<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, July 20, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- The cancer drug Avastin, when used in combination with standard chemotherapy, is safe and can effectively treat an advanced form of one of the most common lung cancers, researchers report.

Previously it had been thought that this combination might have serious adverse side effects, including life-threatening bleeding, for patients with non-squamous non-small-cell lung tumors. However, this phase 4 trial, which used Avastin (bevacizumab) plus chemotherapy in a large population found these problems were minimal.

Phase 4 trials are done after a drug is on the market, to look for any new problems.

"Today we have a new option to treat non-squamous lung cancer, incorporating Avastin in chemotherapy regimens and in maintenance therapy," said lead researcher Dr. Lucio Crino, director of medical oncology at S. Maria della Misericordia Hospital in Perugia, Italy.

"The practical implication is the possibility to incorporate Avastin with any chemotherapy regimen in the frontline therapy of metastatic non-squamous lung cancer," he added.

The report, which is funded by the maker of Avastin, F Hoffman-La Roche Ltd., is published in the July 20 issue of The Lancet Oncology. The funder was involved in study design, coordination of data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, and writing of the report, the journal noted.

Advanced non-small-cell lung cancer is a common cancer that kills 1.18 million people every year worldwide, according to background information in the study. Avastin is a so-called monoclonal antibody that works by blocking vascular endothelial growth factor A, which stimulates the growth of the tumor's blood supply.

When used as an adjunct to chemotherapy, Avastin had already shown cancer-fighting activity in two phase 3 trials, the researchers noted.

For the study, Crino's team studied Avastin in more than 2,200 patients with advanced or recurrent non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer. The patients were treated at centers in 40 countries around the world.

These patients were given the drug every three weeks along with standard chemotherapy, for up to six cycles. Patients were then treated with Avastin alone until the cancer began to progress ("maintenance" therapy).

The researchers reported few clinically significant adverse events, meaning that most were no greater than what one would expect in the general population. One percent of patients experienced bleeding in the lungs and 4 percent had bleeding, Crino's group found.

Overall, 3 percent of the patients died due to adverse events associated with Avastin. These included 1 percent who had blood clots and 1 percent who suffered bleeding.

Other serious adverse events associated with Avastin were blood clots in the lungs and nosebleeds, low white blood cell counts, fever along with a low white blood cell count and deep vein thrombosis (DVT), all of which occurred in 1 percent of the patients.

Dr. Robert Pirker, from the department of medicine at the Medical University of Vienna in Austria, and author of an accompanying journal editorial, said that Avastin "can be safely given when certain precautions are taken."

However, several issues remain to be determined, including the optimal dose and the role of maintenance therapy with Avastin, he said.

"In addition, it is unknown whether bevacizumab [Avastin] increases survival when added to cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with advanced non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer," Pirker said.

Overall, Avastin, like several other targeted agents have led to therapeutic advances in lung cancer, he added. "Hurdles in clinical development do occur but -- as shown for bevacizumab -- can be overcome," Pirker said.

Another expert, Dr. Norman H. Edelman, chief medical officer at the American Lung Association, and professor of preventive medicine, internal medicine, physiology & biophysics at Stony Brook University in New York, called the study "very good bread-and-butter clinical research."

The efficacy of the drug has been proven previously, he noted, but this study provides an in-depth analysis of Avastin's safety profile under "real life" conditions, he added.

"Too often this step is shortcircuited in the rush to market of a new drug and we have to await the laborious collection of after-market data to find the real dangers of many new drugs," Edelman said.

"So, the researchers and sponsors are to be congratulated for doing this study. They find that there are real deleterious side effects but that they are manageable, and conclude the drug is worth using under the proper circumstances," he said.

Avastin is in the spotlight Tuesday for another reason, as well. U.S. regulators could rescind approval of the drug for the treatment of breast cancer, based on follow-up studies reported Friday that failed to show the medication shrank tumors or extended lives, according to published reports.

The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday will ask a panel of outside experts to review the evidence on the Roche drug, the Associated Press said. It's possible the FDA will withdraw approval of Avastin as a breast cancer treatment.

The drug is also approved for lung, colon, brain and kidney cancer.

For more information on lung cancer, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  Several sources were quoted who did not have a direct connection to the study reported on or to the company.  The story indicated clearly that the study reported on was funded by the maker of the drug studied.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Taking folic acid before pregnancy, and through the first several weeks of pregnancy, may help reduce the risk of autism for those children, according to a new study published Tuesday in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

Researchers in Norway looked at data from 85,000 pregnancies, and found that women who took the supplement four weeks before pregnancy, and through the eighth week of pregnancy, were 39% less likely to have children with autism.

The Norwegian study is the largest to date on the benefits of folic acid for autism prevention, and marks one of the first tangible things a woman can do to reduce her risk of giving birth to a child with the disorder.

"This is pretty exciting," said Alycia Halladay, senior director for environmental and clinical sciences for Autism Speaks, an autism advocacy group. "It actually supports the idea of actionable things women can do before they become pregnant, and right as conception happens."

Experts have known for some time that taking folic acid can prevent neural tube birth defects like spina bifida in developing fetuses. American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) guidelines call for all women of child-bearing age - not just those who plan to get pregnant - to take 400 micrograms of folic acid daily to prevent birth defects. The same dose appears to provide some benefit in preventing autism, according to the research.

"This is another piece of evidence that supports the beneficial uses of folic acid during pregnancy," said Halladay, who was not connected with the study.

The research "strongly suggests that taking folic acid prior to pregnancy may reduce the risk of autism in children," said Dr. Edward R.B. McCabe, medical director for the March of Dimes. The organization also recommends women of child-bearing age take 400 micrograms of folic acid daily before conceiving and 600 to 800 micrograms per day while pregnant.

But some experts aren't quite ready to tout the benefits of folic acid too loudly, particularly for autism prevention.

"It is possible that folic acid ... might provide protection against other neurodevelopmental disorders like autism," said Zachary Warren, director of the Treatment and Research Institute for Autism Spectrum Disorders at Vanderbilt University, who was also not involved in the study. "While the current study suggests such protection... the data really do not establish anything close to a causal connection."

The Norwegian researchers do admit that more studies should be done to confirm the link.

Warren says he wishes the solution were as simple as just taking folic acid. "Caring for individuals with autism and their families would be a whole lot easier if we had simple answers about cause and risk," he says. "The reality is, autism is a complex disorder and our best answers about causes and treatment are going to be complex as well."

Despite the fact that a link between taking folic acid and reducing autism risk isn't fully proven, Halladay says there's no harm in taking the supplement, and women should be taking it anyway to prevent birth defects.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes a nice mix of voices, including experts from an autism advocacy group, the March of Dimes, and in independent autism research program. This was a strong point of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Sept. 11, 2015) -- The largest nationwide clinical trial to study high-dose resveratrol long-term in people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease found that a biomarker that declines when the disease progresses was stabilized in people who took the purified form of resveratrol.

Resveratrol is a naturally occurring compound found in foods such as red grapes, raspberries, dark chocolate and some red wines.

The results, published online today in Neurology, "are very interesting," says the study's principal investigator, R. Scott Turner, MD, PhD, director of the Memory Disorders Program at Georgetown University Medical Center. Turner, who treats patients at MedStar Georgetown University Hospital, cautions that the findings cannot be used to recommend resveratrol. "This is a single, small study with findings that call for further research to interpret properly."

The resveratrol clinical trial was a randomized, phase II, placebo-controlled, double blind study in patients with mild to moderate dementia due to Alzheimer's disease. An "investigational new drug" application was required by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to test the pure synthetic (pharmaceutical-grade) resveratrol in the study. It is not available commercially in this form.

The study enrolled 119 participants. The highest dose of resveratrol tested was one gram by mouth twice daily -- equivalent to the amount found in about 1,000 bottles of red wine.

John Bozza, 80, participated in the study. Five years ago, his wife, Diana, began noticing "something wasn't quite right." He was diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment, but only a year later, his condition progressed to mild Alzheimer's.

Diana, whose twin sister died from the same disease, says there are multiple reasons she and John decided to participate in the resveratrol study, and they now know he was assigned to take the active drug.

"I definitely want the medical community to find a cure," she says. "And of course I thought there's always a chance that John could have been helped, and who knows, maybe he was."

Patients, like John, who were treated with increasing doses of resveratrol over 12 months showed little or no change in amyloid-beta40 (Abeta40) levels in blood and cerebrospinal fluid. In contrast, those taking a placebo had a decrease in the levels of Abeta40 compared with their levels at the beginning of the study.

"A decrease in Abeta40 is seen as dementia worsens and Alzheimer's disease progresses; still, we can't conclude from this study that the effects of resveratrol treatment are beneficial," Turner explains. "It does appear that resveratrol was able to penetrate the blood brain barrier, which is an important observation. Resveratrol was measured in both blood and cerebrospinal fluid."

The researchers studied resveratrol because it activates proteins called sirtuins, the same proteins activated by caloric restriction. The biggest risk factor for developing Alzheimer's is aging, and studies with animals found that most age-related diseases--including Alzheimer's--can be prevented or delayed by long-term caloric restriction (consuming two-thirds the normal caloric intake).

Turner says the study also found that resveratrol was safe and well tolerated. The most common side effects experienced by participants were gastrointestinal-related, including nausea and diarrhea. Also, patients taking resveratrol experienced weight loss while those on placebo gained weight.

One outcome in particular was confounding, Turner notes. The researchers obtained brain MRI scans on participants before and after the study, and found that resveratrol-treated patients lost more brain volume than the placebo-treated group.

"We're not sure how to interpret this finding. A similar decrease in brain volume was found with some anti-amyloid immunotherapy trials," Turner adds. A working hypothesis is that the treatments may reduce inflammation (or brain swelling) found with Alzheimer's.

The study, funded by the National Institute on Aging and conducted with the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study, began in 2012 and ended in 2014. GUMC was one of 21 participating medical centers across the U.S.

Further studies, including analysis of frozen blood and cerebrospinal fluid taken from patients, are underway to test possible drug mechanisms.

"Given safety and positive trends toward effectiveness in this phase 2 study, a larger phase 3 study is warranted to test whether resveratrol is effective for individuals with Alzheimer's -- or at risk for Alzheimer's," Turner says.

Resveratrol and similar compounds are being tested in many age-related disorders including cancer, diabetes and neurodegenerative disorders. The study Turner led, however, is the largest, longest and highest dose trial of resveratrol in humans to date.

The research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Aging (U01 AG010483). Turner reports no personal financial interests related to the study.

Georgetown University Medical Center (GUMC) is an internationally recognized academic medical center with a three-part mission of research, teaching and patient care (through MedStar Health). GUMC's mission is carried out with a strong emphasis on public service and a dedication to the Catholic, Jesuit principle of cura personalis -- or "care of the whole person." The Medical Center includes the School of Medicine and the School of Nursing & Health Studies, both nationally ranked; Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, designated as a comprehensive cancer center by the National Cancer Institute; and the Biomedical Graduate Research Organization, which accounts for the majority of externally funded research at GUMC including a Clinical and Translational Science Award from the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release discloses the funding source, which was the National Institute on Aging. The study’s principal investigator R. Scott Turner, according to the disclosure statement attached to the original journal article, states he has received research support from Ceregene, Eli Lilly, Merck, Biogen Idec, Toyama, Elan/Transition Therapeutics and Pfizer, as well as the NIH and the DOD. The news release doesn’t list these disclosures, and says only that that Dr. Turner “reports no personal financial interests related to the study.”
We’d argue that it would have been better to list those disclosures in the news release, since they were deemed important enough to include the journal manuscript. But since we couldn’t easily find any indication that these companies are developing resveratrol-based drugs — which would be a clear conflict of interest — we’ll give the benefit of the doubt and rule this Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A therapy-animal trend grips the United States. The San Francisco airport now deploys a pig to calm frazzled travelers. Universities nationwide bring dogs (and a donkey) onto campus to soothe students during finals. Llamas comfort hospital patients, pooches provide succor at disaster sites and horses are used to treat sex addiction.

And that duck on a plane? It might be an emotional-support animal prescribed by a mental health professional.

The trend, which has accelerated hugely since its initial stirrings a few decades ago, is underpinned by a widespread belief that interaction with animals can reduce distress — whether it happens over brief caresses at the airport or in long-term relationships at home. Certainly, the groups offering up pets think this, as do some mental health professionals. But the popular embrace of pets as furry therapists is causing growing discomfort among some researchers in the field, who say it has raced far ahead of scientific evidence.

Earlier this year in the Journal of Applied Developmental Science, an introduction to a series of articles on “animal-assisted intervention” said research into its efficacy “remains in its infancy.” A recent literature review by Molly Crossman, a Yale University doctoral candidate who recently wrapped up one study involving an 8-year-old dog named Pardner, cited a “murky body of evidence” that sometimes has shown positive short-term effects, often found no effect and occasionally identified higher rates of distress.

Overall, Crossman wrote, animals seem to be helpful in a “small-to-medium” way, but it’s unclear whether the critters deserve the credit or something else is at play.

“It’s a field that has been sort of carried forward by the convictions of practitioners” who have seen patients’ mental health improve after working with or adopting animals, said James Serpell, director of the Center for the Interaction of Animals and Society at the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine. “That kind of thing has almost driven the field, and the research is playing catch-up. In other words, people are recognizing that anecdote isn’t enough.”

Using animals in mental health settings is nothing new. In the 17th century, a Quaker-run retreat in England encouraged mentally ill patients to interact with animals on its grounds. Sigmund Freud often included one of his dogs in psychoanalysis sessions. Yet the subject did not become a research target until the American child psychologist Boris Levinson began writing in the 1960s about the positive effect his dog Jingles had on patients.

But the evidence to date is problematic, according to Crossman’s review and others before it. Most studies had small sample sizes, she wrote, and an “alarming number” did not control for other possible reasons for a changed stress level, such as interaction with the animal’s human handler. Studies also tend to generalize across animals, she noted: If participants are measurably soothed by one golden retriever, that doesn’t mean another dog — or another species — will evoke the same response.

Even so, media headlines are often about the happiness bounce. Hal Herzog, a Western Carolina University psychologist who has long studied human-animal interactions, recalls a 2015 study on the health benefits for children of having a pet dog. “Here’s a reason to get a puppy,” NBC announced. “Kids with pets have less anxiety.”

That’s actually not what the study concluded. The authors did find that children with dogs had lower anxiety based on screening scores than children without dogs. Still, they cautioned that “this study does not answer whether pet dogs have direct effects on children’s mental health or whether other factors associated with acquisition of a pet dog benefit their mental health.”

It was a classic case of conflating correlation and causation, which Herzog says is common. Cherry-picked positive results also are a problem, as he says happens in promotional materials from the Human-Animal Bond Research Initiative (HABRI). The pet-industry backed organization funds research on the topic.

“The number of papers I see that start out, ‘It is now well-established that there are health benefits from owning pets’ — that drives me crazy,” Herzog said. “Yes, there’s literature that supports that. But there’s also literature that doesn’t find that.”

HABRI Executive Director Steven Feldman takes a more positive view of the science while acknowledging that more research needs to be done. “Just like getting vegetables and getting exercise, I would say having animals in our lives is also an essential element of human wellness,” he said.

To many animal lovers and pet owners, the back-and-forth might sound horribly wonky. There’s something intuitive about the good feelings animals give us. Why over-analyze it?

Alan Beck does not disagree. Beck, who directs the Center of the Human-Animal Bond at Purdue University, cites one common theory for why animals might be therapeutic. It’s called the biophilia hypothesis, and it argues that humans evolved a built-in need to affiliate with other living beings.

“Throughout history, animals gave us some comfort. So if it works for you and me in a relatively normal environment, maybe it has a special role for someone who has a depression and stress disorder — that just makes sense,” he said. “The literature does show it’s not bad. And that’s just as important.”

Focusing too much on scientific support sometimes feels like a form of “physics envy,” Beck added, “where you try to quantify everything without appreciating it.”

But there are good reasons for rigorous research on animals and mental health. In 2012, the Department of Veterans Affairs said it would not cover costs of service dogs for veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder, citing “a lack of evidence to support a finding of mental health service dog efficacy.” The department is now in the midst of a multiyear study on the topic, which could lead to government funding for these pooches.

Another reason, the scientists say, is for the animals’ sake. Crossman pointed to a 2014 incident at Washington University in St. Louis as an example of animal therapy gone wrong. A bear cub brought to campus during finals week nipped some students, causing a rabies scare that almost ended with the animal being euthanized. More generally, Serpell said, the popular idea that pets make you happier “is not a harmless distortion. … If the public believes that getting an animal is going to be good for them, many times an unsuitable person will get an unsuitable animal, and it doesn’t work out well for either.”

The research is getting stronger, in part because funding is growing — from HABRI as well as from a public-private partnership between the National Institutes of Health and the Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition. Crossman’s recent study at the Yale Innovative Interactions Lab was among the work being supported.

It relied not just on the Labrador retriever Pardner but seven other certified therapy dogs. Several times a month over much of the past year, they hung out at the university for 15-minute sessions with children who had just finished two stressful tasks: spontaneously crafting stories and telling them to strangers, followed by doing math problems.

The strangers were the researchers, and their mission was to assess whether the kids, ages 10 to 13, would find their time with the dogs to be therapeutic. The study was designed to avoid some of the pitfalls that Crossman has seen elsewhere, which is why some of the 78 young participants got to play only with a fuzzy blanket — because tactile stimulation is known to reduce stress — and why others simply waited for the 15 minutes.

“Without the controls, the changes could be due to all kinds of things, like the fact that lots of time has passed,” Crossman said. “Kids are actually pretty good at coping.”

The children completed questionnaires to assess their mood and anxiety before and after; spit samples, to measure the “stress hormone” cortisol, were taken at three points. At the end, all the kids got a “junior scientist” certificate, lots of praise and an open play session with the dogs.

Crossman, who emphasizes that she is an animal lover, declined to reveal the findings before they’re published. But “hopefully” they will show that dogs can affect children’s stress, she said — before quickly offering a researcher’s clarification.

“I say ‘hopefully’ not just because I think it works or hope it does, but because these programs are used so widely,” she explained. “Kids are already participating in this on a huge scale. Ideally, the order goes the other way around: We test the idea, and then we implement.”

These states have the fattest pets — and they might surprise you

Long before they conquered the Internet, cats took over the world

A kitten nursery saves tiny lives in a city aiming to become ‘no kill’

Bear breaks into house, plays the piano but not very well
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This was a strong point of the story. It cites multiple sources, clearly identifies the affiliation of all sources, and places those affiliations in a context that readers can understand. For example, the story includes input from a source at the Human-Animal Bond Research Initiative (HABRI) — and explains that HABRI is a pet-industry backed organization that funds research on the topic of therapy animals.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Dec. 9, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- The bone drug zoledronic acid (Zometa), considered a potentially promising weapon against breast cancer recurrence, has flopped in a new study involving more than 3,360 patients.

Zometa did not appear to prevent breast cancer from returning or to boost disease-free survival overall. British researchers presented the disappointing findings Thursday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas.

"As a whole, the study is negative," study author Dr. Robert Coleman, a professor of medical oncology at the University of Sheffield in England, said during a Thursday news conference on the findings. "There is no overall difference in recurrence rates or survival rates [between patients who got the bone drug and those who did not], except in older patients, defined as more than five years after menopause."

That was a possible bright spot in the results.

"In that population, there is a benefit," Coleman said. The older women had a 27 percent improvement in recurrence and a 29 percent improvement in overall survival over the five-year follow-up, compared to those who didn't get the drug.

"There was tremendous hope that this [drug] approach would be a major leap forward," Coleman noted. "There have been other trials that suggest this is the case." In one previous study, the use of the drug was linked with a 32 percent improvement in survival and lowered recurrence in younger women with breast cancer.

Other research has found that healthy women on bone drugs were less prone to develop breast cancer, so experts were hoping the drugs had an anti-tumor effect.

Zometa, marketed by Novartis AG, is used to relieve pain when cancers have spread to the bone -- in part, by slowing bone erosion caused by the disease. It is given intravenously, while other bisphosphonates such as Actonel, Fosamax or Boniva can be taken orally.

In the trial, known as AZURE (Adjuvant Treatment with Zoledronic Acid in State II/III Breast Cancer), Coleman and his colleagues evaluated 3,360 breast cancer patients from 174 participating centers, all with stage II or III cancers but no evidence of metastases (cancer that has spread beyond the original site). About half received the bone drugs plus standard therapy; half just got standard therapy.

The focus was on disease-free survival. After five years, about 400 women in each group either died or had recurrences.

When Coleman's team looked at subgroups, however, they found the benefit among older women, a finding they say warrants more study.

"The younger patients are getting no benefit," Coleman said. "If anything, they are doing a little bit worse."

In addition, there were some troubling side effects among women taking Zometa, including 17 cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (a severe bone disease that can result in death of the jawbone).

Dr. Sharon Giordano, an associate professor of breast medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, was not involved in the study but put it in perspective. Bisphosphonates have been used to treat osteoporosis as well as bone complications of breast cancer treatment, she said.

"The role of bisphosphonates in preventing cancer recurrence has been less clear," she said, noting that multiple studies have had conflicting findings.

As for the benefit found in postmenopausal women, she said, "I would consider this hypothesis-generating and not practice-changing."

Other studies underway may provide a clearer answer, she said.

Since the current study was presented at a meeting, its findings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Said Coleman: "Zoledronic acid cannot be routinely recommended for prevention of cancer returning, but it remains a very good drug for patients where the cancer has already spread to the bone."

Coleman disclosed receiving speaker fees from Novartis; the researchers also received academic grant funding from the drug maker.

For more information on bisphosphonates, visit U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article quoted an independent source. It also addressed conflicts-of-interest among the researchers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the past several decades, Alcoholics Anonymous and the 12 steps have dominated addiction treatment in America — boasting millions of adherents and turning into the standard option within most addiction treatment programs in the US.

A new study has found, however, that AA, the original 12-step program, and others like it don’t have to be the only answer for people seeking out mutual help groups to deal with alcohol addiction.

The study, in short, looked at how people’s self-reported outcomes with AA and 12-step programs compare with the three biggest alternative mutual help groups — Women for Sobriety, SMART Recovery, and LifeRing. It concluded that these other groups perform about as well as 12-step programs.

“This study suggests that these alternatives really are viable options for people who are looking for recovery support and don’t like AA for whatever reason,” Sarah Zemore, lead author of the study, told me.

The research is by no means the last word on this question — Zemore characterized the study as the beginning of a deeper evaluation into AA alternatives.

But this is important. There has been a good amount of research into AA and the 12 steps over the years, broadly finding that about a third of people maintain recovery from alcohol addiction due to 12-step treatment, another third get something out of the treatment but not enough for full recovery, and another third get nothing at all.

Researchers have long suspected, though, that the benefits found in 12-step treatment programs are not exclusive to the 12 steps. As Zemore told me, “The benefits of 12-step groups are not driven by the 12 steps’ specific philosophy or adherence to the 12 steps. It’s really more about general mechanisms like abstinence motivation and social support for abstinence. Presumably, you could get those by participating in alternatives to AA.”

In other words, these alternatives could help the one-third to two-thirds of people who don’t get anything or much out of AA. That would help deal with a big public health issue: Based on federal data, more than 20 million people in the US have a substance use disorder, and within that group, more than 15 million have an alcohol use disorder. Excessive drinking alone is linked to 88,000 deaths each year. So finding the right solutions for this problem is literally a matter of life or death.

The study, conducted by the Alcohol Research Group at the Public Health Institute in California and published last month in the Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, surveyed more than 600 people with alcohol use disorder (AUD), who were divided by which mutual help group they primarily participated in. Researchers followed up at six months then 12 months, measuring involvement in the groups and various substance use outcomes, including abstinence from drinking and alcohol-related problems.

After controlling for several factors, the researchers concluded that “[Women for Sobriety], LifeRing, and SMART are as effective as 12-step groups for those with AUDs.”

“Essentially, that’s the story,” Zemore said. “We were really interested in whether the effects of involvement on recovery outcomes depended on which group [participants] were in. And we found that they did not.”

There were some differences in the data. People who reported SMART as their primary group seemed to have worse substance use outcomes, and there were lower odds of total abstinence among LifeRing members.

That might have something to do with differences in recovery goals. For example, AA really emphasizes total abstinence from drinking as the solution to alcohol addiction. Groups like SMART and LifeRing, meanwhile, can be friendlier to the idea of members moderating their drinking but not quitting altogether. That could affect substance use outcomes — and especially abstinence outcomes.

The study’s survey data suggests this is in fact what was going on: When researchers controlled for people’s recovery goals — meaning, whether they wanted to commit to lifetime total abstinence or not — the differences between the 12-step groups, SMART, and LifeRing went away.

“That suggests that people with less commitment to lifetime total abstinence are more likely to participate in SMART and LifeRing than they are to participate in 12-step groups,” Zemore said. “That’s why you’re seeing these associations between SMART and LifeRing affiliation at baseline and worse recovery outcomes when you control for involvement.” She added, “But I want to emphasize that these go away when you control for recovery goals.”

Again, the study is not the final word. John Kelly, an addiction researcher at Harvard Medical School who was not involved in the study, told me that the study is “good news, in general,” but pointed out that it’s limited by its methodology: It’s based on an online survey, not the kind of randomized trial that’s typically the gold standard in research. That may have led to some potentially biased results — perhaps participants in specific groups were less likely to report bad outcomes, for instance.

And since it’s only one study, it’s possible that the results were biased in some other way. So it’s up to future research to verify the findings.

One tricky thing with this line of research is you can’t really force people to participate in certain groups — so studies that randomly assign participants to AA, SMART, LifeRing, or Women for Sobriety may not be easy to do. But there are ways that researchers could get around these problems, such as only using participants who are willing to try different groups and actively following up with them to make sure they are actually participating.

Another big research question: figuring out why, exactly, these groups might work to help people stay alcohol- or drug-free. There’s good research into how AA works, but it’d be good to figure out if SMART, LifeRing, and Women for Sobriety work in a similar way. That, Zemore said, will be one of her goals in future studies.

Why we need alternatives

In discussions about addiction treatment, AA and the 12 steps tend to prompt polarizing reactions — some people swear by the programs, others absolutely hate them.

There’s a good explanation for that: While the research shows that 12-step treatment can be as effective as professional treatment modalities like cognitive behavioral therapy, the research also shows that the 12 steps don’t work for everyone.

As one example, a prominent complaint about 12-step programs is the spiritual aspect. This is a big part of the 12 steps, with the final step even invoking “a spiritual awakening.” For people who aren’t religious or spiritual, this can be a big turn-off; that’s one reason SMART and LifeRing exist to begin with — they’re meant to be secular alternatives to the 12 steps.

The good news is that the research suggests the spiritual aspect doesn’t fully explain why the 12 steps are effective for some people. Instead, it seems other traits are just as, if not more, important — such as the social support that AA meetings provide and the lessons that participants can pick up at meetings.

That’s long led researchers to suspect that alternative mutual help groups could work. If so, that would let some people go to AA meetings if they prefer the 12 steps, while others could find SMART, LifeRing, Women for Sobriety, or something else that works for them. Basically, everyone could find a workable solution.

Providing these alternatives would essentially move addiction treatment closer to other kinds of medical problems. As Keith Humphreys, a drug policy expert at Stanford University, previously told me, “We don’t have anything that works for everybody. There’s very few places in medicine where you do.” So there need to be as many alternatives as possible.

The US is far from that at the moment. Most treatment facilities in America are, according to the survey data and research, at least partly based on the 12 steps — making it the only option for many people. While alternatives like SMART or LifeRing do exist, they’re not nearly as available as AA — and they certainly aren’t built into professional treatment programs in the same way as the 12 steps.

As Albert, a pseudonym for an AA member in Georgia, previously told me, “There’s just not a lot of widely advertised options available.” AA and 12-step treatment are “the most well-known and most recommended option, so that’s kind of where you tend to go.”

Zemore’s study begins to peel away at this problem. By showing that there really might be other effective options out there, the research provides hope that there may be a better — or at least more complete — solution out there for alcohol addiction.

For more on the research into AA and the 12 steps, read Vox’s explainer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes an expert source who was not affiliated with the research and who provides useful context about key limitations of this study. It doesn’t appear that there are any undisclosed conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"The positive result was only marginally significant, and the negative result was clear," said Dr. Thomas McGlashan, a professor of psychiatry at Yale and the study's lead author. "This might discourage people, and legitimately so, from using this drug for prevention because of the weight gain, but hopefully it won't discourage study" of other drugs.

Critics have charged that treating people for a disorder that has not yet been diagnosed is not only premature but stigmatizing, especially for adolescents. The new study was intended in part to clarify the trade-off between the risks and the potential benefits of preemptive treatment.

"Unfortunately, the study's numbers are so small that it cannot be decisive on the key issue, which is whether it's prudent to treat people early when there are uncertainties about the diagnosis and given the effect of stigma and adverse effects," said Dr. William Carpenter, director of the Psychiatric Research Center at the University of Maryland, who was not involved in the study.

The study was plagued by recruitment problems from the beginning, in 1997. Mild, psychosis-like symptoms are rare in adolescents, and families often wait until symptoms are pronounced before seeking treatment, Dr. McGlashan said. Good candidates trickled in slowly; and the researchers added several recruitment sites along the way to increase the numbers of people in the study.

They eventually enrolled 60 people, most of them adolescents, who scored highly on a scale that assesses risk for psychosis. The scale rates severity of more than a dozen symptoms, including suspiciousness, grandiosity and bizarre thoughts. From 20 to 45 percent of people who score high on the scale go on to develop full-blown psychosis, in which these symptoms become extreme, researchers have found.

The researchers split the participants into two groups, one that received drug treatment and one that took placebo pills. In the first year of a two-year trial, 5 of the 31 of those on medication developed full-blown psychosis, compared with 11 of 29 of those who were taking dummy pills.

But by then, more than two-thirds of the young people in both groups had dropped out, making it difficult to interpret differences between them. Some left the study without explaining why; others moved; and 10 of those on medication quit the study because they felt the drug was not working, could not make the appointments or did not like the side effects, among other reasons.

Those on medication gained an average of 20 pounds during the study. Weight gain is a common side effect of Zyprexa.

"It's a pessimistic trade-off, the weight gain and other side effects for what looks like a modest delay in the acute psychotic episode," said Dr. Steven Hyman, a professor of neurobiology at Harvard. "It's clear we need more efficacious drugs with milder side effects."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Mentions that Zyprexa is made by Eli Lilly and that the study was partly funded by this manufacturer (also funded by National Institute of Mental Health).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a big step towards developing a test that can tell people if they have cancer long before the first symptoms show up.

The blood test detected the majority of cancers in people with four of the biggest cancer killers: breast, colon, lung and ovarian cancer, the team at Johns Hopkins University said.

The test is a long way from being used to screen for cancer, but the study shows a way to get there, the team reported in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

“There is a lot of excitement about liquid biopsies, but most of that has been in late-stage cancer or in individuals where you already know what to look for,” said Dr. Victor Velculescu, professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins University Kimmel Cancer Center.

“The surprising result is that we can find a high fraction of early-stage patients having alterations in their blood,” said Velculescu, who led the study team.

It was not a slam dunk, but the test found cancer in the blood of more than half the patients who had been diagnosed with stage 1 cancer. It was even more accurate in finding late-stage cancers, but the goal would be to catch cancer in its earliest, easiest-to-treat stage.

There were no false positives in 44 people who did not have cancer, they said. That's important, said Dr. Wyndham Wilson of the National Cancer Institute, because there is no point detecting cancer in people if the cancer is not going to actually cause trouble.

"You don’t want to go screening people for hallmark (cancer) mutations unless you absolutely know that when you find it, that there is a tumor there and that it is a tumor that needs to be treated," said Wyndham, who was not involved in the study.

Sometimes, early-stage tumors or precancerous growths just go away -- attacked by the immune system or because they don't thrive for other reasons.

Several different liquid biopsies are already on the market, used to help track whether cancer treatments are working. But there’s nothing yet that can detect cancer in someone who has not yet been diagnosed.

It’s easy to find tumor mutations if you know what to look for. “The challenge was to develop a blood test that could predict the probable presence of cancer without knowing the genetic mutations present in a person’s tumor,” Velculescu said.

“We have used this approach to examine 58 cancer-related genes,” the team wrote in their report. The method involved deep sequencing – sequencing DNA 30,000 times over to look for mutations in DNA from tumor cells that floats in the blood.

Cancer patients had more of this DNA in their blood, the team found.

They identified 62 percent of the patients with stage I cancer – four out of eight colon cancer patients, and 90 percent of colon cancer patients with stage II, III or IV disease.

They got a positive in 45 percent of the lung cancer patients with stage I disease, 67 percent of ovarian cancer patients with stage I disease and 67 percent of breast cancer patients with stage I disease.

While that's good, it's not a great result. The test still missed a large percentage of cancers and will need much improvement, Velculescu said.

It will also have to be tried in larger groups of patients, and patients with different cancers. The first goal would be to try it in people at high risk of cancer but no symptoms yet – such as smokers, or people with cancer-causing gene mutations like BRCA mutations, Velculescu said.

Wyndham said it will be important to study such tests in large groups of people who have not had cancer diagnosed, to see if it can truly be used to screen asymptomatic people for cancer. And then it will have to be shown that using the test allows doctors to intervene sooner and help people.

Catching cancer in its earliest stages could save many lives. Cancer is the No. 2 killer overall in the United States.

”The survival difference between late stage and early stage disease in these cancers would account for more than a million lives each year worldwide,” Velculescu said.

The genetic sequencing is also expensive right now – on the order of several thousand dollars for the 30,000 repeats the team did. But costs are coming down steadily, he said.

Velculescu said Johns Hopkins had patented this test, and Velculescu is himself the founder of a company that does liquid biopsies for advanced cancer patients called Personal Genome Diagnostics.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has been very skeptical of blood tests that claim to diagnose disease before people have symptoms.

The agency has chastised a company called Pathway Genomics over its "liquid biopsy" test , saying the company had not shown the $699 test worked as advertised.

It’s also warned other gene testing companies but finally gave 23andMe the go-ahead to market its home DNA test – which does not include any cancer screening – in April.

Cancer screening is still often a tricky issue.

Currently, colon cancer can be detected very early with colonoscopies, and even stopped before pre-cancerous growths get out of control. But colonoscopies are uncomfortable and carry a small risk of injury.

Mammograms can detect early breast cancer, Pap smears can detect cervical cancer or pre-cancerous changes and a type of specialized chest x-ray called a spiral CT can detect lung cancer. There’s a debate over the usefulness of screening for prostate cancer but blood tests and physical exams can indicate some men at high risk.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does include a quote from a National Cancer Institute researcher who wasn’t part of the study team, and it also acknowledges that the lead researcher has patented the technology behind the test and is the principal of a company doing genetic screening.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Walking Fends Off Loss Of Mobility, And It's Not Too Late To Start

People who have reached their later years may think it's primarily a time to relax, not to increase their physical activity. Not so. Previous research has suggested that exercise can improve memory and reverse muscle loss in older adults, among other benefits. And a study out Monday finds that a regular program of physical activity reduces the time spent with mobility-limiting disability.

Researchers took more than 1,600 sedentary people between 70 and 89 years old who had some functional limitations, but who could walk about a quarter of a mile in 15 minutes or less, unassisted by another person or a walker. (Canes were OK.)

Half of the participants got a health education program involving regular in-person sessions and some stretching exercises, while the other group was told to aim for 150 minutes of aerobic activity as well as strength, flexibility and balance training both at the study's facilities and at home. "Walking was the cornerstone of the program," says Thomas Gill, a professor of geriatrics at the Yale School of Medicine and an author of the study, which appears in Annals of Internal Medicine.

The study followed participants for about 2.7 years, and found that the physical activity program cut the amount of time that people spent with a "major mobility disability" — defined as being unable to walk a quarter mile — by 25 percent compared to the education program. Previous findings from the same study showed that the exercise program lowered the risk of becoming disabled in the first place; this one showed that it sped recovery from an episode of disability and lowered the risk of subsequent episodes.

"They've done a really nice job of showing the incredible power of physical activity," says Bradley Cardinal, a professor of kinesiology at Oregon State University who wasn't involved with the study. "It's the secret ingredient to successful aging in terms of quality of life." An editorial accompanying the study, by the University of California, San Francisco's Patricia Katz and the University of South Carolina's Russell Pate, also noted that people who engage in physical activity have a lower risk for heart disease, diabetes, certain cancers, depression, cognitive impairment and functional decline.

The exercise program pretty closely followed the government's recommendations for all adults, including older ones: 150 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity exercise per week, plus two strength sessions that hit all the major muscle groups.

But most Americans don't get that much exercise, and that becomes increasingly true as people age. According to statistics from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, just 28 percent of those 75 and up meet the recommendation for aerobic activity, and only 8 percent also did the suggested amount of strength training.

Cardinal says older adults need to realize that exercise can greatly improve their quality of life by maximizing function as long as possible. But he says that many believe that older age is for relaxing and that physical activity is somehow dangerous or unnatural. That belief "is pervasive among older adults," he says, even though for many of them, meeting the minimum requirements "is doable."

Semantics can help. "We try to frame this as more physical activity than exercise," says Gill. "We talk with older folks and many say, 'I can't exercise, but maybe I can become more physically active.' " Study participants were advised to "start low and go slow," and some were even able to get rid of their canes after six months of exercise, which Gill says they found particularly rewarding.

Physicians can also help. "Prescribing exercise may be just as important as prescribing medications — perhaps even more important in some cases," the editorial said. The authors called on medical schools to "start preparing students to prescribe exercise as effectively as they prescribe statins, and for health systems to support physicians in addressing inactivity just as they provide support in addressing other health risks." (The American College of Sports Medicine has an "Exercise is Medicine" initiative to help physicians integrate exercise recommendations into their treatment plans.)

There are also some basic behavioral strategies for getting yourself to get moving, no matter your age, including giving yourself an incentive to change and engineering your environment to encourage the activity.

Katherine Hobson is a freelance health and science writer based in Brooklyn, N.Y. She's on Twitter: @katherinehobson
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes an independent source, and doesn’t appear to have missed any conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: A test that measures the levels of five chemicals in the breath has shown promising results for the detection of cancers of the oesophagus and stomach in a large patient trial presented at the European Cancer Congress 2017 [1].

Together, stomach and oesophageal cancer account for around 1.4 million new cancer diagnoses each year worldwide [2]. Both tend to be diagnosed late, because the symptoms are ambiguous, meaning the five-year survival rate for these two types of cancer is only 15%.

The new research, involving more than 300 patients, showed that the test could diagnose cancer with an overall accuracy of 85%.

Dr Sheraz Markar, an NIHR Clinical Trials Fellow from Imperial College London, under the supervision of Professor George Hanna, told the Congress: "At present the only way to diagnose oesophageal cancer or stomach cancer is with endoscopy. This method is expensive, invasive and has some risk of complications.

"A breath test could be used as a non-invasive, first-line test to reduce the number of unnecessary endoscopies. In the longer term this could also mean earlier diagnosis and treatment, and better survival."

The trial was based on the results of previous research that suggested differences in the levels of specific chemicals (butyric, pentanoic and hexanoic acids, butanal, and decanal) between patients with stomach or oesophageal cancer and patients with upper gastrointestinal symptoms without cancer. The new research aimed to test whether this 'chemical signature' that seemed to typify cancer could be the basis of a diagnostic test.

In the new study, the research team collected breath samples from 335 people at St Mary's Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust; University College London Hospital; and the Royal Marsden Hospital, London. Of these, 163 had been diagnosed with stomach or oesophageal cancer and 172 showed no evidence of cancer when they had an endoscopy.

All the samples were analysed with a technique called selected ion flow-tube mass spectrometry, which is able to accurately measure small amounts of different chemicals in mixtures of gases such as breath.

Researchers measured the levels of the five chemicals in each sample to see which ones matched to the 'chemical signature' that indicated cancer.

The results showed that the test was 85% accurate overall, with a sensitivity of 80% and a specificity of 81%. This means that not only was the breath test good at picking up those who had cancer (sensitivity), it was also good at correctly identifying who did not have cancer (specificity).

Dr Markar said: "Because cancer cells are different to healthy ones, they produce a different mixture of chemicals. This study suggests that we may be able detect these differences and use a breath test to indicate which patients are likely to have cancer of the oesophagus and stomach, and which do not. However, these findings must be validated in a larger sample of patients before the test could be used in the clinic."

Over the next three years, the researchers will continue with a larger trial, using the test with patients who are being given an endoscopy for gastrointestinal symptoms but not yet diagnosed with cancer. This will assess the ability of the test to pick up cases within a group that is likely to contain only a small percentage of cancers.

The team is also working on breath tests for other types of cancer, such as colorectal and pancreatic, which could be used as first-line tests in general practice surgeries.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funders are named in a sidebar to the release on the EurekAlert! website. Ideally, the funders would also be listed in the release text so that when the release is republished that information is available.
The study abstract noted that the researchers stated they had no conflicts to declare.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 14 (HealthDay News) -- A drug commonly used to prevent excess bleeding in surgeries could keep thousands of people from bleeding to death after trauma, a new study suggests.

The drug, tranexamic acid (TXA) is cheap, widely available around the world and easily administered, experts said. It works by significantly reducing the rate at which blood clots break down, the researchers explained.

"When people have serious injuries, whether from accidents or violence, and when they have severe hemorrhage they can bleed to death. This treatment reduces the chances of bleeding to death by about a sixth, " said researcher Dr. Ian Roberts, a professor of epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in the U.K.

According to Roberts, each year about 600,000 people bleed to death worldwide. "So, if you could reduce that by a sixth, you've saved 100,000 lives in one year," he said.

The report, which was primarily funded by philanthropic groups and the British government, is published in the June 15 online edition of The Lancet.

For the study, Roberts and colleagues in the CRASH-2 consortium randomly assigned more than 20,000 trauma patients from 274 hospitals across 40 countries to injections of either TXA or placebo.

Among patients receiving TXA, the rate of death from any cause was cut by 10 percent compared to patients receiving placebo, the researchers found. In the TXA group, 14.5 percent of the patients died compared with 16 percent of the patients in the placebo group.

When the researchers looked at deaths from bleeding, those in the TXA group experienced a 15 percent reduction in mortality. Among patients receiving TXA, 4.9 percent died from bleeding, compared with 5.7 percent of the patients receiving placebo, they found.

Although there was some worry that TXA might lead to more heart attacks, strokes or clots in the lungs, the researchers observed no such increase among patients getting the drug.

Dr. Jerrold H. Levy, deputy chair for research at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta and author of an accompanying journal editorial, said that, "these data are really neat, because any therapy to reduce mortality in trauma is, I think, a major finding."

Using this drug to treat trauma patients is a completely new idea, Levy said. "I think people should consider it [TXA] following trauma on the basis of this study," he said.

Currently, TXA is not generally used in emergency rooms to treat trauma patients, but Roberts believes that this study could change that.

"It's not our job to tell doctors how to treat their patients, but this is a drug that is safe and effective in a condition where people have a high risk of death," he said.

The researchers believe that TXA could have even wider uses, such as reducing brain bleeds after brain injury. The drug could also be used to reduce postpartum bleeding, which the researchers say causes some 100,000 deaths a year worldwide.

In fact, a trial to see whether TXA can reduce postpartum bleeding has started, the team noted.

Levy however, cautioned that the results of this study apply only to TXA and do not mean that people should try similar drugs hoping for similar results.

"Everybody wants to be creative, but you have to look at the data, and they used TXA," Levy said. "You can't get creative and say 'Ah, one of the other drugs will do the same thing' -- you don't know that, and that's one of my concerns."

For more information on trauma, visit the U.S. National Institute of General Medical Science.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes the author of an accompanying editorial who was not affiliated with the study and does not appear to have conflicts regarding the research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Even though her mammogram showed no sign of cancer, Sandra Litt knew she could feel a lump. She had a second mammogram. Nothing there, the radiologist assured her. "Then one night, I found the 'nothing there' had grown bigger," Litt said. Her self-exam had proved accurate. Two years ago, Litt underwent a double mastectomy and months of chemotherapy to survive an aggressive breast cancer. It defies common sense, she says, for scientists to conclude that breast self-exams do women more harm than good. "It's a very important tool," the 67-year-old Portland woman says. "Why throw away an important tool?" A scientific review, published in August by the

, highlighted the downside of doing breast self-exams: Women taught to perform the monthly ritual wind up having unnecessary biopsies. They are about twice as likely to undergo biopsies that won't find cancerous tumors, according to two studies tracking hundreds of thousands of women in China and Russia. Conflicting news coverage has heightened the confusion. "Breast self-exam has no benefit," one headline proclaimed. "Breast self-exam key in catching what mammogram may miss," another said. What is clear is that studies don't supply an answer that fits all women.

Dr. Elizabeth Steiner, director of the breast health education program at

, said each woman must decide for herself, with full knowledge of the pros and cons, whether to perform self-exams. And there's not a right or wrong answer. Some may do the exams and accept the risk of unnecessary biopsies, she said. Others may decide that either they can't commit the time to do them right, or that the potential for false alarms and anxiety isn't worth it. "That's a very personal decision," Steiner said.

When doctors began promoting breast self-exams in the 1950s, the benefits seemed obvious. Here was a simple, inexpensive do-it-yourself way for women to find tumors before it was too late. During the women's health movement of the 1970s, the self-exam gained importance as a means for women to take charge and rely less on a paternalistic health system. But researchers have learned that self-exams aren't at all simple. The technique is complicated and difficult to learn to do well. Guidelines on how to do them correctly have evolved, leaving many women and doctors with outdated ideas. Further, decades of research still have not produced good evidence that self-exams make any difference in breast cancer survival. "Not only do the trials not find a benefit, the trials demonstrate harm in terms of increased physician visits and benign breast biopsies," said Dr. Nancy Baxter, a University of Toronto surgeon who reviewed the evidence on self-exams for the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. She said self-exams may not reveal tumors early enough to improve survival. "By the time a breast cancer is large enough to be detected by self-exam, tumor biology is the most important predictor of outcome, not finding a tumor a few months before it would have become apparent," she said. Given the lack of evidence, the

considers the exams unproven. And the

has recommended against routine teaching of breast self-exams since 2001. Unnecessary biopsies may not be the only hidden cost. "One danger of pushing breast self-exams on patients is that they may be falsely reassured by it and opt out of their mammograms," said Dr. Heidi Nelson, medical director of the

in Portland. She stopped routinely teaching self-exams to patients after the large trials in China and Russia showed no benefit.

Some evidence does suggest that self-exams done properly could make a difference. For instance, they provide a means to search for tumors in outer parts of the breast where mammography may not reach. About half of breast cancers develop in the upper-outer quadrant of the breast, which is largely inaccessible to mammography scanners. A small study in Canada in 1997 found that self-exams seemed to improve survival among a subset of women using proper technique. The preferred method, known as the vertical strip, three-pressure test, has proved the most sensitive and least likely to produce false alarms, Steiner said. In the largest and most influential study to date, involving 266,000 women in Shanghai, Steiner said researchers taught an inferior method of exams. She said that could partly explain why the Shanghai study failed to find improved survival. Self-exams also appeal strongly to some younger women, whose main screening test is a manual exam done by a doctor or nurse. Mammography is considered inappropriate for women younger than 40, and many doctors don't recommend it until age 50. If a woman decides to do self-exams, Steiner said, it's important to learn to do them right -- and do them every month without fail. "Done haphazardly and irregularly, it is probably worse than no breast self-exam at all," Steiner said. She encourages women to schedule an appointment devoted to learning the technique, which should take at least a half-hour. A few minutes squeezed into a routine annual exam aren't enough, she said. Steiner said not all doctors are up to speed on breast exam technique, which calls for lying down, not taking a few minutes standing in the shower -- the form pushed for years by physicians and even anti-breast cancer groups. "It's important to ask, 'Do you feel confident in your own technique and training me how to do it?'" she said. Nelson cautions women not to skip their mammograms if they don't find lumps during self-exams. But finding a lump also is no reason to panic, given the limited accuracy of the self-test. Litt, the breast cancer survivor, has another piece of advice: "Do not ignore your own judgment; and be assertive," she said. "You don't get a do-over."

What to make of breast cancer's "1-in-8" statistic.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story is based on an update of a report by the Cochrane Collaboration, a credible international group that analyzes bodies of scientific literature to determine overall findings. A range of clinicians put the report and practice of BSE in perspective.  Physicians appropriately talk about the revised guidelines for this screening, and note that regular BSE is still an individual woman’s choice.  Women should be aware of the harms and lack of sensitivity of the exam.  A patient is interviewed for the story, but her story of misdiagnosis seems to undercut the overall message of the piece: women must weigh the pros and potential downsides of regular BSE. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ANN ARBOR--New research from the University of Michigan Life Sciences Institute has determined how a common holiday spice--cinnamon--might be enlisted in the fight against obesity.

Scientists had previously observed that cinnamaldehyde, an essential oil that gives cinnamon its flavor, appeared to protect mice against obesity and hyperglycemia. But the mechanisms underlying the effect were not well understood.

Researchers in the lab of Jun Wu, research assistant professor at the LSI, wanted to better understand cinnamaldehyde's action and determine whether it might be protective in humans, too.

"Scientists were finding that this compound affected metabolism," said Wu, who also is an assistant professor of molecular and integrative physiology at the U-M Medical School. "So we wanted to figure out how--what pathway might be involved, what it looked like in mice and what it looked like in human cells."

Their findings, which appear in the December issue of the journal Metabolism, indicated that cinnamaldehyde improves metabolic health by acting directly on fat cells, or adipocytes, inducing them to start burning energy through a process called thermogenesis.

Wu and her colleagues tested human adipocytes from volunteers representing a range of ages, ethnicities and body mass indices. When the cells were treated with cinnamaldehyde, the researchers noticed increased expression of several genes and enzymes that enhance lipid metabolism. They also observed an increase in Ucp1 and Fgf21, which are important metabolic regulatory proteins involved in thermogenesis.

Adipocytes normally store energy in the form of lipids. This long-term storage was beneficial to our distant ancestors, who had much less access to high-fat foods and thus a much greater need to store fat. That fat could then be used by the body in times of scarcity or in cold temperatures, which induce adipocytes to convert stored energy into heat.

"It's only been relatively recently that energy surplus has become a problem," Wu said. "Throughout evolution, the opposite--energy deficiency--has been the problem. So any energy-consuming process usually turns off the moment the body doesn't need it."

With the rising obesity epidemic, researchers like Wu have been looking for ways to prompt fat cells to activate thermogenesis, turning those fat-burning processes back on.

Wu believes that cinnamaldehyde may offer one such activation method. And because it is already used widely in the food industry, it might be easier to convince patients to stick to a cinnamon-based treatment than to a traditional drug regimen.

"Cinnamon has been part of our diets for thousands of years, and people generally enjoy it," Wu said. "So if it can help protect against obesity, too, it may offer an approach to metabolic health that is easier for patients to adhere to."

Now, before anyone goes dumping tons of extra cinnamon in their egg nog in hopes of keeping holiday-season pounds at bay, Wu cautioned that further study is needed to determine how best to harness cinnamaldehyde's metabolic benefits without causing adverse side effects.

The research was supported by the Human Frontier Science Program, Edward Mallinckrodt Jr. Foundation, National Institutes of Health and American Heart Association.

Other study authors were: Juan Jiang, Margo Emont, Heejin Jun, Xiaona Qiao, Jiling Liao and Dong-il Kim, all of U-M.

The study is titled "Cinnamaldehyde induces fat cell-autonomous thermogenesis and metabolic reprogramming," DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2017.08.006.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources are clearly included in the news release. There are no conflicts of interest listed in the news release or study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She could continue taking the 13 pills a day she needed to control her Parkinson's disease, along with dealing with the side effects. Or she could allow doctors to implant two long, thin electrodes deep into her brain, along with an electrical generator about the size of an iPod in her chest.

In August 2007, Wolter, 63, underwent the surgery at Froedtert Hospital in Wauwatosa, and her life has improved dramatically.

A study released online Tuesday concluded that so-called deep brain stimulation was substantially more effective in treating Parkinson's than the best drug therapy, but it also carried a much greater risk of serious adverse side effects.

The results come at time when a growing number of people are reaching their late 50s and early 60s, when they are most likely to be diagnosed with the disease, which affects between 500,000 and 1.5 million Americans.

"We are on the verge of an epidemic," said Erwin Montgomery, a professor of neurology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The six-month study, which involved 255 people, found that those who underwent surgery had 4.6 more hours each day of good control of their symptoms than those who got the best drug therapy.

"That's huge," said lead author Fran Weaver, a researcher with the Hines VA Hospital in Hines, Ill.

She said the best drugs provide only one to two hours of added improvement, or "on time."

Those who got the therapy also had significantly more improvement in other measures of symptoms, according to the study that will appear today in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

However, they were 3.8 times more likely to experience a serious adverse event, such as an infection, falls, nervous system or psychiatric disorders, or a problem with the device. Forty-nine of the deep brain stimulation patients, or 40%, had 82 serious adverse events, compared with 11% of the drug patients, who had 19 serious adverse events.

Weaver said 99% of the adverse events were resolved within six months, including some cases in which an infection required the removal of the generator from the chest.

There also was one death related to the surgery involving a patient who had bleeding in the brain, went into a coma and died several days later, she said.

Deep brain stimulation also is expensive. At Froedtert Hospital the procedure costs about $120,000, an amount that generally is covered by Medicare and private insurance.

The hospital has done about 300 of the procedures since 2005, said Brad Hiner, an associate professor of neurology at the Medical College of Wisconsin and neurologic director of the hospital's deep brain stimulation program.

"This (the JAMA study) is the largest, most complete and thorough analysis of deep brain stimulation to date," Hiner said.

Some neurologists remain unconvinced about the benefits of the therapy.

"You are doing something pretty invasive," said Paul Nausieda, director of the Regional Parkinson's Center at Aurora Sinai Medical Center in Milwaukee. "It's got too many downside issues."

Nausieda said much of the benefit found in the study could be due to a placebo effect.

Beyond that, doctors need to do a better job of optimizing drug therapy, he said, noting that there are thousands of potential combinations of drugs that can be used to control symptoms.

Nausieda said that of the more than 5,000 Parkinson's patients he has seen, only about 100 were candidates for deep brain stimulation.

"It's certainly not a breakthrough," he said.

Still, deep brain stimulation and several other potential therapies in the growing field of neurostimulation have created a buzz in the medical community.

Clinical trials involving different forms of neurostimulation are looking into its effectiveness in treating a range of disorders, including epilepsy, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and tinnitus, although doctors acknowledge they don't know how the treatments actually work.

In a sense it's a field of science that works backward: Stimulation is applied to the brain, some people get better, and doctors try to figure out why.

"We haven't the foggiest notion," said UW's Montgomery. "(But) we used aspirin long before we knew how it worked. God watches out for fools and little children. We are blessed that we have this therapy."

The problem with deep brain stimulation is that many doctors are not aware of its benefits or don't know how to determine the appropriate patients based on risks vs. potential benefits, he said.

Up to 15% of Parkinson's patients are good candidates for the therapy, but only 2% get it, he said.

Deep brain stimulation is not an option for the 20% to 30% of Parkinson's patients who also have dementia, said Hiner, of Froedtert Hospital.

He said the best candidates are those whose medications are not working well or are causing too many side effects.

Wolter, who lives in Oconomowoc, fit that profile well. She was diagnosed with the disease in 1997 after she developed a slight limp.

She was put on an increasing number of medications, which eventually caused side effects.

At times, she said, she felt incredibly fidgety.

"I'd take my pills and feel good for a while, but I never knew when they would wear off," she said. "I don't know what was worse: the medications or the disease."

She said she worried about having the surgery, but it got to the point where she felt as though she had run out of options.

In the nearly year and a half since having the surgery, her condition has improved substantially, she said.

Her medication use has dropped dramatically and "my body has calmed down," she said. "I can do what everybody does."

In April she went to Disney World with her two daughters and grandchildren and was able to walk around the park.

The study was paid for by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and Medtronic, the company that makes the device used in the study.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The reporter interviewed one patient with a self-reported positive outcome, and four medical specialists. 
The reporter–eventually, in the last phrase of the story–mentions that the research was paid for partly by the maker of the deep-brain stimulation device.  
On balance, the sourcing of this story is acceptable.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The paper was published last week in The Cochrane Library, a journal devoted to systematic reviews of health care interventions. In all, the researchers examined eight trials involving 3,417 men and women ages 18 and older.

None of the studies compared A.A. with no treatment at all, and the researchers said that made it more difficult to draw conclusions about effectiveness. About one-fifth of alcoholics achieve long-term sobriety without treatment.

There is no single known cause of alcoholism, but the researchers wrote that about two-thirds of alcohol dependence could be attributed to genetic factors and one-third to environmental causes like stress or emotional problems. Men and women are equally affected, and age does not appear to affect prognosis.

A member of the staff of the general service office of Alcoholics Anonymous said the organization did not comment on published studies of the program, but some experts objected to the methods and conclusions of the review.

“Although the randomized controlled trial is the gold-standard methodology in comparing between conditions,” said Thomas G. Brown, an assistant professor of psychiatry at McGill University, “it washes out a factor that may be important in potentiating A.A.’s benefits, namely patient choice and preference.” In other words, having a patient choose the form of treatment, rather than being assigned to it as in most studies, could be an important factor.

Despite the largely negative findings, John F. Kelly, a clinical psychologist at Harvard, said he still believed that A.A. and other 12-step programs were effective.

A.A. and other 12-step programs “are not cure-alls,” Dr. Kelly said, “but I would say at a minimum, they help.”

Dr. Edward V. Nunes, a professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia, said research had demonstrated that certain elements of A.A. were effective. “Some of the wisdom embodied in A.A., such as the notion of persons, places and things that trigger drinking, are very much a part of cognitive-behavioral therapy, which is a scientifically driven, empirically validated treatment,” Dr. Nunes said.

The review covered only carefully controlled trials. But Sarah Zemore, of the Alcohol Research Group of the National Alcohol Research Center, said studies that observed the results of a treatment without setting up randomized control groups could also be informative.

“Does A.A. or some other mutual-help group work for people who seek it voluntarily?” she said. “Obviously, a randomized trial cannot address that question. But observational data can.”

It is unlikely that substance abuse experts will widely reject A.A. on the basis of these findings.

“A.A. has helped a lot of people,” Dr. Nunes said. “There are a lot of satisfied customers. On the basis of that, we have to take it seriously.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does an excellent job of putting the results of this study in perspective by interviewing experts in the field of addiction treatment and research. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Finally, the world might be catching a break when it comes to drug-resistant gonorrhea.

A new study suggests that a vaccine that protects against a strain of meningitis may also ward off the sexually transmitted infection.

The research, conducted in New Zealand, found that the gonorrhea rate among teens and young adults there who had received a meningitis B vaccine during an emergency campaign in the early 2000s was significantly lower than the rate seen in people of the same age who weren’t vaccinated.

Researchers in Quebec say they saw the same phenomenon after a meningitis outbreak there, and previously published data from Cuba and Norway also hint of the vaccine’s unexpected benefit.

“It’s quite probably real,” said Helen Petousis-Harris, lead author of the New Zealand article and head of immunization research and vaccinology at the University of Auckland.

The findings are observational. Clinical trials will need to be conducted to see if the effect researchers have observed is actually due to the meningococcal B vaccine. But confirmation would be good news for the prevention and control of gonorrhea.

The last remaining drugs to cure this sexually transmitted infection are showing signs they may only have a few more years of usefulness left.

“While it is still very early days, these findings represent a positive step in the search for a vaccine against this common and distressing disease that is increasingly resistant to antibiotic treatment,” said Robin Gaitens, a spokeswoman for GSK, which owns the product that contains this meningitis component.

Why would a vaccine designed to protect against a strain of bacteria that causes meningitis also prevent gonorrhea infection? Some biology is useful here.

Meningitis is a condition — inflammation of the membranes that surround the brain and the spinal cord — that can be triggered by some viruses and several types of bacteria.

One of the latter is Neisseria meningitidis, sometimes known as meningococcal disease. It is the only form of bacterial meningitis that triggers epidemics.

Despite the fact that gonorrhea and meningitis are quite different from one another, the bacteria that cause Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria meningitidis are actually related.

Meningococcal disease is rare but very dangerous. It can kill, and quickly. People who survive the infection can suffer permanent brain damage or may lose one or several limbs.

Because of the severity of the consequences, health officials often mount emergency vaccination campaigns in response to outbreaks of Neisseria meningitidis.

There are vaccines for several Neisseria meningitidis strains, but designing a vaccine to protect against the B strain was a particularly difficult nut to crack. As a consequence, the vaccine component that was made to protect against B targets a different part of the bacterium, Petousis-Harris said.

That may explain why the B vaccine appears to offer some protection against Neisseria gonorrhea. Meningococcal vaccines that protect against the other strains do not seem to have the same effect.

“A lot of these vaccines have been used widely globally,” Petousis-Harris said. “And what’s happened with gonorrhea? Nothing. Gonorrhea carries on its merry little way.”

New Zealand had a very bad meningococcal outbreak in the early 2000s caused by the B strain. A special vaccine that only protected against that strain was made; it was used between 2004 and 2008.

Petousis-Harris and her colleagues looked later to see if gonorrhea rates had changed after that meningococcal vaccination campaign. They found people who were vaccinated were 31 percent less likely to be infected with gonorrhea than those who hadn’t received the meningococcal B vaccine.

The study, published Monday in the Lancet, was funded by GSK and Auckland Uniservices, the commercialization arm of the University of Auckland.

The single-component vaccine used by New Zealand is no longer made. But the same component is one of several in the Bexsero vaccine, which was used in Quebec when the government decided to vaccinate against meningococcal B disease in a part of the province with a high relative rate of cases a few years ago.

Dr. Jean Longtin, head of the province’s public health laboratory, said he and some colleagues decided to look at whether the vaccination campaign was having an impact on gonorrhea rates in that area after reading about an early observation from Norway.

“In Quebec we saw the exact same effect as New Zealand,” said Longtin, who said his group is still analyzing its findings. “Gonorrhea rates have been going down in the vaccine group whereas in the non-vaccine group it’s following the rest of the province.”

It is not clear how long the protection — if it’s real — will actually last. But even a few years of protection could help significantly reduce the spread of gonorrhea, experts argue.

“Mathematical modeling has shown that even a vaccine of moderate efficacy and duration could have a substantial effect on the transmission and prevalence of gonorrhea, if coverage in the population is high and protection lasts during the highest risk period,” Kate Seib, of Australia’s Institute for Glycomics, wrote in a commentary that accompanied the study.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that the study was funded by GSK and Auckland Uniservices, the commercialization arm of the University of Auckland. It does not mention that one of the researchers in the study has been a paid consultant for GSK and other drugmakers.
The story appears to use one independent source, Dr. Jean Longtin, head of Quebec’s public health laboratory. It also quotes from an accompanying editorial by Kate Seib, of Australia’s Institute for Glycomics, who declared no conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Imagine plopping six cups of coffee grounds on the heads of patients just before they are wheeled into the operating room to have nose or throat surgery?

In essence, that is what a team of Vanderbilt University engineers are proposing in an effort to improve the reliability of the sophisticated "GPS" system that surgeons use for these delicate operations. They have designed a "granular jamming cap" filled with coffee grounds that does a better job of tracking patient head movements than current methods. They are disclosing the novel design and data on its effectiveness at the International Conference on Information Processing in Computer-Assisted Interventions in Barcelona on June 20.

Of course, the coffee grounds are not loose: they form a thin layer inside a stretchy silicone headpiece, which looks something like a black latex swim cap decorated with reflective dots. After the cap is placed on the patient's head, it is attached to a vacuum pump that sucks the air out of the cap, jamming the tiny grounds together to form a rigid layer that conforms closely to the shape of the patient's head. (This is the same effect that turns vacuum-packed coffee into solid bricks.)

Before surgery, a special scanner is used to map the location of the dots relative to key features on the patient's head: a process called registration. Then, during surgery an overhead camera observes the position of the dots allowing the navigation system to accurately track the position of the patient's head when the surgeon repositions it. The computer uses this information to combine a CT scan, which provides a detailed 3-D view of the bone and soft tissue hidden inside the patient's head, with the position of the instruments the surgeon is using and displays them together in real time on a monitor in the operating room.

"These are very delicate operations and a sophisticated image guidance system has been developed to help the surgeons, but they don't trust the system because sometimes it is spot on and other times it is off the mark," said Robert Webster, associate professor of mechanical engineering and otolaryngology, who is developing a surgical robot designed specifically for endonasal surgery. "When we heard about this, we began wondering what was causing these errors and we decided to investigate."

When Webster and his research team looked into the matter, they were surprised by what they found. They discovered it wasn't the hardware or the software in the guidance system that was causing the problem. It was the way the reflective markers were attached to the patient's head that was at fault. Typically, these "fiducial markers" are attached by an elastic headband and double-backed tape and are subject to jarring and slipping. Their tests found that skin movement and accidental bumps by operating room staff both produced large tracking errors.

"The basic assumption is that, after registration, the spatial relationships between the patient's head and the fiducial markers remains constant," said Patrick Wellborn, the graduate student who is making the presentation. "Unfortunately, that is not the case. For one thing, studies have shown that the skin on a person's forehead can move as much as a half an inch relative to the skull. And accidentally bumping or dragging cables over the headband can also produce significant targeting errors."

In fact, previous research has found that when everything goes well, the guidance system produces targeting errors of about 2 millimeters but, in about one operation out of seven, the target error is much larger, forcing the surgeon to redo the registration process.

"Actually, we do have a solution to this problem but it involves drilling and attaching the markers directly to the skull...which we don't like to do because it is painful and it's a step backwards from the majority of what we are doing," said Assistant Professor of Otolaryngology Paul Russell, who is collaborating with the engineers on the project.

So the team began thinking up alternative, non-invasive methods to attach these critical markers. Webster recalled some experiments that were done using coffee grounds to help robots grip irregularly shaped objects. Bladders filled with coffee grounds were built into the robot's gripper. When it grabbed an object, the bladders conformed to its shape. Then a vacuum was pulled, the coffee grounds became rigid and locked the object into place. The researchers decided to see if this technique could be applied to the problem.

In the last three years, they have gone through a number of designs. They began with headbands that had coffee-ground-filled bags over the temples. Their tests showed that these models could reduce the targeting error by about 50 percent. But the engineers still weren't satisfied.

Then, Wellborn, who was taking over the project, had a brainstorming session with fellow graduate student Richard Hendrick. Among the materials that his predecessor had left behind was a latex bald cap. "That sparked the idea of caps in general," Wellborn recalled. "We wanted something elastic that was form fitting, which led to the idea of a swim cap."

In addition to fitting extremely tightly to the head, the new design had another advantage. The headband system has only three fiducial markers attached on the ends of three thin rods to form a triangle. The new design allowed them to attach several dozen markers directly to the surface of the cap, which the researchers believe will also contribute to improving the guidance system's accuracy.

They designed three tests to determine how well this "granular jamming cap" performed relative to the current headband in reducing targeting error:
• They "bumped" both them from a number of different directions with a tennis ball filled with plastic particles swinging on the end of a string. They found that the cap reduced targeting errors by 83 percent.
• They simulated the case where a cable or other piece of equipment is accidentally pushed against the two by applying forces ranging from four to six pounds in different directions. They determined that the cap outperformed the headband by 76 percent when the forces were applied to the headband and by 92 percent when they were applied to the markers.
• They tested the effects of head repositioning by having an experienced surgeon reposition test subjects' heads six to seven times. In this case, the cap proved to have 66 percent lower error rates than the headband.

On the strength of these results, Vanderbilt University has applied for a patent on the design and the technology is available for licensing. (Interested parties should contact the Vanderbilt Center for Technology Transfer and Commercialization.)

"It's a very clever way--that doesn't involve drilling holes in patients' skulls--to greatly improve the accuracy of the guidance system when we are operating in the middle of a person's skull: a zone where the accuracy of the current system is inadequate," said Russell.

Study coauthors also include graduate student Neal Dillon and former postdoctoral fellows Jessica Burgner, professor engineering at Leibniz University in Hanover, Germany, Ray Lathrop, senior consultant engineer at Eli Lilly and Company, and Raul Wirz, medical imaging processing research scientist/engineer at Vanderbilt University Medical Center,

The research was supported by National Institutes of Health grant R01 EB017467 and National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship grant 144519.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release says the research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation. It states that one of the researchers now works for Eli Lilly and Company, and that the university is seeking a commercial partner to bring the device to market.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Drinking more than four cups of coffee may lower the risk of some head and neck cancers, according to a new study.

Researchers found that regular coffee drinkers – those who drank more than four cups of coffee a day – had a 39 percent decreased risk of two types of head and neck cancer: oral cavity and pharynx cancers. Coffee did not decrease the risk of a third type of oral cancer – laryngeal cancer. They looked at nine existing studies and analyzed how much coffee was consumed by more than 5,000 cancer patients and about 9,000 healthy people.

While these results are encouraging, it doesn't mean we should just go out and start drinking lots of coffee, says Mia Hashibe, lead researcher and an assistant professor in the department of family and preventive medicine at the University of Utah.

Hashibe points out that the main risk factors for oral cancers are smoking and drinking alcohol. She says the best way to prevent getting these cancers is to not smoke or drink alcohol, rather than drinking lots of coffee. "We wouldn't want to be encouraging people to drink that much [coffee], without people considering the other risks factors," Hashibe says. "Each person needs to think about how they metabolize caffeine or coffee."

In the past, there’s been a perception that coffee may be bad for you, according to Dr. Donald Hensrud, chair of preventive medicine at the Mayo Clinic. But he says that newer studies suggest that drinking coffee may actually be good for you. "Like many things, the evidence changes over time," says Hensrud. He adds that when it comes to the link between coffee and head and neck cancer, "the benefits outweigh the risks and this is just one more piece of that puzzle that supports that."

It’s not exactly known why coffee may help prevent these cancers. But coffee contains over 1,000 different chemical compounds, including cancer-fighting antioxidants, and it’s those antioxidants that may provide a “plausible explanation” for reducing the cancer risk, says Hensrud.

Other recent studies suggest coffee may have beneficial effects in other diseases like dementia, diabetes, liver and Parkinson's disease. However, coffee alone may not be the answer according to some experts. Dr. Dong Shin, a head and neck specialist at Emory Winship Cancer Institute says this new study suggests “there is a hint of beneficial outcomes" with coffee and oral cancer. But he is concerned that the side effects of coffee are not addressed in this study. Shin says when it comes to preventing cancer, the combination approach is best. He suggests “consuming coffee, tea, veggies, and fruits rather than doing just one thing."

Hensrud adds that there are some drawbacks to drinking too much coffee, including liver damage or increased blood pressure. Other possible side effects from drinking a lot of coffee include insomnia, reflux, heartburn, palpitations, urinary systems and increased fluid intake, says Hensrud. He says coffee can also be addictive and some people may suffer from withdrawal headaches. Too much coffee may make it harder to conceive and can increase the risk of miscarriage.

The study is published in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention.

Editor's Note: Medical news is a popular but sensitive subject rooted in science. We receive many comments on this blog each day; not all are posted. Our hope is that much will be learned from the sharing of useful information and personal experiences based on the medical and health topics of the blog. We encourage you to focus your comments on those medical and health topics and we appreciate your input. Thank you for your participation.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One of the researchers and two independent sources were interviewed – something WebMD didn’t do. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - German researchers who used a bone marrow transplant to treat a cancer patient with the AIDS virus, have declared him cured of the virus — a stunning claim in a field where the word “cure” is barely whispered.

The patient, who had both HIV infection and leukemia, received the bone marrow transplant in 2007 from a donor who had a genetic mutation known to give patients a natural immunity to the virus.

Nearly four years after the transplant, the patient is free of the virus and it does not appear to be hiding anywhere in his body, Thomas Schneider of Berlin Charite hospital and colleagues said.

“Our results strongly suggest that cure of HIV has been achieved in this patient,” they wrote in the journal Blood.

AIDS researchers have rejected the approach on any kind of scale for patients with HIV. A bone marrow transplant is a last-ditch treatment for cancers such as leukemia.

It requires destruction of a patient’s own bone marrow — itself a harrowing process — and then a transplant from a donor who has a near-exact blood and immune system type. Months of recovery are needed while the transplant grows and reconstitutes the patient’s immune system.

“It’s not practical and it can kill people,” said Dr. Robert Gallo of the Institute of Human Virology at the University of Maryland, who helped discover the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS.

“It is possibly a cure, that’s for sure, you won’t know for absolute sure until the person dies and undergoes extreme PCR (genetic) analysis of post-mortem tissue.”

The mutation affects a receptor, a cellular doorway, called CCR5, that the AIDS virus uses to get into the cells it infects.

Since the 1990s scientists have known that some people, mostly of Northern European descent, have the mutation and are rarely infected with HIV.

Some researchers are working on the idea of gene therapy to treat or try to cure HIV, but the technology is still in experimental stages.

“I don’t want to throw cold water on an interesting thing, but that’s what it is — an interesting thing,” Gallo said.

Schneider’s team has been following the patient, taking samples from his colon, liver, spinal fluid and brain as he developed various conditions that justified the tests. They tested all these samples for evidence of the virus, which can be difficult to detect unless it is actively infecting cells.

All these places are suspected “reservoirs” where HIV can hide out for years, to rebound in patients who stop taking drugs that suppress the infection.

This patient appears to have a fully functioning immune system, they found, which appears genetically identical to cells from the donor — not the patient’s own immune cells.

Schneider’s team found no evidence of HIV anywhere.

“From these results, it is reasonable to conclude that cure of HIV infection has been achieved in this patient,” they wrote.

The AIDS virus infects 33 million people globally and has killed more than 25 million since the pandemic began in the 1980s. Cocktails of strong drugs can suppress the virus, keeping patients healthy and reducing the chance they will infect others, but there is no vaccine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story’s main expert source was Dr. Robert Gallo of the Institute of Human Virology at the University of Maryland, who helped discover the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. His comments offered context and appropriate cautions. While the story does not discuss potential conflicts of interest, the researchers declared in their journal article that they had no competing financial interests and the work was supported by non-commercial institutions. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cognitive behavioral therapy, which traditionally includes regular, and often weekly, visits to a clinician, is recommended by the American College of Physicians and other organizations for treatment of chronic insomnia.

For military personnel, internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy appears to be an effective alternative to meeting regularly with a therapist, although it is about half as effective as traditional methods, according to results of a study conducted by Daniel Taylor, University of North Texas professor of psychology and director of UNT's Sleep Health Research Laboratory.

Taylor received a $1.16 million grant from the U.S. Department of Defense for the study, which was affiliated with the STRONG STAR Consortium, a federally funded network of national experts seeking the best ways to treat behavioral health problems impacting post-9/11 service members and veterans. The study was published in SLEEP, the official journal of the Sleep Research Society.

Chronic insomnia is defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders as sleeping poorly at least three nights a week for a month or longer, despite adequate opportunity for a full night's sleep. It is "a significant problem in the military," said Taylor, who noted that military personnel often develop insomnia because of rapidly changing schedules and deployments that keep them constantly on alert.

Chronic insomnia is a strong risk factor for post-traumatic stress disorder, depression and substance abuse, absenteeism and occupational accidents, Taylor said. Treatment of insomnia may not only improve sleep in these soldiers, but also improve these other conditions, he said.

"About 10 percent of deployed military personnel take sleep medications, which are effective for short-term treatment of insomnia in civilian populations. For deployed military personnel, the side effects such as grogginess, slowed cognitive processing and slowed reaction time can be dangerous," Taylor said.

One hundred soldiers at Fort Hood who had chronic insomnia were recruited for Taylor's study. All completed one week of sleep monitoring by keeping sleep diaries and wearing activity monitors.

One third of the participants met with clinicians at Fort Hood for cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia once a week for six weeks, while another third received the therapy via the Internet once a week for six weeks. Both the in-person and Internet therapy had the exact same content, with the Internet lessons presented as audio recordings accompanied by visual graphics and animations. A third control group of participants was contacted by the researchers every other week during the six weeks, but did not receive cognitive behavioral therapy.

Taylor discovered that the study participants who received in-person cognitive behavioral treatment for their insomnia reported significantly greater improvements in sleep quality -- as determined by the sleep diaries and activity monitors -- than those who received the Internet therapy. Both groups had greater improvements in sleep quality than those who did not receive cognitive behavioral therapy.

He noted that that cognitive behavioral therapy is "a multifaceted intervention that can be difficult to administer without the benefit of a therapist." Additional training in the therapy for behavioral health providers in all branches of the military is needed, he said.

In a previous study of civilians with insomnia, Taylor and his research team discovered that cognitive behavioral therapy led to significant improvements in sleep efficiency, with the research subjects' use of sleep medication declining from 87.5 percent before therapy to 54 percent afterward, although the subjects weren't required to stop taking their medication.

Kristi Pruiksma, a STRONG STAR collaborating investigator and clinical psychologist, served as a clinician on Taylor's study. She said the benefits of the online therapy include easy access to the treatment and flexibility in times for completing the sessions, which "is really helpful for those juggling work and family demands."

"The online program can also be done from home rather than at a military behavioral health clinic, which some service members may avoid due to concerns about stigma," said Pruiksma, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (UT Health San Antonio).

"Successful treatment has a real impact on patients' daily lives. An important next step will be to figure out who is able to achieve good benefits from the online program and who is likely to need additional assistance from a therapist," she said.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release names the funding source. The researchers reported no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A government panel of experts released updated guidelines today spelling out who should be taking a daily low-dose aspirin for heart health, which also offers the added benefit of protection against colorectal cancer.

Those who would benefit from the regimen, according to the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, must meet a strict list of criteria -- including a high risk of heart disease and a low risk of bleeding side effects.

Specifically, the group recommends that adults 50 to 59 years old who have a 10 percent or greater 10-year cardiovascular disease risk, are not at an increased risk for bleeding, and have a life expectancy of at least 10 years take a daily low-dose aspirin to prevent heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer.

"As with any drug, patients and their doctors must balance the benefits and risks of taking aspirin," Dr. Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, chair of the task force and professor of medicine, epidemiology and biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco, told CBS News. "The benefits of aspirin outweigh the harms for most people in their 50's who are at risk of cardiovascular disease but not at increased risk of bleeding. For people in this group, taking low-dose aspirin daily can help reduce the risk of heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer."

Adults in their 60s can also benefit from regular use of low-dose aspirin, but the bleeding risk is higher in this age group, so doctors should help these patients decide whether or not aspirin therapy is right for them on a case-by-case basis.

"The task force recommends that all patients talk to their doctor to evaluate their risk for cardiovascular disease and bleeding before making a decision about aspirin use, but this is particularly important for people in their 60s," Bibbins-Domingo said.

Heart disease and colorectal cancer are among the most common causes of death in the U.S. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 610,000 Americans die of heart disease each year, accounting for 1 in 4 deaths. Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer diagnosed in both men and women (excluding skin cancers) and a leading cause of cancer death, the American Cancer Society reports.

While taking low-dose aspirin daily can help prevent heart troubles, doctors note that it also increases the risk of bleeding in the stomach and intestines, and strokes caused by bleeding in the brain. The task force looked at the most up-to-date research on both the benefits and harms of taking aspirin for the primary prevention of both heart disease and colorectal cancer to arrive at their recommendations.

When it comes to dosing, experts say sticking to a low-dose baby aspirin is best.

"The evidence shows that there's really no incremental benefit of going over 81 milligrams, and in fact, you may increase bleeding risk by going over," CBS News medical contributor Dr. Tara Narula, a cardiologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, told "CBS This Morning" when the draft guidelines were released last September.

At this time, the task force reports that more research is needed to assess whether taking aspirin is beneficial for people who are younger than 50 or those who are 70 and older.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This was a close call, and just barely squeaked by as Satisfactory. The story included quotes from two interviewees, the chair of the task force and from another physician. However, that quote is lifted from a CBS TV interview from last year, and not regarding this latest report.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Young people suffering from treatment-resistant depression (TRD) showed a significant reduction of their symptoms after being administered ketamine injections, according to a study published in the Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology.

Researchers from the University of Minnesota (UM) and the nonprofit Mayo Clinic found that ketamine caused an average decrease of 42 percent on the Children’s Depression Rating Scale (CDRS)—the most widely used rating scale in research trials for assessing the severity of depression and change in depressive symptoms among adolescents.

Ketamine is perhaps best known for being a popular recreational drug and a useful medical anesthetic, but a growing body of research is indicating that the compound could be an effective treatment for depression. Several recent studies have shown that even a single dose in adults can lead to rapid reductions in depressive symptoms. However, relatively little research has been conducted into ketamine's antidepressant effects in adolescents.

"Adolescence is a very important time for studying depression, first because depression often starts during these years, and second because it is an important time for brain development," Kathryn Cullen, from the Department of Psychiatry at UM, told Newsweek.

"When adolescent depression persists without successful treatment, it can interfere with achieving important developmental milestones. Finding the right treatment is critical to allow the restoration of healthy brain development and prevent negative outcomes like chronic depression, disability and suicide."

Unfortunately, about 40 percent of adolescents do not respond to their first intervention and only half of nonresponders respond to the second treatment, according to the researchers.

"Standard antidepressant treatments do not work for everyone and take weeks to months to take effect, a time period when patients are at risk for continued suffering and suicide attempts," Cullen said. "The field is in need of new treatment options. Ketamine has a very different mechanism of action than standard treatments."

The latest study involved 13 young people ages 12 to 18 who had failed two previous trials of antidepressants. During a two-week period, the researchers gave them six ketamine infusions.

They found that the treatment was well tolerated, with the participants showing an average decrease in CDRS scores of 42.5 percent. Five of the participants met the criteria for clinical response and remission. Of these, three were still in remission after six weeks, while the remaining two relapsed within two weeks.

According to the scientists, the results demonstrate the potential role for ketamine in treating adolescents with TRD. However, they note that the study was limited by its small sample size, so future research will be needed to confirm these results.

"The purpose of our study was to investigate the effects of ketamine for TRD in younger patients for whom this indication for ketamine administration is not well studied," Mark Roback, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Minnesota, told Newsweek.

"I think our results show promise for this population, however this study is just a beginning. The study serves to point out the need for further, rigorous, study designed to answer the many questions that remain about ketamine for TRD, such as optimal dosing and route of administration, dosing interval and treatment length, and long-term effects—just to name a few."

James Stone, a clinical senior lecturer from the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience at King's College London, who was not involved in the study, told Newsweek that there is "a lot of potential for the use of ketamine as a second or third line antidepressant where other treatments have failed."

"Although ketamine is potentially a huge breakthrough in the treatment of depression, we still don’t know about the long-term safety, or about how to keep people well from depression without requiring regular ketamine dosing," Stone added. "Further studies are needed to address these questions."

This article has been updated to include additional comment from Kathryn Cullen.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted a researcher unaffiliated with this study.  We could find no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- An intrauterine device that releases a progestin hormone may be an effective treatment for younger women with early-stage uterine cancer, Italian researchers report.

By delaying a total hysterectomy, which is the usual treatment for endometrial cancer, the IUD allows women to remain fertile and possibly to have families, according to the study published online Wednesday in Annals of Oncology, the monthly journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology.

"The study was done to see if this was a viable option for younger women who want to preserve fertility," said Dr. Jamie Bakkum-Gamez, senior associate consultant in the division of gynecologic surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. "We see it as buying more time to have a family and, once that's completed, to have a hysterectomy."

"It's a very important trial," added Dr. Angeles Alvarez Secord, associate professor of gynecologic oncology at Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center in Durham, N.C. "I've been using [the IUD] clinically for several years now for this purpose in patients who desire future fertility and some patients who cannot undergo surgery or who are at high risk for surgical complications. It's a fantastic alternative to treat patients with these diseases, and this study will help doctors when they discuss [treatment options] with patients."

Bakkum-Gomez has also used the method in her practice and is conducting a study of the IUD, which was originally designed as a contraceptive device, for this purpose.

About 3 percent to 5 percent of women who get endometrial cancer, which affects the womb lining, are under the age of 40 and will lose their fertility if they undergo a hysterectomy. The majority of these women have not yet had children, according to background information in the article.

Although the IUD is not yet approved to treat endometrial cancer, it is approved and widely used to treat endometriosis and abnormal uterine bleeding.

While hysterectomy or removal of the uterus is the accepted treatment for this kind of cancer, doctors have been using the hormone in oral form for the past 20 years, but only for "well-selected groups of women," said Dr. Elizabeth Poynor, a gynecologic oncologist and pelvic surgeon with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Well selected," in this case, means those with early-stage disease who want to maintain their fertility, much like the group in this trial.

Oral hormone treatment to slow down the cancer's growth is a systemic therapy, however, and can have adverse side effects such as skin rashes, nausea and vomiting, headaches and abnormal uterine bleeding, according to background material accompanying the study.

The theoretical -- but still unproven -- advantage to this new IUD method, Poynor said, is that "there is a lower risk of systemic side effects . . . and that you may be giving higher doses of the drug directly into the uterus."

The authors followed 20 Italian patients from January 1996 to June 2009 with atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH), which often precedes the cancer, and 14 women with early-stage endometrial cancer confined to the inner layer of the womb.

Participants -- all of whom were between ages 20 and 40 -- had an IUD known as Mirena, which released levonorgestrel, inserted for a year. They also received monthly injections of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which halts estrogen production, for six months.

The IUD was removed at the end of the year if there was no evidence of cancer.

Ninety-five percent of women with AEH initially saw their lesions disappear completely, while 57.1 percent of women with early-stage cancer also responded completely to the treatment. (The disease progressed in one of the women with AEH and four of the women with early-stage cancer.)

Of the patients with AEH, four later relapsed and required further treatment; of the women with early-stage cancer, two who had an initial complete response relapsed. However, all the women were alive and seemingly cancer-free by the end of the study after further treatment (either the IUD and GnRH treatment or a hysterectomy), the study reported.

"They did show a higher recurrence or progression rate with endometrial cancer than with AEH and that is consistent with other data," said Bakkum-Gamez, who added that the IUD method would not be appropriate for later-stage cancers, which tend to be more aggressive.

No adverse effects from treatment were noted, according to the researchers, who declared no conflicts of interest.

In background material, the researchers stated the progestin-releasing IUD should be effective in treating AEH and also early endometrial cancer, as long as those patients were evaluated with laparoscopy, ultrasound and MRI to make sure their cancer had not spread and there was no simultaneous ovarian cancer.

Nine of the women in the study successfully delivered babies.

The National Cancer Institute has more on endometrial cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes several independent experts and notes that none had a conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A new study bolsters the case that daily aspirin may help protect against cancer, although the effect seems weaker than previously thought.

And the final chapter on the popular but controversial drug has yet to be written, experts say, because like earlier research the new work has considerable limitations.

“News about the cancer potential of aspirin use has been really encouraging lately,” said Dr. Michael Thun of the American Cancer Society, who worked on the study. “Things are moving forward, but it is still a work in progress.”

Medical guidelines in the U.S. already urge people to take low doses of aspirin to prevent heart disease if the predicted benefits outweigh the risk of side effects, or if they have already suffered a heart attack.

Whether those recommendations should be broadened to include cancer prevention is still up in the air, however.

Earlier this year, an analysis of previous clinical trials showed that people on aspirin were less likely to die of cancer than those not on the medication, with a 37-percent drop in cancer deaths observed from five years onwards.

The new report, published Friday in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, is based on real-life observations instead of experiments. It includes a decade’s worth of data from more than 100,000 men and women in the U.S., most over 60 and all of them non-smokers.

People who said they took daily aspirin - whether ‘baby’ or adult strength - had a 16-percent lower risk of dying from cancer than non-users overall, Thun and his colleagues found.

For men, the difference came out to 103 fewer cancer deaths a year per 100,000 people; for women, the number was 42.

The effect was strongest for gastrointestinal cancers, such as colon cancer and stomach cancer. But it didn’t seem to matter whether people had been on aspirin for more or less than five years.

Because the study wasn’t a clinical trial, it’s hard to know if the findings can be chalked up to aspirin or if something else is at play.

Still, Thun said the results would favor broadening the aspirin guidelines to include cancer prevention based on an individual risk-benefit assessment. But he added that it will take scientists a few years to mull over all of the existing evidence.

Other researchers are more skeptical. Dr. Kausik Ray of St. George’s University of London, who has studied aspirin, said the new study did not look at overall death rates or side effects such as serious stomach bleeds.

“This is not a drug without side effects, so what you have to look at is net benefit,” he told Reuters Health.

Earlier this year, Ray’s team published an analysis of previous aspirin trials showing the medication did not prevent deaths from heart disease or cancer, and was likely to cause more harm than good.

One of the problems with the new study as well as with previous aspirin trials, he said, is something called detection bias. People who develop stomach bleeding from aspirin are likely to get their bowels checked out by a doctor. As a result, doctors may find and remove tumors or precancerous polyps, which could prolong the patient’s life - the idea behind colon cancer screening.

So far, most aspirin trials have been designed to test the drug’s effect on heart disease. Ray called for trials that specifically check people for new cancers at given intervals to weed out the selection bias marring the previous research.

“I don’t think we have enough hard evidence suggesting everybody should be taking” aspirin, Ray said.

When it comes to cancer, the government-backed U.S. Preventive Services Task Force agrees. It discourages the use of aspirin to stave off colorectal cancer in people at average risk for the disease.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The input from independent expert Dr. Kausik Ray was important.  And it pointed out the recommendation of the US Preventive Services Task Force discouraging the use of aspirin “to stave off colorectal cancer in people at average risk for the disease.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TAMPA, Fla. (July 17, 2017) - Moffitt Cancer Center researchers launched a first of its kind study comparing the long-term benefits of radiation therapy in women with breast cancer either before surgery (neoadjuvant) or after surgery (adjuvant). Their study, published in the June 30 issue of Breast Cancer Research, found that patients who have neoadjuvant radiation therapy have a significantly lower risk of developing a second primary tumor at any site.

The majority of patients who have early stage breast cancer have surgery to remove their tumor or a complete mastectomy. Surgery is commonly followed by radiation therapy, which has been shown to increase relapse-free survival. However, in some cases, patients may require neoadjuvant radiation therapy to decrease the size of the tumor before surgery. Currently, there are no studies that have analyzed the long-term effects of neoadjuvant radiation therapy on breast cancer patients.

Moffitt researchers compared the overall survival and the time to diagnosis of a second tumor, if any, of 250,195 breast cancer patients who received either neoadjuvant or adjuvant radiation therapy. They analyzed patient outcomes from a National Cancer Institute (NCI) registry database of cancer incidence and survival rates in the United States. They included female patients in the analysis who were diagnosed between 1973 and 2011 with early-stage breast cancer. The analysis included 2,554 women who received localized neoadjuvant breast radiation therapy before surgery and 247,641 women who received localized adjuvant breast radiation therapy after surgery.

The researchers discovered that among the breast cancer patients who tested positive for the estrogen receptor (ER) biomarker, patients who had neoadjuvant radiation therapy had a significantly lower risk of developing a second primary tumor than patients who had adjuvant radiation therapy. This was true for patients who underwent both partial and complete mastectomies. The researchers found that delaying surgery due to neoadjuvant radiation therapy was not a detriment to survival.

A number of recent studies have suggested that radiation therapy may re-educate and stimulate the immune system to target cancer cells. "The observed benefit of neoadjuvant radiation therapy aligns with the growing body of literature of the immune activation effects of radiation, including shrinking of untreated metastases outside the radiation field," explained Heiko Enderling, Ph.D., associate member of Moffitt's Integrated Mathematical Oncology Department.

These data are promising, but randomized clinical trials are needed to confirm the benefit of neoadjuvant radiation therapy. "Historic data indicate that disease-free survival is significantly increased when radiation therapy is applied before surgery rather than after surgery, especially for ER-positive patients. These findings are worthy of a prospective clinical trial to confirm potential benefits of neoadjuvant vs. adjuvant radiation, and to identify the potential contribution of radiation-induced immunity to vaccinate against future disease," said Enderling.

The study was supported by funds received from the American Cancer Society and the DeBartolo Family Personalized Medicine Institute Pilot Research Awards in Personalized Medicine.

Moffitt is dedicated to one lifesaving mission: to contribute to the prevention and cure of cancer. The Tampa-based facility is one of only 48 National Cancer Institute-designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers, a distinction that recognizes Moffitt's excellence in research, clinical trials, prevention and cancer control. Moffitt is the No. 6 cancer hospital in the nation and has been listed in U.S. News & World Report as one of the "Best Hospitals" for cancer care since 1999. Moffitt devotes more than 2.5 million square feet to research and patient care. Moffitt's expert nursing staff is recognized by the American Nurses Credentialing Center with Magnet® status, its highest distinction. With more than 5,200 team members, Moffitt has an economic impact in the state of $2.1 billion. For more information, call 1-888-MOFFITT (1-888-663-3488), visit MOFFITT.org, and follow the momentum on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding sources were noted and do not appear to be a conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. - Aug. 17, 2015 - Every year falls affect approximately one in three older adults living at home, with approximately one in 10 falls resulting in serious injury. Even if an injury does not occur, the fear of falling can lead to reduced activity and a loss of independence.

Research has shown that vitamin D plays a key role in maintaining muscle integrity and strength and some studies suggest vitamin D may reduce the risk of falls.

Homebound elderly, a generally vulnerable population due to poor dietary intake and nutrition-related health conditions as well as decreased exposure to sunlight, are at increased risk for low vitamin D levels, possibly leading to more falls.

Researchers at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center set out to evaluate the feasibility of delivering a vitamin D supplement through a Meals-on-Wheels (MOW) program to improve the clients' vitamin D levels and reduce falls.

The study is published in the early online edition (8/16/2015) of the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society.

"Falls in homebound older people often lead to disability and placement in a nursing home," said Denise Houston, Ph.D., R.D., associate professor of gerontology and geriatric medicine at Wake Forest Baptist and lead author of the study. "One or our aging center's goals is to help people maintain their independence and live safely at home for as long as possible."

Participants in the Meals-on-Wheels program in Forsyth County, North Carolina, were recruited to take part in a five-month, single-blind randomized trial.

Sixty-eight study participants received either a monthly vitamin D supplement of 100,000 international units or placebo delivered with their MOW meal. The study included the participants' history of falls and their fear of falling, blood tests at the beginning and at end of the trial to measure 25-hydroxyvitamin D (biomarker for vitamin D in blood), and a monthly diary recording falls during the trial period.

At the beginning of this pilot study, the research team found that more than half of the participants had insufficient concentrations of vitamin D in the blood (less than 20 ng/ml), while less than a quarter had concentrations in the optimal range (30 ng/ml or more).

The study showed that the monthly vitamin D supplement was effective in increasing the concentrations of vitamin D in the blood from insufficient to sufficient levels in all but one of the 34 people who received it, and to optimal levels in all but five people. In addition, people in the vitamin D group reported approximately half the falls of those in the control group.

"Although these initial findings are encouraging, we need to confirm the results in a larger trial," Houston said.

The Wake Forest Baptist team currently is conducting a clinical trial to try to determine how vitamin D affects risk factors for falls such as balance and muscle strength and power.

Funding for the study was provided by the Wake Forest Translational Science Institute and Center for Integrative Medicine and the Claude Pepper Older Americans Independence Center of Wake Forest Baptist.

Co-authors are Janet Tooze, Ph.D., Jamehl Demons, M.D., Brooke Davis, M.S., Rachel Shertzer-Skinner, M.A., Stephen Kritchevsky, Ph.D., and Jeff Williamson, M.D., of Wake Forest Baptist; and Linda Kearsley, B.S., Senior Services Inc., Winston-Salem.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release cites funding sources. It makes no mention of possible conflicts of interest, but the study itself says none were found.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Infants exposed to partial treatment in the womb healthier than those not exposed.

Steroids improve survival and reduce the chances of certain birth defects for extremely premature infants, even if the treatment course is not finished before delivery, according to a study funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Steroids are a standard treatment for pregnant women likely to deliver before 34 weeks because these drugs are known to reduce the chance of complications and death among premature infants. However, because completing the entire course takes at least 48 hours, health care providers may opt not to begin treatment when premature delivery is imminent.

The new study, supported by NIH’s Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), provides strong evidence that even a partial course can have some benefit. Researchers evaluated 6,121 extremely premature infants who had been born between 22 and 27 weeks of pregnancy at sites in NICHD’s Neonatal Research Network. The study followed the infants from birth to 18 to 22 months of age and measured survival and brain and nervous system outcomes. The infants were grouped according to the mother’s steroid treatment — no treatment, partial treatment or complete treatment.

Among the three groups, researchers found significant differences in rates of death, complications such as bleeding in the brain (severe intracranial hemorrhage), intestinal problems (necrotizing enterocolitis), lung disease (bronchopulmonary dysplasia) and brain and nervous system impairment. Infants in the complete treatment group fared best. Infants in the partial treatment group fared better than untreated infants. The study team also found evidence that the better outcomes likely were due to lower rates of bleeding in the brain and of a brain injury called cystic periventricular leukomalacia. Overall, these findings suggest that starting steroid treatment promptly — even if the likelihood of completion is low — is beneficial when extremely premature birth is imminent.

Additional funding for the study was provided by NIH’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences.

Rosemary Higgins, M.D., NICHD Neonatal Research Network program scientist and study author, is available for interviews.

To arrange an interview with Dr. Higgins, please call Linda Huynh at 301-496-5133 or e-mail nichdpress@mail.nih.gov.

About the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD): The NICHD sponsors research on development, before and after birth; maternal, child, and family health; reproductive biology and population issues; and medical rehabilitation. For more information, visit the Institute's website at http://www.nichd.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release identifies the funding source in its headline and first sentence – the National Institutes of Health. It later adds that NIH’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences also provided funding for the study.
There was no mention of conflicts of interest, since there were none reported in the original journal article.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But two studies discussed at the oncology meeting found that patients who were considered Her2-negative even using both tests benefited from Herceptin.

Both studies reanalyzed tumor samples from earlier clinical trials showing that Herceptin, if used after a tumor is removed by surgery, cuts the risk of the cancer’s recurring by half. For a woman to have entered those trials, her tumor had to be classified as Her2-positive by a local clinical laboratory.

But scientists have now gone back and retested those preserved tumor samples and found that as many as 20 percent of them were actually Her2-negative. Yet the women with those tumors also experienced a reduction in cancer recurrence from Herceptin, in some cases as great as that in the Her2-positive women.

“This is a revolution compared to what we believed before,” said Dr. Edith A. Perez of the Mayo Clinic, who presented one of the studies. She said the findings raised questions of whether women who were Her2-negative should be tested again.

Some experts were skeptical, saying the number of patients in the two studies was too small to draw firm conclusions. Also, they said, it was not clear if those women were truly Her2-negative, since they had tested positive by the local laboratory.

Dr. Daniel F. Hayes, a breast cancer specialist at the University of Michigan who helped develop guidelines for Her2 testing, said it would be unwise to start giving Herceptin to Her2-negative women because the drug was expensive and raised the risk of heart failure.

But he said the studies called attention to the inconsistent quality of Her2 testing in many small laboratories. Laboratories can use commercially available tests or develop their own.

Dr. Soonmyung Paik, who presented the second study at the cancer conference, said the problem might lie not in sloppy testing but rather in the cutoff used to determine which women get Herceptin.

Dr. Paik, who is with the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, said that about 40 percent of women had intermediate levels of Her2. They are now classified as negative but might still derive some benefit from the drug. On the other hand, he said, many women who are Her2-positive do not benefit from Herceptin. So better ways are needed to determine who should be treated.

“To me, the take-home message is that we don’t have a perfect test, unfortunately,” Dr. Paik said.

Dr. Pamela M. Klein, an executive at Genentech, the manufacturer of Herceptin, said the company was continuing to explore how to best identify patients for the drug.

The fact that this uncertainty is occurring so long after the 1998 approval of Herceptin — the paragon of “personalized medicine” — suggests that it will not be so easy to tailor other drugs to patients based on gene or protein tests.

It left some doctors at the conference incredulous and uncertain how to treat their patients.

“Here we are, 10 years into it,” said Dr. Marc L. Citron, an oncologist in Lake Success, N.Y., “and we don’t know how to test for it.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story is balanced in term of sources cited. The story identifies researchers who conducted reviews, oncologists in practice, the physician who designed guidelines for Her2/neu testing, and a representative from Genentech. Clinicians express frustration and confusion about a lack of standardization for determining who should receive Herceptin and similar treatments.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Fibromyalgia is so common, and we have such a difficult time treating it effectively. It’s defined by what the patient tells you,” he added. “It’s hard for some patients’ families and their doctors to get their head around what it is and whether it’s real. So, that these results were so positive for something that’s very safe is an impressive accomplishment.”

Recent studies have suggested that tai chi, with its slow exercises, breathing and meditation, could benefit patients with other chronic conditions, including arthritis. But not all of these reports have been conclusive, and tai chi is hard to study because there are many styles and approaches.

The fibromyalgia study involved the yang style of tai chi, taught by a Boston tai chi master, Ramel Rones. Dr. Solomon and other experts cautioned that bigger studies with other masters and approaches were necessary.

Still, patients, who received twice-weekly tai chi classes and a DVD to practice with 20 minutes daily, showed weekly improvement on an established measurement, the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire, improving more than the stretching-and-education group in physicians’ assessments, sleep, walking and mental health. One-third stopped using medication, compared with one-sixth in the stretching group.

Dr. Chenchen Wang, a Tufts rheumatologist who led the study, said she attributed the results to the fact that “fibromyalgia is a very complex problem” and “tai chi has multiple components — physical, psychological, social and spiritual.”

The therapy impressed Mary Petersen, 59, a retired phone company employee from Lynn, Mass., who said that before participating in the 2008 study, “I couldn’t walk half a mile,” and it “hurt me so much just to put my hands over my head.” Sleeping was difficult, and she was overweight. “There was no joy to life,” she said. “I was an entire mess from head to foot.”

She had tried and rejected medication, physical therapy, swimming and other approaches. “I was used to being treated in a condescending manner because they couldn’t diagnose me: ‘She’s menopausal, she’s crazy.’ ”

Before the study, “I didn’t know tai chi from a sneeze,” said Ms. Petersen, who has diabetes and other conditions. “I was like, ‘Well, O.K., I’ll get to meet some people, it will get me out of the house.’ I didn’t believe any of it. I thought this is so minimal, it’s stupid.”

After a few weeks, she said she began to feel better, and after 12 weeks “the pain had diminished 90 percent.” She has continued tai chi, lost 50 pounds and can walk three to seven miles a day.

“You could not have convinced me that I would ever have done this or continued with this,” she said. “I wouldn’t say it’s a cure. I will say it’s an effective method of controlling pain.”

Dr. Shmerling said that though tai chi is inexpensive compared with other treatments, some patients would reject such an alternative therapy. And Dr. Gloria Yeh, a Beth Israel Deaconess internist and co-author of the editorial, said others “will say, ‘It’s too slow, I can’t do that.’ ”

But she said it offered a “gentler option” for patients deterred by other physical activities. “The mind-body connections set it apart from other exercises,” she said, adding that doctors are seeking “anything we can offer that will make patients say ‘I can really do this.’ ”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  Most of the quotes in the story are from people not affiliated with the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
* Drug being developed by Pfizer, Elan and Johnson & Johnson

LONDON, March 1 (Reuters) - New imaging technology suggests an experimental drug for Alzheimer’s reduces clumps of plaque in the brain by around 25 percent, lifting hopes for a medicine that disappointed in clinical tests two years ago.

Bapineuzumab — being developed by Pfizer Inc (PFE.N), Irish drugmaker Elan Corp ELN.I and Johnson & Johnson (JNJ.N) — is a potential game-changer because it could be the first drug to treat the underlying cause of the degenerative brain disease.

Investor confidence in the antibody medicine, however, took a big hit in July 2008 when it failed to meet its main goal in a mid-stage trial and caused brain swelling at higher doses. The new study, which only involved 28 patients, is modest fillip.

“It demonstrated that the drug has an effect on the pathological hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease,” lead researcher Juha Rinne from Finland’s University of Turku told Reuters.

Rinne and colleagues used a novel imaging substance called carbon-11-labelled Pittsburgh compound B, which sticks to areas of the brain where there is a lot of beta amyloid plaque.

After 78 weeks, they found that patients given bapineuzumab had about a 25 percent reduction in plaque compared with those on placebo. The effect was similar with three different doses of the drug, they reported in the journal Lancet Neurology.

The treatment was generally well tolerated, although two patients on the highest dose had transient brain swelling. The drug’s developers have since dropped the top dose from large ongoing Phase III trials.

Commenting on the results, Sam Gandy from New York’s Mount Sinai School of Medicine said it was too early to say effective disease-modifying drugs were at hand, but the ability to measure plaque in living subjects was “something of a breakthrough”.

Experts are divided on the root cause of Alzheimer’s and hence the best way to tackle it.

Most advanced drugs, like bapineuzumab, have focused on removing clumps of amyloid plaques, which are thought to stop brain cells from functioning properly. But a rival school blames toxic tangles caused by an abnormal build-up of the protein tau.

Rinne’s imaging study was funded by Elan and Wyeth, which is now part of Pfizer. (Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  The story included a quote attributed to Sam Gandy at New York’s Mount Sinai School of Medicine without explaining what expertise he might bring.  Nonetheless, he was enthusiastic about the potential benefit from the measurement technique the study used.  And though the story was focused on an Alzheimer’s treatment, he mentioned that it’s too early to say anything about effectiveness to treating Alzheimer’s disease.  
The story did report that the study was funded by the manufacturer of the drug being studied.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 11, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Colonoscopy can save lives, but experts agree that testing rates remain too low. Now, researchers say a special scoring system might point to those people at highest risk for colon cancer, who may need the test the most.

The system might also make colon cancer screening more efficient and boost the number of people who get checked for the disease, said a team led by Dr. Thomas Imperiale of Indiana University Medical Center, in Indianapolis.

One expert said more efforts are needed to get people to undergo colonoscopy, which is currently recommended once every 10 years beginning at age 50.

"Five percent of the U.S. population will be diagnosed with colon cancer within their lifetimes," said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. He was not involved in the new research.

Swaminath noted that one study published in 2012 found that "colonoscopy reduced the risk of death from colon cancer by 53 percent, by removing polyps. No other procedure is available to remove polyps from anywhere in the colon."

And while some areas of the United States have rates of compliance with colonoscopy guidelines of 75 percent or more, "many areas have poor colon cancer screening rates," he added.

Imperiale's team noted that not all people deemed to be at "average risk" for colon cancer face the same risk of the disease, and so some might benefit more from invasive colonoscopy than others.

In the new study, the Indiana researchers looked at more than 4,400 Americans who were scheduled to undergo their first screening colonoscopy. They calculated a clinical "score" for each of these patients, based on their health information, and the five most common risk factors for colon cancer: age, sex, waist size, smoking and family history.

Then they looked at the results of each patient's colonoscopy. The study found that patients classified under the scoring system as low-risk did, in fact, have far fewer advanced abnormal growths that might develop into cancer, compared to patients classified as high-risk.

So, patients scoring at the lower end of risk for colon cancer might be able to have less invasive screening tests (such as the fecal occult blood test), while those at higher risk would require a colonoscopy, Imperiale's team concluded.

However, Swaminath wasn't fully sold on the notion.

He believes that the scoring system "was only modestly able to separate people within the risk groups." Swaminath pointed out that even the new study found that "low- to intermediate-risk patients still have a risk between of between 1.9 percent to 9.9 percent of harboring a polyp that can develop into cancer."

For now, he said, the data from this study is not strong enough to spur any changes in current screening recommendations.

Dr. Jules Garbus is co-chief of colon and rectal surgery at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y. He seemed more supportive of the new scoring system.

"A risk stratification tool is critical in helping physicians make appropriate screening recommendations for patients," Garbus said. "While high-risk patients may ultimately require a screening colonoscopy, many average- and low-risk patients could undergo less invasive screening procedures. This can improve patient compliance with screening, as well as address escalating health care cost issues.

The study is published Aug. 10 in the Annals of Internal Medicine.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about colorectal cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story contains two independent voices. The perspective they provide is a particular strength of the article. We wish that more stories would reach out to experts not affiliated with the studies being reported on for context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Do this and similar exercises hundreds of times over multiple sessions weekly; continue for months; and, gradually, presbyopia lessens, a number of studies show.

One study also examined functions of the eye itself and found none of these improvements were because of changes in the eye. They’re all in the brain.

Various smartphone apps say they offer this kind of vision-improving training; I used one called GlassesOff, the only one I found that was backed by scientific studies.

Perceptual learning can improve the vision of people who already see quite well and those with other conditions. For example, a study tested the approach in 23 young adults, around age 24. Compared with a control group of 20 young adults, the treatment group increased letter recognition speed. Similar training is an effective component in treating amblyopia, also called “lazy eye,” which is the most frequent cause of vision loss in infants and children, affecting 3 percent of the population. It may also improve vision in those with mild myopia (nearsightedness).

It should be acknowledged that some researchers involved in many of these studies have financial ties to GlassesOff. However, other studies with no commercial links obtained similar results, and several scientists I spoke to, including those without ties to GlassesOff, thought the science behind the app was credible. One study published in Psychological Science trained 16 college-aged adults and 16 older adults (around age 71) with Gabor patch exercises for 1.5 hours per day for seven days. After training, the older adults’ ability to see low-contrast images improved to the level that the college-age ones had before training.

Scientists don’t know exactly how perceptual learning relieves presbyopia, but they have some clues based on how our brain processes visual information.

After first taking in “raw data” of an image through the eye, different sets of neurons in the brain process it as separate features like edges and colors. Then the brain must coordinate activity across sets of neurons to assemble these features into recognizable objects like chairs, faces, letters or words. Reading at our normal pace, the brain has only about 250 milliseconds to do this work until the eyes automatically move onto the next letter or word. Once they do so, we’re taking in more information from whatever the eyes focus on next. If we haven’t yet processed the prior set of information, we can’t understand it.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: In-depth reporting was clearly undertaken (and independent research is cited) in the process of putting together this piece. Also, the column discloses conflicts of interest within the industry, which is important.
However, the story didn’t include direct quotes from independent sources. The author states that he consulted with experts in this field as part of his research, and that’s another check in the “plus” column. But on the downside, readers don’t know who those sources are or what expertise they bring to bear. From a reader standpoint, this would be useful information to include and it’s important information to look for. Considering all aspects of the issue, we’ll rate this a borderline satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A common treatment for prostate cancer may slightly increase patients' risk of heart problems, new research says.

Experts said the findings could make doctors think twice before prescribing the standard hormone treatment to men with prostate cancer, particularly if they are at risk of heart disease. The research was announced Tuesday at a joint meeting of the European Cancer Organisation and the European Society for Medical Oncology in Berlin.

"What we can do with these results is to raise a flag with hormone treatments," said Mieke Van Hemelrijck, a cancer epidemiologist at King's College in London and the study's lead researcher.

More than 670,000 men are diagnosed with prostate cancer globally every year, making it the second-most common cancer in men, after lung cancer. In the U.S., about 600,000 men are being treated with endocrine therapies for prostate cancer.

Van Hemelrijck and colleagues studied more than 30,000 men in Sweden with prostate cancer who got hormone therapy between 1997 and 2006, for about three years. They compared the rate of heart problems in those patients to the rate in the general Swedish population.

Prostate cancer patients had a 28 percent higher relative chance of having a fatal heart attack and a 21 percent increased chance of dying from heart disease. Still, these risks were low in absolute terms: researchers estimated the hormone therapies would cause an extra 10 heart problems – like chest pain or a heart attack – a year for every 1,000 prostate cancer patients.

"What patients should do is talk about this with their doctor," said Michael Thun, a vice president emeritus at the American Cancer Society, who was not connected to the research. "It makes a lot of sense and could one day change treatment guidelines."

Previous studies have found hormone therapy given to prostate cancer patients with a history of heart disease increases their chances of dying.

Van Hemelrijck hypothesized that hormone therapy disrupts the normal circulation of testosterone in the body. Scientists think testosterone has some protective effect on the heart. Thus, hormones that interfere with testosterone could be deadly.

"There is no definitive evidence, though the risk of heart problems is definitely something doctors should consider when prescribing hormone treatment," Thun said.

Helen Rippon, head of research management at Britain's Prostate Cancer Charity, said the benefits of hormone therapy ultimately outweighed the increased risk of heart problems. "This is not a colossal risk," Rippon said.

"For the vast majority of men, the benefits of hormone therapy are absolutely clear: it can halt the disease or stop it for years," she said. "Clinicians always make decisions on a case-by-case basis, and this is one more piece of information for them to consider."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 



The story included quotes from two independent experts but not much balance therein.  One seems to inappropriately exaggerate the potential benefit of hormone therapy and the other seems to minimize the potential for harm from its use.  The story should have also noted the sources of funding for the study. According to a news release, the study was funded by the Swedish Research Council, the Stockholm Cancer Society and Cancer Research UK. Nonetheless, the story barely meets the expectation for this criterion. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But it's not clear that women concerned strictly about breast cancer will line up for this drug, either. A closer look at the recent study suggests that raloxifene's advantages may not be as great as the government announcement implied. Some cancer experts were less than enthusiastic, and patient advocates were downright skeptical.

"The outcome of the study is not as clear cut as we might have hoped for," said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society. "It will take some time for experts to review the data to determine which of the two treatments is preferable."

Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, said the new study had been hyped adding, "We have many concerns about it on many levels."

Another group, Breast Cancer Action, said, "We are very concerned that treating risk as a medical condition will result in substituting one disease for another."

The study included nearly 20,000 women 35 and older who were past menopause and had an increased risk of developing breast cancer. To qualify, their risk had to be at least that of an average 60- to 64-year-old woman — a 1.66 percent chance of getting the disease within 5 years. On average, the participants actually had more than twice that risk, around 4 percent, meaning that 40 of 1,000 would be affected. (Women can quickly figure out their own risk at the Web site cancer.gov/bcrisktool).

Half the participants took one drug, and half the other for about five years. Their rates of invasive breast cancer were the same, 163 cases for tamoxifen and 167 for raloxifene — about half as many as would have been expected without treatment.

So raloxifene looked just as good as tamoxifen. Even better news, the cancer institute said, was that those taking raloxifene "had 36 percent fewer uterine cancers and 29 percent fewer blood clots." Based on those findings, it is easy to see why raloxifene was declared the winner.

But numbers can be tricky. Expressed as percentages, the differences between the drugs for uterine cancer and blood clots sound large.

"But the actual numbers are small," Dr. Lichtenfeld said.

Among women taking tamoxifen in the study, 36 of 4,732 got uterine cancer, while for raloxifene the number was 23 of 4,712. (Women who had had hysterectomies were not counted.) As for blood clots, there were 141 in the 9,726 women on tamoxifen and 100 in the 9,745 on raloxifene

"Women who took raloxifene did get uterine cancer, and they did have blood clots," Dr. Lichtenfeld said. "Any suggestion that tamoxifen is the only drug saddled with getting these diseases is not accurate."

More important, the difference between the numbers of side effects was not statistically significant, meaning that it could have occurred by chance and that the drugs could be similar or even the same. That fact was not stated in the news release, and the researchers mentioned it only briefly during the news conference, calling the results "borderline" significant.

Many researchers say that results don't count unless they pass the statistical tests. But Dr. Leslie Ford, an associate director for clinical research at the cancer institute, said that the differences could not be ignored because they came so near to being significant. Had the study gone on a little longer, they might have crossed the line, she said.

Another issue is that the message from the cancer institute seemed to play down a shortcoming of raloxifene that cancer doctors consider important. The institute emphasized that raloxifene lowered the risk of "invasive" breast cancer, tumors that have penetrated surrounding tissue and that have the potential to spread and turn deadly.

But raloxifene did not prevent two other serious breast conditions, whereas tamoxifen did reduce their risk by 50 percent. Those conditions, sometimes called noninvasive breast cancers, are L.C.I.S. and D.C.I.S., for lobular and ductal carcinomas in situ. Lobular growths increase the likelihood of invasive cancer, and ductal ones can become invasive. D.C.I.S. is often treated like breast cancer, with surgery and radiation.

"D.C.I.S. is not inconsequential," said Dr. Lichtenfeld, adding that it leads some women to have both breasts removed. Since tamoxifen lowers the risks of both invasive and noninvasive tumors, he said, it "has a broader spectrum of activity against breast cancer."

Dr. Larry Norton, a breast cancer expert at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, said he also found it worrisome that raloxifene did not share tamoxifen's ability to prevent the noninvasive growths.

When it came to L.C.I.S. and D.C.I.S., the difference between the two drugs was statistically significant, meaning it was likely to be real and not due to chance. Yet that distinction was not pointed out in the news release, and, Dr. Lichtenfeld noted, it was "de-emphasized" during the news conference.

But Dr. Ford of the cancer institute said raloxifene's ability to prevent invasive cancers was more important.

"Invasive cancer is what kills you," she said, adding that only about 10 percent of D.C.I.S. turn invasive, and that those that do can be treated. She called it "twisted logic" to dwell on tamoxifen's superior ability to prevent the noninvasive cancers because, she said, "We're not preventing noninvasive cancers because nobody's taking tamoxifen anyway."

Given that there are shades of gray and room for debate about these findings, some critics questioned the way they were made public.

The results were announced by the cancer institute in a news release and a telephone conference for news reporters. Contrary to usual practice, the complete data had not yet been revealed to scientists or published in a medical journal, though the institute said it intended to do so. Officials said they announced the findings before publishing them because they had implications for public health.

Ms. Visco said, "How is it ethical to do that, to make this much hype around something that is not a health emergency, and you can't check their data?"

She said she also worried that the announcement might have left the impression that the drugs could prevent breast cancer entirely.

"It's not prevention," Ms. Visco said. "It's risk reduction, short term, for a subset of women we cannot identify."

The concern is that many women would have to take tamoxifen or raloxifene for a few to benefit. In 1,000 high-risk women like those in the study, for instance, without treatment 40 would be expected to develop invasive breast cancer over the next five years. If all 1,000 were treated, only 20 cases would occur.

But since there is no way to predict who will actually get cancer, everyone has to be treated, meaning that 980 will be exposed to the drug's risks but will get no cancer benefit.

"The hope is that at some point we'll be able to pinpoint who really is at high risk of breast cancer and then we'll know what to do," Ms. Visco said. "But we're not anywhere near there."

In the meantime, Dr. Ford said, at least tamoxifen and raloxifene give women at risk the chance to do something. She compared the drugs to statins and blood pressure drugs, which people take even though they feel well, to lower their risks of heart attacks and strokes. But others argue that heart attacks are far more common than breast cancer, and the drugs to prevent them much safer.

To Dr. Norton, the most important conclusion to be drawn from the study is that more research on breast cancer prevention is needed. He said the next step should be to test another class of drugs called aromatase inhibitors, already in use to treat breast cancer, to see if they can do better at risk reduction than tamoxifen or raloxifene.

"Until we have zero cancer," he said, "I'm not going to make any claims about a great advance."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple sources who have differing opinions of the significance of these findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For hours on a recent morning at the , Dr. Andrew Lowy painstakingly performed the therapy on a patient.

After slicing the man’s belly wide open, he thrust his gloved hands deep inside, and examined various organs, looking for . He then lifted the small intestine out of the body to sift it through his fingers.

As he found tumors, he snipped them out. “You can see how this is coming off like wallpaper,” Dr. Lowy said as he stripped out part of the lining of the man’s abdominal cavity.

After about two hours of poking and cutting, Dr. Lowy began the so-called shake and bake. The machine pumped heated chemotherapy directly into the abdominal cavity for 90 minutes while nurses gently jiggled the man’s bloated belly to disperse the drug to every nook and cranny.

The treatment is formally called cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, or Hipec.

Recent converts include University Hospitals Case Medical Center in Cleveland, in the , and even Massachusetts General. The is looking at it, according to people in the field. Advocates predict that the number of procedures could grow to 10,000 a year from about 1,500 now.

The therapy has even been featured on an episode of the TV series “Grey’s Anatomy.”

But Dr. Ryan, a gastrointestinal oncologist, suggested in an interview that the procedure was being extended to because “you can’t make a living doing this procedure in appendix cancer patients.”

He debated the procedure publicly at the recent annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. While some patients did seem to live much longer than expected, he said that they had been carefully selected and might have fared well even without the therapy.

Proponents say that if cancer has spread into the abdominal cavity but not elsewhere, then lives can be prolonged by removing all the visible and killing what’s missed with Hipec.

By contrast, said Dr. Paul Sugarbaker, a surgeon at Washington Hospital Center and the leading proponent of Hipec, “there are no long-term survivors with systemic chemotherapy — zero.”

Dr. Sugarbaker, who opposed Dr. Ryan in the debate, said that it has long been known that cancerous cells are unable to withstand as much heat as healthy cells. And putting the chemotherapy on top of tumors should be more effective than systematically delivering it through the bloodstream.

One randomized trial done more than a decade ago involving 105 patients in the did show a striking benefit. The median survival of those getting surgery and Hipec, plus intravenous chemotherapy, was 22.3 months, almost double the 12.6 months for those getting only the intravenous chemotherapy. But 8 percent who got the surgery and Hipec died from the treatment itself. And critics say that since that trial was conducted, new drugs have come to market that allow patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to live two years with intravenous chemotherapy alone.

A new trial in the has been temporarily suspended so that researchers can find a way to recruit patients. After nearly a year only one patient had enrolled, because people were reluctant to chance winding up in the control group, according to one of the investigators.

While proponents contend that the risk of dying from the surgery has been reduced since the Dutch trial, the procedure still lasts eight hours or more and full recovery can take three to six months. “It’s maximally invasive,” said Dr. Sugarbaker, who often removes the “spare parts” — organs a patient can live without, like the spleen, the gall bladder, the ovaries and the uterus.

The cost of the surgery and Hipec, including hospitalization, ranges from $20,000 to more than $100,000, doctors said. While and insurers generally pay for the operation, the heated treatment may not be covered. But doctors added it may be if it is described merely as chemotherapy. Some patients, like Ms. Borges, who is a fitness devotee, recover well and say the procedure staved off a death sentence.

But Dr. Alan Venook, a colon cancer specialist at the , said that a couple of patients referred by him had “died miserable deaths. One lost much of her abdominal wall to infection and just died in misery.”

Another risk is that the surgery may be done unnecessarily. CT scans cannot pick up many of the small tumors, so it is often unclear how much cancer is inside until the patient is opened.

In June, Dr. Lowy sliced open a woman and saw, to his horror, that she had more tumors than he could remove. Taking out only some would not improve her chances of survival, so he closed the incision, and she is now starting intravenous chemotherapy.

Things with the male patient, Andy S., went better. A 41-year-old father of two from near , Mr. S. agreed to let a reporter observe the surgery, but asked that his full name not be published because he did not want his cancer history to surface through searches.

Mr. S. had eventually diagnosed as . But the appendix was found to be cancerous. Such cancers typically spew mucus containing tumor cells into the abdominal cavity. So he signed up for surgery and Hipec with Dr. Lowy.

“I’ve had to say my goodbyes to everybody,” Mr. S. said the day before the operation. “I had to talk to my priest. I had to do all these things I never thought I’d have to do at 41. I wouldn’t wish it on my worst enemy, but I have to go through with it.”

Dr. Lowy explored the entire cavity from the diaphragm to the pelvis. He found mucus in several spots that he sopped up with a cloth and also tiny tumors the size of a pencil eraser that had implanted in several spots. He snipped those out and sewed up the wounds. He removed the right side of the man’s colon and the omentum, a fatty structure.

Then two Y-shaped tubes hooked to the Hipec machine were inserted into the abdominal cavity, one to deliver the chemotherapy and the other to bring the drug back to the machine to be reheated. The incision was sewn up around the tubes so the chemotherapy would not leak.

The man’s belly was filled with three liters of saline fluid and the chemotherapy, a generic drug called mitomycin C, heated to 42 degrees Celsius, or nearly 108 degrees Fahrenheit. Any hotter could have caused injuries. Bloated with liquid, the man’s torso resembled a water bed.

After 90 minutes, the fluid was drained and the incision reopened for a final check before the patient was stitched up. The procedure took six hours.

“We got all of the visible disease, and he didn’t have a lot of visible disease,” Dr. Lowy said with satisfaction.

Mr. S. left the hospital eight days later, happy to have undergone the treatment. “I want to have the best chance I can have to never see this again,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Many different voices with different perspectives were heard in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHAPEL HILL - University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center researchers have found that mailing self-collection kits to test for high-risk human papillomavirus infection has the potential to boost cervical cancer screening - especially for low-income women who are overdue for testing.

In the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology, researchers published the results of mailing at-home, HPV self-collection kits to 193 low-income women in North Carolina who were overdue for screening according to national guidelines. They reported this screening approach detected high-risk HPV in all of the cases of women who were found to have high-grade, abnormal cervical precancerous growths, showing that self-collection at home for HPV may be a viable method to identify women at high-risk for cervical cancer.

"This is a demonstration that mailing self-collection kits and returning them to test for high-risk HPV infection has big potential to increase screening access among under-screened women, and to do that successfully," said UNC Lineberger's Jennifer S. Smith, the study's senior author, and a professor in the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health.

Although cervical cancer is preventable through early detection and treatment, the American Cancer Society estimates that more than 4,100 women will die from cervical cancer in the United States this year. Nearly 20 percent of women in the United States who are eligible for cervical cancer screening report they haven't been tested for cervical cancer within the recommended time interval, national surveys have shown.

"Women are dying unnecessarily of cervical cancer because they either haven't been vaccinated against HPV in adolescence, or they've not been getting screened according to national guidelines," Smith said. "Increasing screening rates among under-screened women is of paramount importance."

In 2014, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration signed off on using an HPV test alone to screen for cervical cancer for women 25 years and older, in conjunction with the Pap test. Earlier this year, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force gave an "A" rating to HPV primary screening alone for women aged 30 to 65.

"There are a lot of different barriers that cause women to be underscreened," said the study's first author Andrea Des Marais, MPH, project manager with the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health. "HPV tests are being widely used now in the United States, but only through physician collection in clinical practice, which requires that women come to a clinic. Offering HPV testing using self-collection by mail has a lot of potential to reach women who are the highest risk of being screened: those who don't access regular medical care."

For the study, researchers mailed at-home, self-collection kits to low-income women in North Carolina who were overdue for screening by national guidelines. They included women between the ages of 30 and 64 years who had reported no history of receiving a Pap test, which checks for precancerous or cancerous cells, within the past four years.

Researchers provided study participants with self-collection brushes along with instructions for how to take a sample from inside the vagina. The brush samples were then tested in a lab for HPV and other sexually transmitted infections. Participants also self-collected samples at a clinic and handed them to a nurse, and had a pelvic exam for a clinician to collect a Pap smear sample.

The researchers compared the results from self- and clinician-samples - which were tested for high-risk HPV strains that are linked to cervical cancer - to the Pap results and the results of cervical biopsies collected during colposcopy, which is a secondary diagnostic test that confirms the presence of cervical pre-cancerous lesions among women with abnormal Pap smear results.

The home self-collection test indicated that 12.4 percent of women were infected with high-risk HPV, the self-collection tests used in the clinic found 15.5 of the women had high-risk HPV infection, and the clinician-collected test identified 11.4 percent of the women had high-risk HPV infection.

"We found comparable detection between self-collection and physician-collection," Des Marais said.

All women found to have high-grade cervical lesions by Pap smear or by cervical biopsy were positive for high-risk HPV on their home self-collected sample.

"We found in this sample, all of the women who had high-grade lesions had HPV-positive home self-collection results," Smith said. "We didn't miss any of those high-grade cases by conducting home self-collection."

Smith said there is more work to be done, such as identifying ways to make the self-collection process more efficient and cost-effective, and getting FDA approval for the clinical use of self-collection for cervical cancer screening.

"This is a proof-in-principle study that we used to determine whether home self-collection is highly effective for detecting high-grade disease," Smith said. "We are already working on the next step, which is a clinical trial in which women who aren't up-to-date on screening get either a referral to a free clinic appointment to receive a screening, or receive a self-collection kit in the mail, followed by referral to a free clinic appointment. This will allow us to determine the effect that self-collection has on screening uptake."

In addition to Des Marais and Smith, other authors included Yuqian Zhao, Marcia M. Hobbs, Vijay Sivaraman, Lynn Barclay, and Noel T. Brewer.

The study was supported by the National Cancer Institute, the National Institutes of Health, and the University Cancer Research Fund. Individual researchers were supported by the China Scholarship Council.

Financial disclosure: High-risk HPV and sexually transmitted disease tests, sample preservation media, ThinPrep processor slides, and other equipment were donated by Hologic, Inc. Self-collection brushes were donated by Rovers Medical Devices. Some travel expenses for Des Marais were paid by Hologic, and others have consulted for the company. Smith has received research funding, supply donations, and consultancies, and served as a paid speaker for Arbor Vita, BD Diagnostics, Hologic, Rovers Medical Devices, and Trovagene. Neither Hologic nor Rovers had input into the research design, analysis or interpretation of results.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release includes information about not only sources of funding, but also sources of research equipment — which is really good to see. The release also includes clear information regarding potential conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS - Jan. 8, 2018 - Exercise can reverse damage to sedentary, aging hearts and help prevent risk of future heart failure - if it's enough exercise, and if it's begun in time, according to a new study by cardiologists at UT Southwestern and Texas Health Resources.

To reap the most benefit, the exercise regimen should begin by late middle age (before age 65), when the heart apparently retains some plasticity and ability to remodel itself, according to the findings by researchers at the Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine (IEEM), which is a collaboration between UT Southwestern Medical Center and Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas.

And the exercise needs to be performed four to five times a week. Two to three times a week was not enough, the researchers found in an earlier study.

"Based on a series of studies performed by our team over the past 5 years, this 'dose' of exercise has become my prescription for life," said senior author Dr. Benjamin Levine, Director of the Institute and Professor of Internal Medicine at UT Southwestern. "I think people should be able to do this as part of their personal hygiene - just like brushing your teeth and taking a shower."

The regimen included exercising four to five times a week, generally in 30-minute sessions, plus warmup and cool-down:
• One of the weekly sessions included a high-intensity 30-minute workout, such as aerobic interval sessions in which heart rate tops 95 percent of peak rate for 4 minutes, with 3 minutes of recovery, repeated four times (a so-called "4 x 4").
• Each interval session was followed by a recovery session performed at relatively low intensity.
• One day's session lasted an hour and was of moderate intensity. (As a "prescription for life," Levine said this longer session could be a fun activity such as tennis, aerobic dancing, walking, or biking.)
• One or two other sessions were performed each week at a moderate intensity, meaning the participant would break a sweat, be a little short of breath, but still be able to carry on a conversation -- the "talk test." In the study, exercise sessions were individually prescribed based on exercise tests and heart rate monitoring.
• One or two weekly strength training sessions using weights or exercise machines were included on a separate day, or after an endurance session.

Study participants built up to those levels, beginning with three, 30-minute, moderate exercise sessions for the first 3 months and peaked at 10 months when two high-intensity aerobic intervals were added.

The more than 50 participants in the study were divided into two groups, one of which received two years of supervised exercise training and the other group, a control group, which participated in yoga and balance training.

At the end of the two-year study, those who had exercised showed an 18 percent improvement in their maximum oxygen intake during exercise and a more than 25 percent improvement in compliance, or elasticity, of the left ventricular muscle of the heart, Dr. Levine noted. He compared the change in the heart to a stretchy, new rubber band versus one that has gotten stiff sitting in a drawer.

Sedentary aging can lead to a stiffening of the muscle in the heart's left ventricle, the chamber that pumps oxygen-rich blood back out to the body, he explained.

"When the muscle stiffens, you get high pressure and the heart chamber doesn't fill as well with blood. In its most severe form, blood can back up into the lungs. That's when heart failure develops," said Dr. Levine, who holds the S. Finley Ewing Chair for Wellness at Texas Health Dallas and the Harry S. Moss Heart Chair for Cardiovascular Research. He also holds the Distinguished Professorship in Exercise Sciences at UT Southwestern, which is celebrating its 75th anniversary this year.

Earlier research by UT Southwestern cardiologists showed that left ventricular stiffening often shows up in middle age in people who don't exercise and aren't fit, leaving them with small, stiff chambers that can't pump blood as well.

However, the researchers also found that the heart chamber in competitive masters-level athletes remains large and elastic, and that even four to five days of committed exercise over decades is enough for noncompetitive athletes to reap most of this benefit.

In the current study, researchers wanted to know if exercise can restore the heart's elasticity in previously sedentary individuals - especially if begun in late middle age. Previous studies from Dr. Levine's research program have shown substantial improvements in cardiac compliance in young individuals after a year of training, but surprisingly little change if the training was started after age 65.

To start the study, researchers recruited 53 participants, ages 45 to 64. Many came from the Dallas Heart Study, which includes 6,000 Dallas residents and is the only single-center heart study of its size and multiethnic composition. The Dallas Heart Study is designed to improve the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of heart disease.

The new study appears in Circulation, a journal of the American Heart Association. Collaborators on the study included first author Dr. Erin Howden, Research Fellow with UT Southwestern's Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences and the IEEM and now a faculty member at the Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute in Melbourne, Australia. Funding came from the National Institutes of Health and the American Heart Association.

UT Southwestern, one of the premier academic medical centers in the nation, integrates pioneering biomedical research with exceptional clinical care and education. The institution's faculty has received six Nobel Prizes, and includes 22 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 18 members of the National Academy of Medicine, and 14 Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigators. The faculty of more than 2,700 is responsible for groundbreaking medical advances and is committed to translating science-driven research quickly to new clinical treatments. UT Southwestern physicians provide care in about 80 specialties to more than 100,000 hospitalized patients, 600,000 emergency room cases, and oversee approximately 2.2 million outpatient visits a year.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions the funding sources for the study (NIH and American Heart Association). There are no conflicts of interest listed in the news release or study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Experts have known for some time that light therapy can improve the mood of people who feel especially down when the days get shorter and gloomier. But now a study has found that light therapy also works in treating non-seasonal depression.

The research, published Wednesday in JAMA Psychiatry, is significant because major depression is one of the most common mental health disorders in the United States and one of the leading causes of disability worldwide.

Light therapy is cheap, easy to use and comes with few side effects compared to medication such as antidepressants, said lead author Raymond Lam, a professor of psychiatry at the University of British Columbia.

Previous research on light therapy for non-seasonal depression has been limited. This study "shows a new, proven-safe treatment of depression that is probably both more effective and less expensive than drug treatment or anything else," said Dan Kripke, a psychiatrist and professor emeritus at the University of California, San Diego, who has studied the topic but was not involved in the latest trial.

[It's 3 a.m. and you're depressed. How technology is transforming mental health care.]

The researchers said enough clinical evidence now supports mental health professionals recommending light therapy as a treatment for depression. Most people typically receive medication and psychotherapy — but medications don't work in all cases and there's a shortage of providers in many areas.

[Why it's so hard to find a mental health professional ]

Lam and his colleagues followed 122 patients and evaluated whether light therapy improved their mood when it was used both with and without fluoxetine, or Prozac, a commonly prescribed antidepressant. Over eight weeks, participants were exposed daily to 30 minutes from a fluorescent light box soon after waking up. Some participants were instead given placebo pills and placebo devices.

Although the light therapy helped many patients, it provided the most benefit to those who were also taking the antidepressant. About 60 percent of those using light therapy with the antidepressant reported feeling almost back to normal, Lam said.

Researchers have two main theories on why light therapy works. One is that it affects the biological clock in the brain. There's some evidence that depression, like jet lag, occurs when the biological clock is out of sync, and light helps to correct that, Lam said.

Light is also believed to affect neurotransmitters in the brain. Those are considered important for the development of depression and are the targets of most antidepressant medications.

Women more likely to have serious mental health problems than men, study says

NIH's mental health chief on why he's leaving for Google: Technology may hold key to better diagnosis

Most Americans will get a wrong diagnosis at least once in their lives
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included a quote from an independent source other than study authors, so we’ll award a Satisfactory. However, it would not have taken much to find someone who would have raised some questions about the study and offered a note of caution or two.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eating tomatoes in your daily salad or regularly enjoying a healthy red sauce on your spaghetti could help reduce your risk of stroke, according to research published this week in the journal Neurology.

Tomatoes contain a powerful antioxidant that is good for brain health, the researchers say, and cooked tomatoes seem to offer more protection than raw.

"This study adds to the evidence that a diet high in fruits and vegetables is associated with a lower risk of stroke," says study author Jouni Karppi, of the University of Eastern Finland in Kuopio. "A diet containing tomatoes... a few times a week would be good for our health. However, daily intake of tomatoes may give better protection." 

 

 Karppi says it's the chemical lycopene that gives tomatoes and other fruits/vegetables their rich red color, that is helping to protect the brain. Tomatoes are particularly high in the powerful antioxidant that acts like a sponge, soaking up rogue molecules called free radicals that if left unchecked can damage cells.

Researchers tested the level of lycopene in the blood of more than 1,000 Finnish men aged 46 to 65, starting in 1991. Scientists then followed the men on average for more than a decade to record the number who had strokes.

The scientists found that those with the highest levels of lycopene were 55% less likely to have a stroke than those with the lowest amounts in their blood.

Though the study looks promising, experts say that we can't necessarily give all of the credit to lycopene.

"It's a compelling study and it fits with other data that we have about risk of stroke and vegetable and fruit consumption," explains Dr. Daniel Labovitz, director of the Stern Stroke Center at Montefiore Medical Center in New York. "But it's not proof that if you eat tomatoes you're going to have less risk of stroke."

Labovitz also points out that the group of men who had fewer strokes were younger, had lower blood pressure and smoked less than the group more prone to stroke. Though the researchers tried to take these lifestyle factors into account when calculating their findings, it may be that these things influenced the outcomes.

In other words, perhaps better health habits - not necessarily just the lycopene - lead to fewer strokes.

Lycopene has attracted a lot of attention in recent years because it's such a powerful antioxidant. If we don't eat enough lycopene-packed foods, experts suspect too many free radicals get left in the body, damaging blood vessels by helping to form fatty deposits. When these deposits build up, a blockage forms. If that vessel is in the brain, the blockage can cause a stroke.

But the foods we eat are complex and filled with many nutrients, making it tough to prove what is really providing benefits.

"Eating tomatoes is a good thing, but we don't know if there is really anything unique about tomatoes apart from other fruits and vegetables that reduce stroke risk," explains Dr. Walter Willett, chair of the Department of Nutrition at Harvard School of Public Health in Boston, Massachusetts.

Tomatoes could contribute to reducing stroke in other ways, Willett says, because they are a good source of potassium, which is known to reduce blood pressure. Elevated blood pressure is major risk factor for stroke.

So are lycopene packed tomatoes really the magic fruit? It seems the jury is still out, but researchers suggest we eat healthy as they continue to search for answers.

"This is one more reason to consume fruits and vegetables - at least 5 a day - and it's good to include tomatoes in that mix," Willett said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There was excellent input from independent experts on stroke and nutrition. This was a strength of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COLUMBIA, Mo. (Oct. 29, 2015) - Rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm is one of the most dramatic medical emergencies a person can face. It usually strikes without warning, killing approximately 50 percent of those who experience it before they reach a hospital. Of those who do get to a health facility alive, only about 50 percent survive. When diagnosed through screening, aortic aneurysms are carefully monitored for signs of enlargement, and surgical intervention often is needed to prevent rupture of the vessel. Now, University of Missouri researchers have found that patients who took cholesterol-lowering medications before endovascular surgery experienced fewer complications and better outcomes.

"Although this condition usually occurs in men older than 50 with a family history of the disease, anyone can have an abdominal aortic aneurysm," said Todd Vogel, associate professor and chief of the Division of Vascular Surgery at the MU School of Medicine, and lead author of the study. "Most patients with this disease are older and tend to have other health conditions such as high cholesterol. In an effort to prevent cardiovascular disease they take statin medications. These cholesterol-lowering medications protect blood vessels from plaque formation and stress, and in some cases can even slow the progression of aortic aneurysms. We wanted to understand the impact statin use has on surgical outcomes when repairing this type of aneurysm."

Vogel's research team reviewed nearly 20,000 cases where patients either had open surgery or an endovascular repair - a minimally invasive procedure that uses a catheter to access the aneurysm. The team then identified patients who took cholesterol-lowering medication before surgery.

"Our research showed that patients who took statins before either open or minimally invasive interventions had better outcomes compared to those who did not take statin medications," Vogel said. "The patients who took statins and had endovascular repairs had a 26 percent decrease in mortality up to one year after surgery. Patients who took statins and had traditional open procedures also did better, but the difference was not nearly as significant as with endovascular repair. The bottom line is that patients who used statins were more likely to survive during and after an elective endovascular procedure."

Additionally, the study showed that statin use also reduced post-surgical complications for patients with other health issues such as peripheral artery disease, a condition that causes arterial blockages of blood vessels in the limbs.

"This information could be beneficial to patients who are about to have elective endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair," Vogel said. "However, further research is needed to assess the benefits of using statins before surgical repair of other types of aneurysms."

The study, "The Impact of Preoperative Statin Therapy on Open and Endovascular Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Repair Outcomes," recently was published in Vascular, the official publication of the International Society for Vascular Surgery.

The MU School of Medicine has improved health, education and research in Missouri and beyond for more than 165 years. MU physicians treat patients from every county in the state, and more Missouri physicians received their medical degrees from MU than from any other university. For more information, visit http://medicine. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It appears this epidemiological study received no outside funding so we believe it’s safe to conclude there is no conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (EMBARGOED UNTIL AUG. 14, 2017, AT 10 A.M. EDT ) - Cardiac stem cell infusions could someday help reverse the aging process in the human heart, making older ones behave younger, according to a new study from the Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute.

"Our previous lab studies and human clinical trials have shown promise in treating heart failure using cardiac stem cell infusions," said Eduardo Marbán, MD, PhD, director of the Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute and the primary investigator of the study. "Now we find that these specialized stem cells could turn out to reverse problems associated with aging of the heart."

The study was published today by the European Heart Journal.

In the study, investigators injected cardiosphere-derived cells, a specific type of stem cell, from newborn laboratory rats into the hearts of rats with an average age of 22 months, which is considered aged. Other laboratory rats from the same age group were assigned to receive placebo treatment, saline injections instead of stem cells. Both groups of aged rats were compared to a group of young rats with an average age of 4 months.

Baseline heart function was measured in all rats, using echocardiograms, treadmill stress tests and blood analysis. The group of older rats underwent an additional round of testing one month after receiving cardiosphere-derived cells that came from young rats.

"The way the cells work to reverse aging is fascinating," Marbán said. "They secrete tiny vesicles that are chock-full of signaling molecules such as RNA and proteins. The vesicles from young cells appear to contain all the needed instructions to turn back the clock."

Results of those tests show lab rats that received the cardiosphere-derived cells:
• Demonstrated longer heart cell telomeres, compound structures located at the ends of chromosomes that shrink with age
• Improved their exercise capacity by an average of approximately 20 percent
• Regrew hair faster than rats that didn't receive the cells

"This study didn't measure whether receiving the cardiosphere-derived cells extended lifespans, so we have a lot more work to do," said Lilian Grigorian-Shamagian, MD, PhD, co-primary investigator and the first author of the study. "We have much to study, including whether CDCs need to come from a young donor to have the same rejuvenating effects and whether the extracellular vesicles are able to reproduce all the rejuvenating effects we detect with CDCs."

Since Marbán's team completed the world's first cardiac stem cell infusion in 2009, the Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute has made significant contributions to decoding and understanding how cardiac stem cells regenerate damaged heart muscle. The team is studying the use of stem cells to treat patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy as well as patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, a condition that affects more than 50 percent of all heart failure patients.

General support for Marbán's laboratory is provided by the National Institutes of Health. The CDCs, manufactured by Capricor Inc. (NASDAQ: CAPR) as their product CAP-1002, have been used in other human clinical trials.

The process to grow cardiac-derived stem cells was developed by Marbán when he was on the faculty of Johns Hopkins University and further developed at Cedars-Sinai. Capricor has licensed the process from Johns Hopkins and from Cedars-Sinai for clinical and commercial development. Capricor has licensed additional intellectual property from Cedars-Sinai and the University of Rome. Cedars-Sinai and Marbán have financial interests in Capricor.

The Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute is internationally recognized for outstanding heart care built on decades of innovation and leading edge research. From cardiac imaging and advanced diagnostics to surgical repair of complex heart problems to the training of the heart specialists of tomorrow and research that is deepening medical knowledge and practice, the Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute is known around the world for excellence and innovations.

EMBARGOED UNTIL AUG. 14, 2017, AT 10 A.M. EDT
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that “general support” for Marban’s lab is provided by the National Institutes of Health, and that Cedars-Sinai along with its heart institute chief Eduardo Marban, a co-author of the study, have financial interests in Capricor, which own the process to grow cardiac-derived stem cells.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is such a radical change in thought that it’s been hard for many people to get their heads around it,” said Dr. Monica Morrow, chief of the breast service at Sloan-Kettering and an author of the study, which is being published Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association. The paid for the study.

Doctors and patients alike find it easy to accept more cancer treatment on the basis of a study, Dr. Morrow said, but get scared when the data favor less treatment.

The new findings are part of a trend to move away from radical surgery for breast cancer. Rates of , removal of the whole breast, began declining in the 1980s after studies found that for many patients, survival rates after and radiation were just as good as those after mastectomy.

The trend reflects an evolving understanding of breast cancer. In decades past, there was a belief that surgery could “get it all” — eradicate the cancer before it could spread to organs and bones. But research has found that breast cancer can begin to spread early, even when are small, leaving microscopic traces of the disease after surgery.

The modern approach is to cut out obvious tumors — because lumps big enough to detect may be too dense for drugs and radiation to destroy — and to use radiation and chemotherapy to wipe out microscopic disease in other places.

But doctors have continued to think that even microscopic disease in the lymph nodes should be cut out to improve the odds of survival. And until recently, they counted cancerous lymph nodes to gauge the severity of the disease and choose chemotherapy. But now the number is not so often used to determine drug treatment, doctors say. What matters more is whether the disease has reached any nodes at all. If any are positive, the disease could become deadly. Chemotherapy is recommended, and the drugs are the same, no matter how many nodes are involved.

The new results do not apply to all patients, only to women whose disease and treatment meet the criteria in the study.

The tumors were early, at clinical stage T1 or T2, meaning less than two inches across. Biopsies of one or two armpit nodes had found cancer, but the nodes were not enlarged enough to be felt during an exam, and the cancer had not spread anywhere else. The women had lumpectomies, and most also had radiation to the entire breast, and chemotherapy or hormone-blocking drugs, or both.

The study, at 115 medical centers, included 891 patients. Their median age was in the mid-50s, and they were followed for a median of 6.3 years.

After the initial node , the women were assigned at random to have 10 or more additional nodes removed, or to leave the nodes alone. In 27 percent of the women who had additional nodes removed, those nodes were cancerous. But over time, the two groups had no difference in survival: more than 90 percent survived at least five years. Recurrence rates in the armpit were also similar, less than 1 percent. If breast cancer is going to recur under the arm, it tends to do so early, so the follow-up period was long enough, the researchers said.

One potential weakness in the study is that there was not complete follow-up information on 166 women, about equal numbers from each group. The researchers said that did not affect the results. A statistician who was not part of the study said the missing information should have been discussed further, but probably did not have an important impact.

It is not known whether the findings also apply to women who do not have radiation and chemotherapy, or to those who have only part of the breast irradiated. Nor is it known whether the findings could be applied to other types of cancer.

The results mean that women like those in the study will still have to have at least one removed, to look for cancer and decide whether they will need more treatment. But taking out just one or a few nodes should be enough.

Dr. Armando E. Giuliano, the lead author of the study and the chief of surgical oncology at the Cancer Institute at St. John’s Health Center in , Calif., said: “It shouldn’t come as a big surprise, but it will. It’s hard for us as surgeons and medical oncologists and radiation oncologists to accept that you don’t have to remove the nodes in the armpit.”

Dr. Grant W. Carlson, a professor of surgery at the Winship Cancer Institute at , and the author of an editorial accompanying the study, said that by routinely taking out many nodes, “I have a feeling we’ve been doing a lot of harm.”

Indeed, women in the study who had the nodes taken out were far more likely (70 percent versus 25 percent) to have complications like infections, abnormal sensations and fluid collecting in the armpit. They were also more likely to have lymphedema.

But Dr. Carlson said that some of his colleagues, even after hearing the new study results, still thought the nodes should be removed.

“The dogma is strong,” he said. “It’s a little frustrating.”

Eventually, he said, genetic testing of breast tumors might be enough to determine the need for treatment, and eliminate the need for many node biopsies.

Two other breast surgeons not involved with the study said they would take it seriously.

Dr. Elisa R. Port, the chief of breast surgery at in Manhattan, said: “It’s a big deal in the world of breast cancer. It’s definitely practice-changing.”

Dr. Alison Estabrook, the chief of the comprehensive breast center at St. Luke’s-Roosevelt hospital in New York said surgeons had long been awaiting the results.

“In the past, surgeons thought our role was to get out all the cancer,” Dr. Estabrook said. “Now he’s saying we don’t really have to do that.”

But both Dr. Estabrook and Dr. Port said they would still have to make judgment calls during surgery and remove lymph nodes that looked or felt suspicious.

The new research grew out of efforts in the 1990s to minimize lymph node surgery in the armpit, called axillary dissection. Surgeons developed a technique called sentinel node biopsy, in which they injected a dye into the breast and then removed just one or a few nodes that the dye reached first, on the theory that if the was spreading, cancer cells would show up in those nodes. If there was no cancer, no more nodes were taken. But if there were cancer cells, the surgeon would cut out more nodes.

Although the technique spared many women, many others with positive nodes still had extensive cutting in the armpit, and suffered from side effects.

“Women really dread the axillary dissection,” Dr. Giuliano said. “They fear lymphedema. There’s numbness, , and some have limitation of motion. There are a fair number of serious complications. Women know it.”

After armpit surgery, 20 percent to 30 percent of women develop lymphedema, Dr. Port said, and radiation may increase the rate to 40 percent to 50 percent. Physical therapy can help, but there is no cure.

The complications — and the fact that there was no proof that removing the nodes prolonged survival — inspired Dr. Giuliano to compare women with and without axillary dissection. Some doctors objected. They were so sure cancerous nodes had to come out that they said the study was unethical and would endanger women.

“Some prominent institutions wouldn’t even take part in it,” Dr. Giuliano said, though he declined to name them. “They’re very supportive now. We don’t want to hurt their feelings. They’ve seen the light.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Good quotes including from Dr. Monica Morrow, chief of the breast service at Sloan-Kettering and an author of the study, but also a few fromindependent experts toward the end. Dr. Grant W. Carlson, a professor of surgery at the Winship Cancer Institute at Emory University, and the author of an editorial accompanying the study, provides some soul-searching context by saying that, in taking out so many lymph nodes, “I have a feeling we’ve been doing a lot of harm.” Dr. Elisa R. Port, the chief of breast surgery at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan, said, “It’s definitely practice-changing.” And Dr. Alison Estabrook, the chief of the comprehensive breast center at St. Luke’s-Roosevelt hospital in New York said, “In the past, surgeons thought our role was to get out all the cancer. … Now he’s saying we don’t really have to do that.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A National Institutes of Health study found that non-invasive brain stimulation decreased calorie consumption and increased weight loss in adults who are obese. The findings suggest a possible intervention for obesity, when combined with healthy eating and exercise. Results were published in Obesity concurrent with a presentation at the 2015 Obesity Society meeting.

Led by scientists at the Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, part of NIH’s National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), the team studied a total of nine men and women with obesity who resided in the Branch’s metabolic ward on two separate visits, each for eight days. On each visit, the participants ate a weight-maintaining diet for five days. Then for three days, they unknowingly received either active or sham (fake) transcranial direct current stimulation, or tDCS. Participants then ate and drank as much as they wanted from computerized vending machines. Applied to the scalp, the active tDCS targeted the brain region controlling behavior and reward.

The four people who got the sham stimulation during both visits consumed the same number of calories from the vending machines on each visit and did not lose weight. But the five people who got inactive stimulation on the first visit, and active tDCS at the brain target on the second visit, consumed an average of 700 fewer calories and lost an average of 0.8 pounds on the second visit.

Next, the researchers will compare a group getting only active tDCS with a separate group getting only sham stimulation. More study is needed to confirm the safety and effectiveness of tDCS for weight loss.

M.E. Gluck et al. Noninvasive neuromodulation targeted to the lateral prefrontal cortex induces changes in energy intake and weight loss in obesity. Obesity 4 Nov.

NIDDK Research Clinical Psychologist Marci Gluck, Ph.D., is available to comment on this study.

NIDDK Research Clinical Psychologist Marci Gluck, Ph.D., is available to comment on this study.To schedule an interview, please contact Krysten Carrera, 301-496-3583, NIDDKMEDIA@niddk.nih.gov.

The NIDDK, a component of the NIH, conducts and supports research on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, nutrition and obesity; and kidney, urologic and hematologic diseases. Spanning the full spectrum of medicine and afflicting people of all ages and ethnic groups, these diseases encompass some of the most common, severe and disabling conditions affecting Americans. For more information about the NIDDK and its programs, see www.niddk.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The principal investigator in this research is an employee of a federal agency. There does not appear to be any conflict of interest and funding sources are named.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Singing in a choir for just one hour boosts levels of immune proteins in people affected by cancer, reduces stress and improves mood, which in turn could have a positive impact on overall health, a new study by Tenovus Cancer Care and the Royal College of Music published today in ecancermedicalscience has found.

The research raises the possibility that singing in choir rehearsals could help to put people in the best possible position to receive treatment, maintain remission and support cancer patients.

The study tested 193 members of five different choirs. Results showed that singing for an hour was associated with significant reductions in stress hormones, such as cortisol, and increases in quantities of cytokines - proteins of the immune system - which can boost the body's ability to fight serious illness.

Dr Ian Lewis, Director of Research and Policy at Tenovus Cancer Care and co-author of the research, said: "These are really exciting findings. We have been building a body of evidence over the past six years to show that singing in a choir can have a range of social, emotional and psychological benefits, and now we can see it has biological effects too.

"We've long heard anecdotal evidence that singing in a choir makes people feel good, but this is the first time it's been demonstrated that the immune system can be affected by singing. It's really exciting and could enhance the way we support people with cancer in the future."

The study also found that those with the lowest levels of mental wellbeing and highest levels of depression experienced greatest mood improvement, associated with lower levels of inflammation in the body. There is a link between high levels of inflammation and serious illness.

Choir members gave samples of their saliva before an hour of singing, and then again just after. The samples were analysed to see what changes occurred in a number of hormones, immune proteins, neuropeptides and receptors.

Dr Daisy Fancourt, Research Associate at the Centre for Performance Science, a partnership between the Royal College of Music and Imperial College London and co-author of the research, said: "Many people affected by cancer can experience psychological difficulties such as stress, anxiety and depression. Research has demonstrated that these can suppress immune activity, at a time when patients need as much support as they can get from their immune system. This research is exciting as it suggests that an activity as simple as singing could reduce some of this stress-induced suppression, helping to improve wellbeing and quality of life amongst patients and put them in the best position to receive treatment."

Diane Raybould, 64, took part in the study and has been singing with the Bridgend Sing with Us choir since 2010. Diane was diagnosed with breast cancer when she was aged 50. Her daughter was diagnosed with breast cancer at the same time and sadly, passed away from the disease at just 28. Diane said: "Singing in the choir is about more than just enjoyment, it genuinely makes you feel better. The choir leaders play a huge part of course, but so does the support of the other choir members, the inspirational programme and uplifting songs. The choir is a family, simple as that. Having cancer and losing someone to cancer can be very isolating. With the choir, you can share experiences openly and that is hugely important."

Rosie Dow, Head of Sing with Us at Tenovus Cancer Care and co-author of the research, added: "This research is so exciting, as it echoes everything all our choir members tell us about how singing has helped them. I've seen peoples' lives transformed through singing in our choirs so knowing that singing also makes a biological difference will hopefully help us to reach more people with the message that singing is great for you - mind, body and soul."

Following on from this research, Tenovus Cancer Care is launching a two year study looking in more depth at the longitudinal effect of choir singing over several months. It will look at mental health, wellbeing, social support and ability to cope with cancer, alongside measuring stress hormones and immune function amongst patients, carers, staff and people who have lost somebody to cancer.

The full research paper can be found at http://ecancer.

If you or someone you love has been affected by cancer, Tenovus Cancer Care can offer help and support. To find out more call the Tenovus Cancer Care free Support Line on 0808 808 1010 or visit tenovuscancercare.org.uk

For more information contact Ruth Taylor, PR and Communications Manager on 07429 103084 / ruth.taylor@tenovuscancercare.org.uk. Research paper available on request
• 193 members of five choirs in Cardiff, Bridgend, Pontypridd, Cwmbran and Swansea took part in the study across between June and July 2014.
• The Centre for Performance Sciences is a partnership between the Royal College of Music, London and Imperial College London.
• Tenovus Cancer Care runs 17 Sing with Us choirs across England and Wales. For more information please visit http://www.
• At Tenovus Cancer Care our aims are simple: to help prevent, treat and find a cure for cancer. In doing that we offer support, advice and treatment, information on prevention and funding for research to improve outcomes for people living with cancer. We do this where it is needed most - right at the heart of the community.
• Keep up to date with Tenovus Cancer Care by following them on Twitter @tenovuscancer or Liking their page on Facebook http://www.
• The Royal College of Music is currently home to 800 undergraduate and postgraduate students from 60 nations. International students constitute approximately 50% of our student body. In 2016, the RCM was ranked by The Guardian as the leading Higher Education Institution in the UK for studying music. The Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) survey found that proportionally more RCM alumni who responded to the survey had moved to employment or further study within six months of graduation than graduates from any other UK conservatoire or UK university.
• Among RCM alumni are composers and performers such as Sir Hubert Parry, Benjamin Britten, Gustav Holst, Sir Colin Davis, David Helfgott, Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, Lord Lloyd Webber, Dame Joan Sutherland, Sir James Galway, Ralph Vaughan Williams and Alfie Boe. Regular visitors to the RCM to teach and demonstrate are Bernard Haitink, Vladimir Ashkenazy and Lang Lang. Our most recent honorary doctorates include Vladimir Jurwoski, Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, Sir Roger Norrington, Bryn Terfel and Steve Reich.
• The Centre for Performance Science is a distinctive new partnership of the Royal College of Music and Imperial College London. The Centre takes a strongly interdisciplinary approach to investigating human performance in the arts, business, education, medicine, science and sport, and draws upon world-leading expertise and state-of-the-art facilities across the RCM and Imperial College.
• ecancermedicalscience is an open-access journal that is free to read.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the non-profit Tenovus conducted the research, in collaboration with The Centre for Performance Science, which is a new partnership of the Royal College of Music and Imperial College London.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
May 18, 2010 -- Flibanserin, an antidepressant-like drug, makes sex more satisfying for some premenopausal women distressed over their low sexual desire.

The findings come from phase III clinical trials that drugmaker Boehringer Ingelheim hopes will convince the FDA to approve flibanserin for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD).

While HSDD is a controversial diagnosis -- some experts see it as the medicalization of what is for many women a relationship issue -- the 1,378 premenopausal women enrolled in the clinical trials were suffering distress over their lack of sexual desire.

Compared to women who received inactive placebo pills, those who took flibanserin at bedtime were more likely to get relief from self-reported sexual distress, to experience more sexual desire, and to have more sexually satisfying experiences.

The drug didn't work for all women. Just under a third of women taking flibanserin got over their sexual distress and/or lack of sexual desire (vs. about a fifth of women taking placebo pills). But the difference was important to the women, says study researcher Michael L. Krychman, MD, medical director of sexual medicine at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif.

"The absolute number of women who had remission of sexual distress was clinically significant, but equally important to them was how it improved their lives," Krychman tells WebMD.

Nearly half of women taking flibanserin (and nearly a third of women taking placebo) reported at least minimal improvement in "bothersome decreased sexual desire."

Flibanserin is taken nightly at bedtime. However, it's not an on-demand treatment. Data suggest that the drug begins to affect sexual satisfaction after four weeks of continuous treatment.

In the 24-week "Bouquet" studies (each of the Boehringer Ingelheim-funded studies is named after a flower), there were few drug-related side effects. Those most commonly reported were daytime sleepiness, dizziness, fatigue, anxiety, dry mouth, nausea, and insomnia. Some 15% of women on flibanserin, and 7% of those on placebo, stopped treatment due to side effects.

Updated reports on data from the North American "Daisy" and "Violet" studies were made by Krychman and other researchers at this week's annual meeting of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists in San Francisco.

Kychman is an advisor to Boehringer Ingelheim and serves on their speakers' bureau, services for which he is compensated.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Conflicts of interest are disclosed.  The story noted that the study researcher interviewed is a paid consultant for the drug manufacturer.  An alternative point of view is provided by two independent experts, a psychologist and a sex-therapist.  The independent sources comment on the role that personal relationships play in sexual desire and experience which was not addressed or acknowledged by the researchers.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You might not want to rush into knee surgery. Physical therapy can be just as good for a common injury and at far less cost and risk, the most rigorous study to compare these treatments concludes.

Therapy didn't always help and some people wound up having surgery for the problem, called a torn meniscus. But those who stuck with therapy had improved as much six months and one year later as those who had arthroscopic surgery right away, researchers found.

"Both are very good choices. It would be quite reasonable to try physical therapy first because the chances are quite good that you'll do quite well," said one study leader, Dr. Jeffrey Katz, a joint specialist at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School.

He was to discuss the study Tuesday at an American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons conference in Chicago. Results were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine.

A meniscus is one of the crescent-shaped cartilage discs that cushion the knee. About one-third of people over 50 have a tear in one, and arthritis makes this more likely. Usually the tear doesn't cause symptoms but it can be painful.

When that happens, it's tough to tell if the pain is from the tear or the arthritis — or whether surgery is needed or will help. Knee surgery for a torn meniscus is done about half a million times each year in the U.S.

The new federally funded study compared surgery with a less drastic option. Researchers at seven major universities and orthopedic surgery centers around the U.S. assigned 351 people with arthritis and meniscus tears to get either surgery or physical therapy. The therapy was nine sessions on average plus exercises to do at home, which experts say is key to success.

After six months, both groups had similar rates of functional improvement. Pain scores also were similar.

Thirty percent of patients assigned to physical therapy wound up having surgery before the six months was up, often because they felt therapy wasn't helping them. Yet they ended up the same as those who got surgery right away, as well as the rest of the physical therapy group who stuck with it and averted an operation.

"There are patients who would like to get better in a 'fix me' approach" and surgery may be best for them, said Elena Losina, another study leader from Brigham and Women's Hospital.

However, an Australian preventive medicine expert contends that the study's results should change practice. Therapy "is a reasonable first strategy, with surgery reserved for the minority who don't have improvement," Rachelle Buchbinder of Monash University in Melbourne wrote in a commentary in the medical journal.

As it is now, "millions of people are being exposed to potential risks associated with a treatment that may or may not offer specific benefit, and the costs are substantial," she wrote.

Surgery costs about $5,000, compared with $1,000 to $2,000 for a typical course of physical therapy, Katz said.

One study participant — Bob O'Keefe, 68, of suburban Boston — was glad to avoid surgery for his meniscus injury three years ago.

"I felt better within two weeks" on physical therapy, he said. "My knee is virtually normal today." He still does the recommended exercises several times a week.

Robert Dvorkin had both treatments for injuries on each knee several years apart. Dvorkin, 56, director of operations at the Coalition for the Homeless in New York City, had surgery followed by physical therapy for a tear in his right knee and said it was months before he felt no pain.

Then, several years ago, he hurt his left knee while exercising. "I had been doing some stretching and doing some push-ups and I just felt it go 'pop.'" he recalls. "I was limping. It was extremely painful."

An imaging test showed a less severe tear and a different surgeon recommended physical therapy. Dvorkin said it worked like a charm — he avoided surgery and recovered faster than from his first injury. The treatment involved two to three hour-long sessions a week, including strengthening exercises, balancing and massage. He said the sessions weren't that painful and his knee felt better after each one.

"Within a month I was healed," Dvorkin said. "I was completely back to normal."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted two study leaders, an editorial author, and two patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Mozaffarian agreed that, because the evidence is based on observational studies and clinical trial data, it is not definitive, but he added, “It’s the best evidence we have.” As for the study’s finding that total mortality could be cut by 17 percent, he said, “While one can argue over the precise size of benefits, even if the benefit is only one-half or one-quarter as large, it still greatly outweighs the risk.”

The report from the Institute of Medicine tells the government that much more research is needed. Dr. Malden C. Nesheim, chairman of the institute’s committee and a provost emeritus at Cornell, said, “We are quite cautious because the studies we looked at are not controlled for all the variables, and we can’t distinguish between the effects from omega-3’s or replacement of other foods in the diet.”

The National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration had requested the institute’s report because it said consumers were confused about how much and what kind of fish they should eat. The two studies, which conflict in important aspects, seem unlikely to provide much clarity. “The high degree of certainty in one report and the extreme caution in the other,” said Rebecca Goldberg, a senior scientist with Environmental Defense, an advocacy group, “will make people more confused than ever.”

To the surprise of Institute of Medicine officials, NOAA sponsored the hastily called press conference at which the Harvard report was released, even though that study conflicted with the one prepared by the institute. “We’re just trying to make consumers feel good,” said William T. Hogarth, assistant administrator for fisheries of the National Marine Fisheries Service, part of NOAA.

Both reports have come under criticism from environmental groups and from the Consumers Union. “In addition to being concerned about the failure of the JAMA and I.O.M. reports to address the risks of mercury in tuna,” said the consumer organization, “we are also concerned that both reports dismiss concerns about PCB’s in most fish.”

“These reports are urging Americans to eat more seafood as if it were a crisis,” Dr. Goldberg said. “According to NOAA’s own statistics, per capita consumption of seafood has risen from 14.8 pounds in 2001 to 16.6 pounds in 2004.”

Jane Houlihan, the research director of the Environmental Working Group, another advocacy group, said, “The Harvard study reads like an advertisement for the seafood industry.”

Both studies reinforce advice from the Food and Drug Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency in 2004, to eat about six ounces of fish a week, preferably high in omega-3’s, with a caveat for women of childbearing age and children under 12 not to eat swordfish, shark, tile fish or king mackerel and to limit their intake of albacore (white meat) tuna to six ounces a week to avoid mercury. For those who eat more fish, both reports advise eating a variety of species to reduce the level of contaminants.

“Once again pregnant women are being told it’s O.K. to eat tuna,” Ms. Houlihan said. “The reality is, 90 percent of women would exceed government’s level for a safe dose of mercury if they ate six ounces of albacore tuna every week as the F.D.A., E.P.A and now I.O.M. recommend.”

Dr. Nestle finds the situation so confusing “no rational person can possibly figure out how to make sense of it,” she said. “Fortunately, Environmental Defense and Monterey Bay Aquarium, who specialize in both health and environmental fish issues, provide advisory cards for choosing fish, and no one can manage this without one.”

The Environmental Defense list is at oceansalive.org and the Monterey Bay Aquarium’s is at mbayaq.org/cr/seafoodwatch.asp.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article cites an array of scientific experts, regulatory authorities, industry sources, and representatives of various advocacy groups. It also provides sufficient information to determine their potential conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, March 29, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- If you're looking to lose those extra pounds, you should probably add reducing stress and getting the right amount of sleep to the list, say researchers from Kaiser Permanente's Center for Health Research in Portland.

In fact, although diet and exercise are the usual prescription for dropping pounds, high stress and too little sleep (or too much of it) can hinder weight loss even when people are on a diet, the researchers report.

"We found that people who got more than six but less than eight hours of sleep, and who reported the lowest levels of stress, had the most success in a weight-loss program," said study author Dr. Charles Elder.

Elder speculates if you are sleeping less or more than recommended and if your stress levels are high, you will not be able to focus on making behavioral changes.

These factors may also have a biological impact, he added.

"If you want to lose weight, things that will help you include reducing stress and getting the right amount of sleep," Elder said.

The report, funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health, is published in the March 29 online edition of the International Journal of Obesity.

In this two-step trial, 472 obese adults were first counseled about lifestyle changes over a 26-week period. Recommendations included cutting 500 calories a day, eating a diet rich in fruits, vegetables and whole grains by following the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet approach, and exercising at least three hours a week.

In addition, the researchers asked the participants questions about sleep time, depression, insomnia, screen time and stress.

During this part of the trial, the participants lost an average of almost 14 pounds. The 60 percent of the participants who lost at least 10 pounds went on to take part in the next phase of the trial. Those in the second phase of the trial continued their diet and exercise program.

Elder's team found the right amount of sleep and stress reduction at the start of the trial predicted successful weight loss. Lower stress by itself predicted more weight loss during the first phase of the trial, they added.

Declines in stress and depression were also important in continuing to lose weight during both phases of the trial, as were exercise minutes and keeping food diaries, Elder's group found.

Dr. David L. Katz, director of the Prevention Research Center at Yale University School of Medicine, said that "while we often tend to look at health one condition at a time, the reality is that health is best viewed holistically."

"People who are healthy and vital tend to be healthy and vital not because of any one factor, but because of many. And the factors that promote health -- eating well, being active, not smoking, sleeping enough, controlling stress, to name a few --promote all aspects of health," he added.

This study shows that people are more likely to lose weight when not impeded by sleep deprivation, stress or depression, he said.

"Anyone who has ever tried to lose weight probably could have said much the same from personal experience. Similarly, weight loss reduced stress and depression. This, too, is suggested by sense and common experience, as it is affirmed by the science reported here," Katz said.

The important message is that weight loss should not be looked at with tunnel vision, Katz said.

"Improving sleep may be as important to lasting weight control efforts as modifying diet or exercise. Managing stress is about physical health, as well as mental health. This study encourages weight loss in a more holistic context," he said.

Another study presented earlier this month at the American Heart Association scientific sessions held in Atlanta found that people of normal weight eat more when they sleep less.

Columbia University researchers discovered that sleep-deprived adults ate almost 300 calories more a day on average than those who got enough sleep. And the extra calories mostly came from saturated fat, which can spell trouble for waistlines.

The researchers came to their conclusions -- which should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal -- after following 13 men and 13 women of normal weight. They monitored the eating habits of the participants as they spent six days sleeping four hours a night and then six days sleeping nine hours a night (or the reverse).

"If sustained, the dietary choices made by people undergoing short sleep could predispose them to obesity and increased risk of cardiovascular disease," the researchers wrote in an American Heart Association news release.

For more information on obesity, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This story included expert quotes and also some insight from the results of a recently presented study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Pathway Genomics, a company known for pushing the boundaries of direct-to-consumer genetic testing, on Thursday will launch a cancer screening test designed to detect bits of cancer DNA in the blood of otherwise healthy people.

The test represents a first in the rapidly developing field of “liquid biopsies,” which use gene sequencing technology to screen blood samples for trace amounts of DNA associated with different cancers.

Several cancer diagnostic companies have been working on the tests, a field that has recently been joined by makers of DNA blood screening tests for fetal abnormalities after the tests detected early cancers in expectant mothers. Cowen & Co estimates that use of DNA blood tests for cancer screening will exceed $10 billion a year by the end of the decade.

But the move by Pathway, a privately owned maker of genetic tests ranging from cancer risk and heart health to drug response, underscores a growing debate over how much genetic information should be made available to healthy people if it is not yet clear how it can improve their health.

The company has already run into trouble on a similar issue. In 2010, Walgreens pulled Pathway’s genetic testing kits from its pharmacies after U.S. health regulators warned patients might take action without understanding the results.

Several oncology experts said liquid biopsy tests like Pathway’s, while exciting, still require large clinical studies proving they help people beat cancer through early detection. Doctors will also need a clear assessment of their accuracy.

“For any given test, the rate of false positives causing unnecessary alarm and false negatives that provide false security should be known,” said Dr. Keith Stewart, an oncologist who heads Mayo Clinic’s Center for Individualized Medicine.

Pathway’s screening test looks at 96 genetic markers associated with major cancer types such as breast, ovarian, lung, colon and melanoma. The company is focusing on mutations that are relatively well-understood, and for which there are specific treatments, said Chief Executive Jim Plante.

The cost to consumers begins at $299 to periodically check for DNA in their blood that could act as an early warning sign of cancer. The tests must be ordered by a doctor, based on a patient’s risk profile. A positive test will require additional checks to find where the cancer is growing.

Pathway also launched a blood test for patients already diagnosed with cancer to help determine whether a treatment is working, or whether the disease is likely to return.

Scientists have long known that cancers shed bits of genetic material into the blood. Privately held Guardant Health and Personal Genome Diagnostics Inc already offer blood tests for cancer patients. Roche-backed Foundation Medicine Inc, Genomic Health Inc, Illumina Inc and Sequenom Inc say they have similar tests in the works.

But cancer experts say there are major differences between using such tests to screen for cancer and monitoring patients who are already known to have it.

For example, some early cancers may not secrete DNA fragments into the bloodstream and require other types of detection. A colonoscopy can find and remove polyps before they pose a threat as colon cancer.

“If we are relying on a test that can only detect cancer after it has formed, we miss a huge opportunity to intervene,” said Dr. Scott Kopetz of the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

Patients might be attracted to a less-invasive test for colon cancer, but if it is less effective, it might result in more cases of colon cancer, not fewer.

Another concern is that the tests may pick up on markers that are never destined to be cancer, something already known to occur in blood tests for prostate cancer, Kopetz said.

Pathway says its test is more than 99 percent accurate in detecting mutations in blood samples that contain at least nine copies of a tested mutation.

“We do expect to detect cancer DNA when the tumors are small - much sooner than stage three or four,” Plante said.

Dr. Bert Vogelstein, a cancer geneticist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, said Pathway’s figure represents the test’s technical ability to detect DNA in the blood.

Doctors, however, need an indication of how many patients will get a false positive result, something that can only be determined in a very large clinical trial, said Vogelstein. He is advising two companies developing liquid biopsy tests for cancer screening: Sysmex and Personal Genome Diagnostics.

Plante said the company has started two clinical trials involving patients but has yet to publish any results on how the tests perform in people.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted more independent sources than the competing Bloomberg story, and it also did a good job of identifying where people had conflicts. For example, the last expert quoted says that the test should undergo a large clinical trial, a point of agreement among multiple experts quoted in the press. But then the story says that this expert, “is advising two companies developing liquid biopsy tests for cancer screening: Sysmex and Personal Genome Diagnostics.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An inhaler that protects the lungs against air pollution has been developed by scientists and could help the many millions of people affected by toxic air to avoid its worst effects.

The inhaler delivers a molecule, first found in bacteria in the Egyptian desert, which stabilises water on the surface of the lung cells to form a protective layer. It is expected to be available as an inexpensive, over-the-counter product.

Outdoor air pollution is a global health crisis that kills over 3 million people a year and it has long been linked to lung and heart disease and strokes. But research is also uncovering new impacts on health, including degenerative brain diseases such as Alzheimer’s, mental illness and, this week, diabetes.

The impact of air pollution costs $5tn a year, according to a World Bank report published last week. In the UK, at least 40,000 people a year die prematurely from air pollution, with a cross-party committee of MPs calling it a “public health emergency”.

But the government’s plans to tackle the issue were heavily criticised this week, just as alerts were issued for extreme air pollution across much of northern England. A day later, it was announced that more ambitious plans for London from Mayor Sadiq Khan were overwhelmingly backed by the public.

Vehicles are a key contributor to air pollution but, a year after the VW emissions scandal broke, most new diesel cars still emit far more toxic nitrogen oxides on the road than the official lab-based limit.

Action to clean up air is urgently needed across the world, but cutting emissions for vehicles and other sources will take years, meaning ways to reduce the harm in the meantime could be vital. The new inhaler has been developed by German medical devices company Bitop and is based on a molecule called ectoine, discovered in the 1980s in a desert bacterium which uses the compound to conserve water in 60C heat.

“It is quite an inert molecule that does one main thing, which is bind water, which stabilises cell membrane tissues against physical or chemical damage,” said Dr Andreas Bilstein, at Bitop. “It supports the natural barrier.”

When inhaled, this helps prevent the damage caused by air pollution particles that can lead to asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and lung cancer, Bilstein said: “Damage cannot occur as strongly and there is less inflammatory response, and so disease progression is reduced. The perfect situation is that the patient inhales in the morning and evening at home.”

The inhaler has been tested in three small groups of patients particularly at risk from air pollution, due to asthma, COPD and bronchitis, with the positive results due to be published soon, Bilstein said.

Ectoine does not interact with cell receptors, so it is classed as a medical device rather than a drug. This means large clinical trials are not required for official approval and the inhaler could be on sale soon, at an estimated cost of £17 a month, after Bitop selects a marketing partner. A version of the product for use in nebulisers will be available this year in Germany and Poland, while an ectoine-based nasal spray for allergy relief is already available.

Bilstein said the inhaler could be useful around the world, as particulate air pollution is not just a European problem: “Especially in Asia – China in particular – the demand for such a product is even higher. I was in New York last week, and the air was also not very clean.”

The protective effect of ectoine was discovered by Prof Jean Krutmann and colleagues at the Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, while investigating whether the molecule could protect skin against sun damage. Bitop funded a series of studies, now published in prominent scientific journals.

“The point that it can prevent the lung inflammation induced by ultrafine particles is established – there is no more doubt,” Krutmann said. Antioxidants can also provide some protection but there has been controversy over the effectiveness of such food supplements, he said: “Personally, I think it is much better to eat lots of vegetables and fruit rather than taking any supplements.”

Dr Richard Russell, a consultant respiratory physician in the NHS and medical advisor to the British Lung Foundation, who was not involved in the research, said the inhaler was both credible and promising: “Ectoine is a beautifully elegant molecule and it clearly works by helping water to stabilise, giving you a film of water in times of stress.”

“The work that has been published thus far, in credible, internationally recognised journals, show that this stuff has positive properties, protecting against triggered inflammation,” he told the Guardian. Russell, who also lectures at Imperial College and Oxford University, said it might also be useful for the treatment of asthma, COPD and other lung diseases, not only prevention. “It could potentially do so much more. It is actually quite exciting and there is clearly a lot more to come from this story.”

Krutmann said slashing air pollution remained paramount. “It is very nice to be able to protect people against the detrimental effects, but this should not be used as an argument that we can now stop working on reducing particulate [air pollution]. The best thing is that we have clean air because then we don’t need any prophylactic treatment. But on the other hand we have to be realistic and in many countries you cannot just switch traffic overnight to electric cars and do other drastic things.”

“It will take many more years, especially in countries like China, and I think there is an ethical need to provide something to the general population to protect them,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Comments from one independent source are provided and the potential conflicts of interest of Dr. Klutman and Bilstein are in part duly noted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SATURDAY, March 31, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A noninvasive scan might someday help doctors track the progress of prostate cancer and help guide treatment, researchers report.

The imaging tool, known as a prostate cancer-specific radiotracer, has so far only been tested successfully in mice. But a team from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City said the technology could help identify cases where prostate cancer has spread to the bone.

Radiotracers work by injecting a small amount of a compound tagged with a radionuclide into patients. Using positron emission tomography -- also known as a PET scan -- doctors are then able to better visualize tumors and tumor spread.

In studies involving mice with prostate cancer, the researchers had the radiotracer hone in on prostate-specific antigen (PSA), the same prostate cancer marker used in the PSA test. They found that the PSA gravitated to tissues containing prostate cancer that had already grown resistant to standard hormone-based therapies.

The study also revealed the radiotracer could help identify cases where prostate cancer had spread to the bone. The researchers pointed out traditional bone scans are unable to differentiate between malignant and nonmalignant lesions.

The findings were to be presented Saturday at the American Association for Cancer Research annual meeting in Chicago, and are also being published in Cancer Discovery.

If used on people, the researchers claimed that the radiotracer might someday help doctors "personalize" treatment strategies for prostate cancer and better manage the disease.

"The ultimate goal is to be able to predict the response of patients to new and existing therapies at an early stage, thereby personalizing their treatment and improving outcomes," Michael J. Evans, research fellow in the Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, explained in meeting news release.

Encouraged by their findings, the study's authors said they hope to begin a human trial next year.

Two prostate cancer experts said the tool, if borne out in patients, could prove very useful.

Dr. Michael Schwartz is director of laparoscopy and minimally invasive surgery at North Shore-LIJ Health System in Lake Success, N.Y. He noted that, as of now, doctors typically rely on results of the PSA blood test and/or standard diagnostic scans to help guide treatment decisions.

Both methods have their limits and, "while this study is very preliminary, if this radiotracer technology can prove to detect very early recurrence or metastasis in human patients, it could become extremely useful in either the pre- or post-treatment setting in selecting a treatment algorithm," Schwartz said. "It also may help reduce the need for biopsy of possible metastatic lesions."

Dr. Erik Goluboff, an attending urologist at Beth Israel Medical Center, New York City, agreed that, "this is an exciting study using a novel radiotracer to detect PSA-expressing tissues throughout the body."

He believes that the new tool's "greatest strength would be in monitoring changes in PSA expression in tissues as a result of various treatments. If a treatment showed a marked change, it could continue to be used in that patient, hence "personalized" medicine. If a specific change did not occur, that treatment could be abandoned and another tried instead. Since these changes could not be detected based on a PSA blood test alone, this new test would be very helpful in determining early on which therapy to choose in a given patient."

However, Goluboff also noted that research from animal-based studies does not always pan out in humans and "further, larger studies are of course required to confirm these findings."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute provides more information on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Perhaps the only thing that salvaged the story was the story-ending caveat from an independent expert:
…research from animal-based studies does not always pan out in humans and “further, larger studies are of course required to confirm these findings.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gone With A Shot? Hopeful New Signs Of Relief For Migraine Sufferers

Humans have suffered from migraines for millennia. Yet, despite decades of research, there isn't a drug on the market today that prevents them by targeting the underlying cause. All of that could change in a few months when the Food and Drug Administration is expected to announce its decision about new therapies that have the potential to turn migraine treatment on its head.

The new therapies are based on research begun in the 1980s showing that people in the throes of a migraine attack have high levels of a protein called calcitonin gene–related peptide, or CGRP, in their blood.

Step by step, researchers tracked and studied this neurochemical's effects. They found that injecting the peptide into the blood of people prone to migraines triggers migraine-like headaches, whereas people not prone to migraines experienced, at most, mild pain. Blocking transmission of CGRP in mice appeared to prevent migraine-like symptoms. And so a few companies started developing a pill that might do the same in humans.

Clinical trials of the first pills were effective against migraine but halted in 2011 over concerns about potential liver damage. So, four pharmaceutical companies rejiggered their approach. To bypass the liver, all four instead looked to an injectable therapy called monoclonal antibodies — tiny immune molecules most commonly used to treat cancer. Not only do these bypass the liver to block CGRP, but one injection appears to be effective for up to three months with almost no noticeable side effects.

Two manufacturers, Amgen (in collaboration with Novartis) and Teva Pharmaceuticals, have completed clinical trials and expect to hear from the FDA by June whether the therapies have been approved. Two more companies, Eli Lilly and Alder Biopharmaceuticals, plan to file for FDA approval later this year.

It's been a long time coming. Right now, the only available preventive treatments are accidental discoveries: A number of people prescribed medications for depression, high blood pressure and epilepsy discovered migraine relief, too. Now, many of those drugs, including propranolol and topiramate, have been tested and approved for migraine. But no one drug works for everyone, and side effects can prove intolerable or downright unpleasant.

Migraines are throbbing, one-sided headaches that can be accompanied by nausea as well as sensitivity to light, sound, smell, and movement. At their best, the headaches are an annoyance. At their worst, they can be completely debilitating. So for those of us who get numerous migraines each month, the prospect of a new approach feels almost life-changing.

According to one recent survey by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 10 percent of men and 20 percent of women in the U.S. reported having had a migraine in the last three months. And up to 2 percent of all Americans has at least 15 migraine days every single month. The toll such pain can take on health, morale, and productivity is substantial.

My own migraines started when I was 13. They struck a few times a week and I thought they were normal headaches. For a while, I tried the usual over the counter pain relievers but, one by one, they stopped working. By age 25, I started to wonder if there was something seriously wrong with my head. My general practitioner diagnosed me with migraines, gave me my first preventive medication — an antidepressant — then sent me to see a specialist.

Since that day more than 17 years ago, I have tried six preventive prescription medications. Not one helped. I alternated among four different, neurologist-recommended supplements, all to no avail. I received bi-monthly injections of magnesium and participated in one of the first clinical trials of Botox. And while Botox seemed to decrease my migraines by one or two per month, it wasn't enough to bother fighting about it with a new insurance company. I exercised regularly. I experimented with an elimination diet that left me eating nothing but broccoli and white rice, but still the migraines came. I averaged about 15 to 20 each month.

Still, I considered myself lucky. The headaches almost never came with nausea, and I had medications that typically ousted them within an hour or two. All told, I usually lost only a few hours of productivity a week.

When I grew older and had two children, my body changed and my migraines changed, too. I get them less frequently now, but when they come, they can stick around for a few days or even a week. Abortive medications still work, except when they don't. So when I heard about a new approach that was making its way through a number of pharmaceutical company pipelines, I began combing through the national clinical trials database to find a trial near me. I found one about 80 miles away, which didn't seem too far a trek considering the tantalizing reward of a migraine-free life. I made an appointment.

Neurologist David Dodick, at the Mayo Clinic in Phoenix, has been involved in multiple clinical trials with each of the four anti-CGRP antibody treatments in development. And, he admits, he's optimistic. He has good reason to be: Each of the therapies decreases migraine frequency by at least one to two days per month. "In a field where, over time, the progress and pace of research in understanding the underlying biology and mechanism of disease has been slow, this was very exciting," he says.

Because migraines are not life-threatening, most drugs have to pass a pretty high bar to be approved. And so far, patients on the experimental treatments report limited side effects that consist mostly of pain at the injection site. Unlike the current preventive medications, there is no nausea, no fuzzy thinking, no nerve pain, no weight loss or gain. And instead of remembering to take a daily pill, there is just a once-monthly injection.

Neurologists already have patients eager to test these therapies, especially when everything else they've tried hasn't worked. "There's a big hole to fill, both in prevention and acute therapies," says Alexander Mauskop, director of the New York Headache Center in New York City. (Disclosure: He's my former neurologist.) "If I have someone who's really suffering and can't find a solution, I tell them that in June I might have something new for them to try." Right now, he says, he has a list of about two dozen such patients.

Even if the new therapies are approved, however, patients may still have to jump through a number of hoops to get them. Biologic therapies like these are expensive, and treatment could reportedly range anywhere from $8,000 to $18,000 a year. At that price, Mauskop and other neurologists expect insurance companies to require patients to have tried just about everything else first.

The other hitch at this stage is a lack of long-term safety data. "If someone is well-controlled with Botox or another drug, I'd not suggest they switch," Mauskop says. "With Vioxx, it took 10 years before they discovered that it increased the risk of heart problems."

Side effects are a potential concern. Elizabeth Loder, chief of headache at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, points out that because CGRP constricts blood vessels, there may be potential long-term effects on blood pressure or other cardiovascular function. In women of childbearing age, who are the ones most prone to frequent migraines, "you can imagine that might have effects on fertility or placental function."

Right now, the longest patients have been on one of these new therapies is one to two years.

I ask Mauskop whether he'd recommend I enroll in a clinical trial, given my failure to respond to most everything else. He pauses, noting that he's no longer my neurologist and that he can't really give me any suggestions. But then he says that, since I'd previously shown some response to Botox, perhaps I might want to give it another try. I think about my two young children and my risk tolerance. Perhaps in 10 years I'll feel differently. For now, however, I pick up the phone and cancel my clinical trial appointment.

Lauren Gravitz is a science writer and editor in Hershey, Penn. Her work has appeared in Nature, The Economist, Aeon, Discover, The Oprah Magazine, and more. Find her at www.laurengravitz.com and @lyrebard.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two physicians who don’t appear to have interests in promoting these treatments are quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Women undergo more cesarean sections each year in the United States than any other major surgery, with the procedure carrying a significant rate of infection at the incision site.

A new study from Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis offers strong guidance on the best way to reduce the infection risk. Rather than prepping patients with iodine-alcohol — a common antiseptic combination in C-sections — the research indicates that chlorhexidine-alcohol is significantly more effective. The researchers argue that the evidence is strong enough to change standard skin-prep practices for C-sections.

The study appears online Feb. 4 in The New England Journal of Medicine and coincides with a presentation at the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine’s Annual Meeting in Atlanta.

“One of the biggest complications of surgery, and of C-sections in particular, is infection,” said first author Methodius G. Tuuli, MD, assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology. “For a new mother who needs to care for her baby — which is stressful even when all things are equal — having an infection can really impair her ability to do that. We are very interested in clarifying the best ways to prevent these infections, reducing the burden on the patients, on their infants and on the health-care system as a whole.”

An estimated 1.3 million women in the U.S. delivered their babies by C-section in 2013, with surgical-site infections complicating 5 to 12 percent of those deliveries. The average cost of treating those cesarean-related infections in the hospital is $3,500 and may be much higher for severe infections.

The research shows that patients in the chlorhexidine-alcohol group developed significantly fewer infections than patients in the iodine-alcohol group. Those who received the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination had a 4 percent infection rate, which is nearly half that of the patients who received the iodine-alcohol combination — 7.3 percent.

The clinical trial included 1,147 patients who underwent cesarean sections at Barnes-Jewish Hospital from 2011 to 2015. Of 572 patients randomly assigned to receive the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination, 23 developed an infection at the site of the surgery within 30 days of the procedure. Of 575 patients who randomly received the iodine-alcohol combination, 42 developed a surgical-site infection.

The investigators pointed out that all other standard procedures for reducing the risk of infection after surgery, including giving preventive antibiotics beforehand, were the same in both groups.

Studies of other types of surgeries also have suggested the superiority of chlorhexidine over iodine in preventing infection. But according to Tuuli, the unique circumstances of a C-section — that bacteria come from both skin and vagina and that a woman’s immune system is altered during pregnancy — mean the results of these studies may not apply.

In addition, past trials comparing antiseptics before surgery included relatively few participants and often compared a chlorhexidine-alcohol combination with iodine alone. These studies could not determine whether the worse performance of iodine alone was due to the chlorhexidine, the alcohol or the combination.

Although the new study was conducted at only one hospital, the researchers said the patient population was racially diverse and that more than 60 percent received public insurance. Tuuli and his colleagues also pointed out that the superiority of the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination was consistent whether the C-section was scheduled or unscheduled, whether or not the patient was obese, whether staples or sutures were used to close the wound and whether the patient had chronic medical conditions, including diabetes.

Highlighting the significance of the findings, the study’s senior author, George A. Macones, MD, the Mitchell and Elaine Yanow Professor and head of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, said, “This study is a tremendous addition to the literature on preventing surgical-site infections after cesarean. There are few circumstances when a single study should change our practice. But based on the biological plausibility and the striking reduction in surgical-site infections with chlorhexidine, this is one of those circumstances.”

This work was supported by a Women’s Reproductive Health Research Career Development grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant number 1K12HD063086-01; and by the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.

Tuuli MG, Liu J, Stout MJ, Martin S, Cahill AG, Odibo AO, Colditz GA, Macones GA. A randomized trial comparing skin antiseptic agents at cesarean delivery. New England Journal of Medicine. Feb. 4, 2016.

Washington University School of Medicine’s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states the funding sources. There were no apparent conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES -- Researchers have demonstrated for the first time that the progression of Type-1 diabetes can be halted -- and possibly reversed -- by a stem cell transplant that preserves the body's diminishing ability to make insulin, according to a study published today.

The experimental therapy eliminated the need for insulin injections for months or even years in 14 of 15 patients who were recently diagnosed with the disease. One subject, a 30-year-old male, hasn't taken insulin since his stem cell transplant more than three years ago, according to the study in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

The study suggests a new avenue for treating the intractable disease, in which the immune system destroys insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas. Without insulin, patients can't metabolize sugar and risk developing nerve damage, cardiovascular disease, kidney failure, and blindness.

Patients with Type-1 diabetes typically compensate by monitoring their blood sugar levels every few hours and injecting themselves with insulin as many as five times a day.

After the stem cell treatment, "patients are absolutely medication-free; they're off insulin," said Dr. Richard Burt, chief of the division of immunotherapy at Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine and senior author of the study.

The strategy is similar to an approach showing some success in treating other immune-system disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, and multiple sclerosis.

"We all realize that without addressing the problem at the level of the immune system, we'll never really beat Type-1 diabetes," said Dr. Francisco Prieto, who treats diabetics in Elk Grove, Calif., and wasn't involved in the study. "This is very encouraging work."

Burt and his colleagues cautioned that they don't yet know whether the fix is permanent and, if it is not, how long it will last. One of the subjects was insulin-free for one year but then relapsed after a respiratory viral infection, said lead author Dr. Julio Voltarelli, associate professor at Ribeirao Preto Medical School at the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil.

The researchers also cautioned that the process is not without risk, with patients vulnerable to infection during part of the therapy.

But other doctors said that even if the benefits of the therapy are temporary, the research provides valuable insight into the mechanism behind the disease.

The Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation in New York estimates that as many as 3 million Americans have Type-1 diabetes, with between 30,000 and 35,000 new cases diagnosed each year.

The age of onset is considerably younger than for Type-2 diabetes patients, who can still make insulin but can't use it efficiently.

The stem cell approach mirrors the bone marrow transplants used to treat patients with certain cancers and blood diseases. The idea is to wipe out the faulty immune system and replace it .

In the study, 15 Brazilian patients were treated within a few months of their diagnosis, before their immune systems had the chance to eradicate all of their insulin-producing cells.

The study was conducted in Brazil because of Voltarelli's interest in the experiment. It was funded by the Brazilian Ministry of Health and other sources.

The patients, who ranged in age from 14 to 31, were treated with drugs and hormones that prompted the body to produce hematopoietic stem cells and send them from the bone marrow into the bloodstream, where they were extracted by a special machine.

About two weeks later, the patients checked into the hospital and received chemotherapy and other drugs to kill off their immune systems over five days.

After a day of rest, they were infused with their own hematopoietic stem cells, which took about eight to 12 days to establish a new immune system. In the interim, they were given antibiotics to protect against infections.

The treatment had no effect on one patient, whose disease had already progressed too far, doctors decided. Of the remaining 14 patients, 12 were able to stop taking insulin shortly after their transplants. Altogether, five patients have not needed insulin injections for at least 23 months, and two have been insulin-free for more than 18 months.

Even if patients continue to require insulin shots, the treatment should be considered a success if it halts the destruction of beta cells, said Dr. Jay Skyler, with the Diabetes Research Institute at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, who wrote an editorial accompanying the study.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article quotes a source associated with the research and also quotes a source not associated with the research.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Despite recent debate about how well antidepressants really work in people with only mild or moderate depression, a new analysis of drug studies suggests they may have some benefit across the board.

Researchers found that more patients taking Prozac or Effexor had a substantial improvement in their symptoms than those taking a drug-free placebo pill, regardless of how severe those symptoms were to begin with.

“The idea that unless you’re very, very ill, you’re not going to benefit from treatment does not appear to stand up” when looking closely, said the study’s lead author, Robert Gibbons, from the University of Chicago.

Still, not everyone in the studies improved — on average, about five people had to be treated with one of the drugs for one person to feel better, and the benefits seemed to be diminished among some of the oldest patients.

What’s more, one researcher not involved in the study said its findings still don’t mean the drugs are any better than non-drug methods of treating depression, such as talk therapy and being more physically active.

For their analysis, Gibbons and his colleagues looked at outcomes for each individual patient in published and unpublished trials testing the effects of six weeks of treatment with antidepressants versus placebo pills. Most of those trials were funded and run by the pharmaceutical companies that manufacture Prozac and Effexor — Eli Lilly and Wyeth, respectively.

They included 12 studies of Prozac in adults and four each in elderly patients and youth, as well as 21 trials of immediate- or extended-release Effexor in adults. About 9,000 participants were included.

More adults and kids taking Prozac, known generically as fluoxetine, had at least a 50 percent improvement in scores on depression tests after six weeks compared to those assigned to take a placebo pill.

Fifty-five percent of adults on Prozac responded to treatment, compared to 34 percent in the placebo group. In youth, 30 percent on Prozac had significant symptom improvement, compared to just six percent of the comparisons.

The benefits were seen regardless of how severe patients’ symptoms were before starting treatment.

However, in the elderly the differences between the treatment and placebo groups were much smaller, and the researchers calculated that 17 older patients would have to be treated with Prozac for one to gain from it.

“Clearly the efficacy of antidepressants is age-dependent, (and) largest, most interestingly, in youth, which I don’t think would be the mainstream view in psychiatry,” Gibbons told Reuters Health.

The findings, he added, “raise other questions that need to be followed up (including), what’s going on in the elderly?”

Both types of Effexor, or venlafaxine, also seemed to help adults with mild to severe depression, with slightly more patients responding to the immediate-release dose.

Some of the study’s authors have testified for or received funding from drug companies, though the report itself was funded by national health agencies.

The researchers said they couldn’t be sure there would be similar improvements with other types of antidepressants — especially given the more limited data in kids and the elderly — or that the longer-term benefits would be as clear.

One recent study suggested that up to a fifth of patients on the antidepressant Cymbalta (duloxetine) might actually benefit more from placebo pills (see Reuters Health story of December 9, 2011.)

Irving Kirsch, who studies antidepressants and placebos at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said the new report didn’t make him more optimistic about the drugs.

If five or more patients need to be treated with an antidepressant for one to substantially improve, most don’t get much out of it, he pointed out.

“More than 80 percent of the patients are not getting a significant benefit from the drug — either they’re not getting better or they would get the same benefit with placebo,” he told Reuters Health.

“There are alternative treatments for depression that also produce about the same symptom reduction as the drugs do, but without the risk of side effects,” Kirsch added, including psychotherapy and exercise.

Still, Gibbons said that the improvement in symptoms for the average patient wasn’t insignificant.

“Definitely it doesn’t look like antidepressants are placebos,” he concluded.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story interviewed Irving Kirsch, frequently cited/quoted on antidepressant research issues.
It also did a good job of noting potential conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. – Sept. 28, 2016 – Hot flashes – the bane of existence for many women during menopause – can be reduced in frequency by almost half for about 50 percent of women over eight weeks of acupuncture treatment, according to scientists at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center.

In a study published in the Sept. 28 issue of the journal Menopause, scientists reported that about half the women in the study reduced the frequency of hot flashes, while half did not.

“Women bothered by hot flashes and night sweats may want to give acupuncture a try as a relatively low-cost, low-risk treatment,” said Nancy Avis, Ph.D., lead author of the study and professor of Public Health Sciences at Wake Forest School of Medicine, a part of Wake Forest Baptist. “Women will know pretty quickly if acupuncture will work for them. Women who had a reduction in their hot flashes saw a benefit beginning after about three to four weeks of weekly treatments.”

The National Institutes of Health-funded study was designed to examine different patterns of responses to acupuncture. Participants included 209 perimenopausal and postmenopausal women ages 45 to 60 who had on average at least four hot flashes or night sweats per day. Women were randomized to receive up to 20 acupuncture treatments within six months or to a control group.

Of the 170 women who received acupuncture, a small group of women (11.9 percent) had an 85 percent reduction in hot flashes by the eighth week of the study, Avis said. Forty-seven percent of the study group reported a 47 percent reduction over this same time frame. However, 37 percent showed only a minimal reduction of 9.6 percent in frequency of hot flashes, while 4 percent reported a 100 percent increase in hot flashes. “We had hoped to identify some of the characteristics of the women who benefitted from acupuncture, but like so many treatments, we could not really tell ahead of time who would benefit,” Avis said. Funding for the study was provided by grant R01AT005854 from the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, at NIH.

Co-authors include: Beverly Levine, Ph.D., Scott Isom, M.S., and Timothy Morgan, Ph.D., of Wake Forest Baptist; and Remy R. Coeytaux, M.D., Ph.D., of Duke University School of Medicine.

Disclosure: Coeytaux has a financial interest in an organization involved in recruiting study subjects and administering acupuncture treatments at one of the two study sites. His spouse is the primary shareholder of Chapel Hill Doctors, which is an organization that was subcontracted by Wake Forest School of Medicine as a site for subject recruitment and treatment.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release does a nice job here, mentioning how the study was funded and clearly outlining the potential conflicts of interests. One of the co-authors is the primary shareholder of Chapel Hill Doctors which was subcontracted by Wake Forest School of Medicine to recruit volunteers for the trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Up to sixteen weeks of intermittent fasting without otherwise having to count calories helps fight obesity and other metabolic disorders. Such fasting already shows benefits after only six weeks. This is according to a study by Kyoung-Han Kim and Yun Hye Kim in the journal Cell Research which is published by Springer Nature. Intermittent fasting in mice helped to kick-start the animals' metabolism and to burn fat by generating body heat. The research team was led by Hoon-Ki Sung of The Hospital for Sick Children in Ontario, Canada.

Research has shown that our unhealthy eating habits and sedentary lifestyles are playing a major role in the development of lifestyle-related metabolic diseases such as diabetes, heart disease and obesity. For this reason, dietary interventions like intermittent fasting are gaining popularity to treat conditions such as obesity.

The research team in this study wanted to better understand the reactions that interventions such as fasting trigger on a molecular level in the body. They exposed groups of mice to sixteen weeks of intermittent fasting. The recurring regimen saw the animals being fed for two days, followed by one day without anything to eat. Their calorie intake was not adjusted otherwise. Four months later the mice in the fasting group weighed less than those in the control group who continued to eat the same volume of food. The lower body weight of the mice in the fasting group was not the only effect. The fasting regime helped lower fat build-up in the white fat by increasing the brown-like fat (involved in burning energy and producing body heat) of mice on the high fat diet. Their glucose and insulin systems also remained more stable. In a further experiment, similar benefits were already seen after only six weeks of intermittent fasting.

Through an analysis into the underlying biology involved, the researchers found that such intermittent fasting tempers an immune reaction in fat cells. There are changes in certain gene pathways involved in the immune system and the body's reaction to inflammation. A type of white blood cell known to play a role in fighting inflammation is triggered. Known as anti-inflammatory macrophages, these cells stimulate the fat cells to burn stored fats or lipids by generating heat. This happens during periods of intermittent fasting because there is an increase in vascular growth factor (VEGF) that help form blood vessels and activate anti-inflammatory macrophage.

"Intermittent fasting without a reduction in calorie intake can be a preventative and therapeutic approach against obesity and metabolic disorders," says Kyoung-Han Kim.

"Strikingly, these fasting-stimulated changes in the growth of vascular cells and subsequent immune alterations occur even after a single cycle of 24-hour fasting, and are completely reversed when mice start eating again," adds Yun Hye Kim.

Reference: Kim, K-H. et al (2017). Intermittent fasting promotes adipose thermogenesis and metabolic homeostasis via VEGF-mediated alternative activation of macrophage, Cell Research DOI: 10.1038/cr.2017.126

Note: Kyoung-Han Kim's current affiliation is the University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Canada.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The research was funded by a variety of grants which were listed in the sidebar of the EurekAlert! site, but not in the news release text. The authors declared in the journal article that they had no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A recent study from the Center for BrainHealth at The University of Texas at Dallas shows that a certain type of instructor-led brain training protocol can stimulate structural changes in the brain and neural connections even years after a traumatic brain injury (TBI).

The findings, published in Brain and Behavior, further suggest that changes in cortical thickness and neural network connectivity may prove an effective way to quantitatively measure treatment efficacy, an ability that has not existed until now. Building upon previous research, the study challenges the widely held belief that recovery from a TBI is limited to two years after an injury.

"A TBI disrupts brain structure. These brain changes can interfere with brain network communication and the cognitive functions those networks support," said Dr. Kihwan Han, research scientist at the Center for BrainHealth and lead author of the study.

"For people with chronic TBI, they may have trouble with daily tasks such as creating shopping lists and resolving conflicts with others for many years after the injury. These findings provide hope for people who thought, 'This is as good as my recovery is going to get' and for the medical community who have yet to find a way to objectively measure a patient's recovery," he said.

The study included 60 adults with TBI symptoms lasting an average of eight years. Participants were randomly placed into one of two cognitive training groups: strategy-based training or knowledge-based training. Over an eight-week period, the strategy-based training group learned strategies to improve attention and reasoning. The knowledge-based training group learned information about the structure and function of the brain as well as the effects of sleep and exercise on brain performance.

Magnetic resonance imaging measured cortical thickness and resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) before training, after training and three months post-training. Previous studies have shown that cortical thickness and rsFC can be potential markers for training-induced brain changes.

Individuals in the strategy-based reasoning training showed a greater change in cortical thickness and connectivity compared to individuals who received the knowledge-based training. Changes in cortical thickness and functional connectivity also correlated to an individual's ability to switch between tasks quickly and consistently to achieve a specific goal.

"People who showed the greatest change in cortical thickness and connectivity, showed the greatest performance increases in our cognitive tasks. Perhaps future studies could investigate the added benefit of brain stimulation treatments in combination with cognitive training for individuals with chronic TBI who experience problems with attention, memory or executive functions," Han said.

The work was supported by the Department of Defense, the Meadows Foundation and the Friends of BrainHealth Distinguished New Scientist Award.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources are disclosed at the end of the news release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - Sleep deprivation -- typically administered in controlled, inpatient settings -- rapidly reduces symptoms of depression in roughly half of depression patients, according the first meta-analysis on the subject in nearly 30 years, from researchers at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. Partial sleep deprivation (sleep for three to four hours followed by forced wakefulness for 20-21 hours) was equally as effective as total sleep deprivation (being deprived of sleep for 36 hours), and medication did not appear to significantly influence these results. The results are published today in the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.

Although total sleep deprivation or partial sleep deprivation can produce clinical improvement in depression symptoms within 24 hours, antidepressants are the most common treatment for depression. Such drugs typically take weeks or longer to experience results, yet 16.7 percent of 242 million U.S. adults filled one or more prescriptions for psychiatric drugs in 2013. The findings of this meta-analysis hope to provide relief for the estimated 16.1 million adults who experienced a major depressive episode in 2014.

Previous studies have shown rapid antidepressant effects from sleep deprivation for roughly 40-60 percent of individuals, yet this response rate has not been analyzed to obtain a more precise percentage since 1990 despite more than 75 studies since then on the subject.

"More than 30 years since the discovery of the antidepressant effects of sleep deprivation, we still do not have an effective grasp on precisely how effective the treatment is and how to achieve the best clinical results," said study senior author Philip Gehrman, PhD, an associate professor of Psychiatry and member of the Penn Sleep Center, who also treats patients at the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center. "Our analysis precisely reports how effective sleep deprivation is and in which populations it should be administered."

Reviewing more than 2,000 studies, the team pulled data from a final group of 66 studies executed over a 36 year period to determine how response may be affected by the type and timing of sleep deprivation performed (total vs early or late partial sleep deprivation), the clinical sample (having depressive or manic episodes, or a combination of both), medication status, and age and gender of the sample. They also explored how response to sleep deprivation may differ across studies according to how "response" is defined in each study.

"These studies in our analysis show that sleep deprivation is effective for many populations," said lead author Elaine Boland, PhD, a clinical associate and research psychologist at the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center. "Regardless of how the response was quantified, how the sleep deprivation was delivered, or the type of depression the subject was experiencing, we found a nearly equivalent response rate."

The authors note that further research is needed to identify precisely how sleep deprivation causes rapid and significant reductions in depression severity. Also, future studies are needed to include a more comprehensive assessment of potential predictors of treatment outcome to identify those patients most likely to benefit from sleep deprivation.

This research was funded by National Institutes of Health grants (R01 HL102119, P30 NS045839, R01MH107571, R01MH098260, P41 EB015893, R01 MH080729), National Aeronautics and Space Administration grants (NNX15AK76A, NBPF02701, NNX08AY09G, NBPF03401, NBPF02501, NNX14AM81G, NX16AI53G), National Heart, Lung, and Brain Institute (U01 HL125388), National Institute on Drug Abuse (1 R21 DA040902-01A1), the Office of Naval Research (N00014-11-1-0361), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NNX14AN49G), National Space Biomedical Research Institute through NASA (NCC 9-58), and grant support from Merck and Philips Healthcare/Respironics.

In addition to Gehrman and Boland, additional authors include Rachel V. Smith from the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center, and Hengyi Rao, David F. Dinges, Namni Goel, John A. Detre, Mathias Basner, Yvette I. Sheline, and Michael E. Thase, all from Penn.

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania(founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $5.3 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 18 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $373 million awarded in the 2015 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2015, Penn Medicine provided $253.3 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release listed the federal grants and two medical device companies that provided funding for the study. One of the device companies manufactures devices for sleeping and respiratory care. There does not appear to be any direct conflict, but we would have liked a statement saying that.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Long-term follow-up of participants in clinical trials of a generic vaccine to reverse advanced type 1 diabetes finds significant clinical benefits, including restoration of near-normal blood sugar levels. Three years after receiving two administrations of the bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine four weeks apart, all members of a group of adults with longstanding type 1 diabetes showed an improvement in HbA1c to near normal levels - improvement that persisted for the following five years. The study from a Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) research team - published in npj Vaccines - also reports that the effects of BCG vaccine on blood sugar control appear to depend on a totally novel metabolic mechanism that increases cellular consumption of glucose.

"This is clinical validation of the potential to stably lower blood sugars to near normal levels with a safe vaccine, even in patients with longstanding disease," says Denise Faustman, MD, PhD, director of the MGH Immunobiology Laboratory , principal investigator of BCG clinical trials at MGH and senior author of the npj Vaccines report. "In addition to the clinical outcomes, we now have a clear understanding of the mechanisms through which limited BCG vaccine doses can make permanent, beneficial changes to the immune system and lower blood sugars in type 1 diabetes."

Faustman will also present five-year follow-up results of a separate group of BCG clinical trial participants with longstanding type 1 diabetes on Saturday, June 23, at the 78th Scientific Sessions of the American Diabetes Association in Orlando.

Used for almost a century to prevent tuberculosis, BCG has been known for more than 30 years to boost production of a cytokine called tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which may be beneficial in autoimmune diseases both by eliminating the autoreactive T cells that attack an individual's tissues - in the case of type 1 diabetes, pancreatic islets - and by inducing production of regulatory T cells (Tregs) that could prevent an autoimmune reaction. Faustman's team first reported in 2001 that inducing TNF production could cure type 1 diabetes in mice, but since TNF dosing is toxic in humans, clinical trials have utilized BCG for its ability to elevate TNF levels safely.

Initial clinical trial results, published in a 2012 PLOS One paper, reported that two doses of BCG spaced four weeks apart led to reductions in autoreactive T cells, an increase in Tregs and what turned out to be a transient increase in insulin production. But by the end of that short, 20-week trial, there was no reduction in HbA1c, the established measure of blood sugar levels over time. An extension and expansion of that trial with long term follow-up, the current results are based on data from 282 human study participants - 52 with type 1 diabetes who participated in the BCG clinical trials and 230 who contributed blood samples for mechanistic studies.

Regular monitoring of clinical trial participants found that HbA1c levels of those receiving BCG had dropped by more than 10 percent at three years after treatment and by more than 18 percent at four years. That reduction was maintained over the next four years, with treated participants having an average HbA1c of 6.65, close to the 6.5 considered the threshold for diabetes diagnosis, and with no reports of severe hypoglycemia. Participants in the placebo group and in a comparison group of patients receiving no treatment experienced consistent HbA1c elevations over the same eight-year time period.

In investigating how BCG administration produces its beneficial effects, the research team identified a mechanism never previously seen in humans in response to treatment with any drug - a shifting of the process of glucose metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation, the most common pathway by which cells convert glucose into energy, to aerobic glycolysis, a process that involves significantly greater glucose consumption by cells. The researchers also found that BCG could reduce blood sugar elevations in mice that were caused by means other than autoimmune attack, raising the possibility that BCG vaccines could also be beneficial against type 2 diabetes.

Mihai G. Netea, PhD, professor in the Department of Internal Medicine at Radboud University Medical Center in the Netherlands, says of this study, "The clinical effects and the proposed mechanism demonstrated are exciting and add to the emerging consensus that the BCG vaccine can have a lasting and valuable impact on the immune system. We know, and this study shows, that BCG vaccination induces epigenetic reprogramming at the chromatin architecture level and functional alterations indicative of a permanent change in immunity. The MGH trials and other, larger prevention and intervention trials underway around the globe may lead to a major shift in the prevention and treatment of infections and autoimmunity." Netea was not involved in the current study.

The MGH team's findings set the stage for further testing of BCG administration, including the FDA-approved phase 2 study currently underway, testing multiple BCG doses in a large group of participants with longstanding type 1 diabetes. That trial is fully enrolled, and there are seven additional BCG clinical trial groups currently recruiting or enrolling at MGH, with a pediatric trial in the planning stages. The MGH BCG clinical trial program is entirely funded by private philanthropy from individuals and family foundations, including the Iacocca Foundation. Additional information about clinical trials, including information for potential participants and financial supporters, is available at http://www. or by emailing DiabetesTrial@partners.org.

The lead author of the npj Vaccines paper is Willem M. Kühtreiber, PhD, MGH Immunobiology Laboratories. Additional co-authors are Lisa Tran, Taesoo Kim, Michael Dybala, Brian Nguyen, Sara Plager, Daniel Huang, Sophie Janes, Audrey Defusco, and Danielle Baum, MGH Immunobiology; and Hui Zheng, PhD, MGH Biostatistics.

Massachusetts General Hospital, founded in 1811, is the original and largest teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. The MGH Research Institute conducts the largest hospital-based research program in the nation, with an annual research budget of more than $900 million and major research centers in HIV/AIDS, cardiovascular research, cancer, computational and integrative biology, cutaneous biology, genomic medicine, medical imaging, neurodegenerative disorders, regenerative medicine, reproductive biology, systems biology, photomedicine and transplantation biology. The MGH topped the 2015 Nature Index list of health care organizations publishing in leading scientific journals and earned the prestigious 2015 Foster G. McGaw Prize for Excellence in Community Service. In August 2017 the MGH was once again named to the Honor Roll in the U.S. News & World Report list of "America's Best Hospitals."
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: According to the news release the study “is entirely funded by private philanthropy from individuals and family foundations.”
No conflicts of interest are reported in the published study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Though too early to call it a cure, the procedure has enabled the young people, who have Type I diabetes, to live insulin-free so far, some for as long as three years. The treatment involves stem cell transplants from the patients' own blood.

"It's the first time in the history of Type 1 diabetes where people have gone with no treatment whatsoever ... no medications at all, with normal blood sugars," said study co-author Dr. Richard Burt of Northwestern University's medical school in Chicago.

While the procedure can be potentially life-threatening, none of the 15 patients in the study died or suffered lasting side effects. But it didn't work for two of them.

For now, the new treatment does not apply to the nearly 20 million Americans with Type 2 diabetes, reports CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook. But diabetics are hopeful they'll some day be free of a lifetime of pinpricks and injections.

Larger, more rigorous studies are needed to determine if stem cell transplants could become standard treatment for people with the disease once called juvenile diabetes. It is less common than Type 2 diabetes, which is associated with obesity.

The hazards of stem cell transplantation also raise questions about whether the study should have included children. One patient was as young as 14.

Dr. Lainie Ross, a medical ethicist at the University of Chicago, said the researchers should have studied adults first before exposing young teens to the potential harms of stem cell transplant, which include infertility and late-onset cancers.

In addition, Ross said that the study should have had a comparison group to make sure the treatment was indeed better than standard diabetes care.

Burt, who wrote the study protocol, said the research was done in Brazil because U.S. doctors were not interested in the approach. The study was approved by ethics committees in Brazil, he said, adding that he personally believes it was appropriate to do the research in children as well as adults, as long as the Brazilian ethics panels approved.

Burt and other diabetes experts called the results an important step forward.

"It's the threshold of a very promising time for the field," said Dr. Jay Skyler of the Diabetes Research Institute at the University of Miami.

Skyler wrote an editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association, which published the study, saying the results are likely to stimulate research that may lead to methods of preventing or reversing Type I diabetes.

"These are exciting results. They look impressive," said Dr. Gordon Weir of Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes two experts – one of whom was apparently not involved in the study.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The most common sexually transmitted disease is often silent and invisible: human papillomavirus (also called HPV). But in some people HPV leads to genital warts and cancers – notably, cervical cancer.

The vaccines Gardasil and Cervarix were designed as a prevention for young women who have not yet been exposed to HPV. Men up to age 26 are also eligible for Gardasil to protect against HPV. But there are a lot of people out there who still have HPV, and nothing protects against all 130 strains of the virus. At least half of all sexually active males and females have had HPV, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

A Pennsylvania start-up company called Inovio Pharmaceuticals has developed an experimental vaccine for people who already have HPV and precancerous lesions that are associated with it. A new study demonstrating the vaccine's safety and potential effectiveness was published this week in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

 

 The experimental vaccine does not use the live HPV virus; it is formulated in synthetic DNA and pure water. It uses the immune system of the treated women to fight off cancer, said Joseph Kim, president and CEO of Inovio Pharmaceuticals and study co-author.

Worldwide, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer after breast cancer, with about 493,000 new cases and 274,000 deaths annually, the study said. HPV causes about 5% of cancers globally.

Some women, because of their particular genetic makeup, can clear precancerous lesions on their own and would not need this vaccine. This happens in anywhere from 10% to 25% of women infected with HPV, Kim said.

No one knows why some women have this capability and others do not, but for those who lack it the Inovio vaccine is "giving our immune system a little boost," Kim said.

Eighteen women with high-grade precancerous cervical lesions participated in the phase 1 study.

Study authors say the vaccine is formulated to work against all cancers caused by HPV types 16 and 18, including cervical, anogenital (anal and genital), and head and neck cancers. The researchers did not observe any side effects.

In the next phase of this research 150 women worldwide are participating, but they are not included in these published results, Kim said.

The phase 1 results are very early in the experimentation of this vaccine. The study was not done as a randomized controlled trial, the gold standard for determining whether a drug works better than chance. Also, 18 people is a small number for examining the effects of a medication.

Given those drawbacks, it’s not appropriate to draw too many conclusions from this study, says Dr. Diane Harper, a prominent HPV researcher at the University of Missouri – Kansas City’s School of Medicine. Harper contributed to the studies on both HPV vaccines that are currently available, Cervarix and Gardasil, and is not involved with this research.

“Several therapeutic vaccines have shown great promise in phase 1 and then not panned out in phase 2,” she noted in an e-mail.

The vaccine consists of three injections in the arm over three months, Kim said. The vaccine trains T-cells in the body to go after cervical cells with potentially cancerous genes embedded in them.

Inovio is using this technology to develop vaccines for prostate cancer and HIV also, Kim said.

“We certainly have a technology that can change the medical field by being able to program and generate strong immune responses that are specific and effective,” he said.

Kim said the next phase results should be out at the end of 2013; then comes a larger phase 3 trial with about 500 patients, to be concluded around 2016 or 2017.

HPV is spread through genital contact, including oral sex, and partners can bounce the virus back and forth between them, making it harder to clear naturally. Kissing is not known to deliver this STD.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story did provide a quote from an independent researcher who was not involved with the current research (and does not appear to be affiliated with the vaccine manufacturer).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When I tore my rotator cuff in 2008, I had conventional laparoscopic surgery to repair it. The outcome was excellent, but the recovery was long and horrible. The orthopedist wouldn’t let me drive for six weeks, or run, swim or lift weights for three months. I suffered through weeks of torturous physical therapy. It was nearly six months before I felt normal again.

So in 2014, after a nurse improperly administered a vaccination that resulted in chronic pain and an MRI revealed another rotator-cuff tear, I vowed I would not go through shoulder surgery (or its aftermath) again.

Cortisone injections and physical therapy didn’t help, so I decided to try something else: platelet-rich plasma, a therapy that uses the body’s natural healing properties to mend injuries. Its practitioners believe it will transform orthopedics. Based on my experience with it, I think they are right.

It may not work for every condition, or for everyone. But it worked for me.

[PRP therapy is popular for sports injuries, but does it work?]

Before undergoing PRP treatment, I read quite a bit about it, learning that it holds promise for healing soft-tissue injuries such as tearing of the rotator cuff (the group of tendons and muscles that provide stability to the shoulder), tennis elbow, plantar fasciitis, Achilles tendinitis, patella tendinitis and hamstring tears; it may even provide relief for mild to moderate osteoarthritis.

“[PRP] works, and the results have been amazing,’’ says John Ferrell, the sports medicine physician who treated me. “There still needs to be more research done to perfect the process, but [it] will change the way orthopedics is practiced in the future. We will be more preventive. We will be able to treat ailments noninvasively, and at an earlier stage.’’

The procedure involves collecting several ounces of blood from a patient’s arm, spinning the blood in a centrifuge to concentrate the platelets and injecting the concentrated platelets into the injury site to stimulate healing. Platelets, the blood cells that promote clotting, contain hundreds of proteins, called growth factors, that are important in repairing injuries.

“PRP works by acting like a stem-cell magnet,’’ says Ferrell, who practices at Regenerative Orthopedics & Sports Medicine, which has several offices in the Washington area. “It releases growth factors that signal stem cells to come [and] help regenerate the injured area. Rotator-cuff tendon partial tears are notorious for not healing because of the poor blood supply there. PRP actually creates new blood vessels that feed the tendon the proper nutrients it needs to heal.’’

A recent pilot study conducted at the Glen Sather Sports Medicine Clinic at the University of Alberta on rotator-cuff tears supports this. It showed tissue healing in five of seven of the patients who received PRP, as well as improvements in their pain and function.

The researchers call the results “clinically relevant,’’ despite the study’s small size, and say the next step should be a larger, controlled clinical trial. “I’ve heard some skeptics call PRP a cure looking for a disease, but it is being used in so many areas of medicine now with promising outcomes,” says Marni Wesner, a sports medicine physician at the clinic and one of the study’s authors. “The potential for benefit from PRP is real.’’

I had my first appointment with Ferrell last October to find out whether PRP might help me. By then, my painful shoulder had been keeping me up nights for more than a year. It bothered me while swimming and lifting weights, and while getting dressed. By performing several tests to assess my strength and range of motion, Ferrell discovered that my left shoulder — the site of the tear — was considerably weaker than my right.

He then used ultrasound to find the tear and showed it to me on a monitor. It turned out to be larger than indicated in the static MRI pictures I had obtained earlier.

Before deciding whether PRP was right for me, he had to be sure that the tear was the source of my pain and weakness. He injected an anesthetic into the tear, then he ran the strength tests again. My strength was significantly better. This meant that the tear was causing my problems, and fixing it probably would restore strength and function to my shoulder and end my pain.

I had the first PRP injection on Oct. 23. It was painful, and the aching persisted for about 36 hours. I had one bad night, followed by an uncomfortable day. After that, the pain stopped. Still, Ferrell advised me to baby the shoulder — to use my other arm when holding a dog leash and to skip swimming and weights for two weeks. Running was fine. He also recommended physical therapy after two weeks.

After what I went through in 2008, those were restrictions I could live with.

Ferrell told me not to use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, such as ibuprofen, for a week after the injection because the goal is to encourage, not stifle, inflammation. Other pain relievers such as acetaminophen were okay. “We want to stimulate an acute inflammatory reaction, which will trigger the healing cascade to start to work,’’ Ferrell says.

Because there is not yet enough research on PRP — and because some studies have shown mixed results — insurance will not cover it.

Still, “it has significant cost savings” compared with surgery, Ferrell says. The average treatment is two injections, which costs about $1,000 at his practice, whereas rotator-cuff surgery runs about $13,000, he says, although insurance often covers most of the costs of surgery.

With additional research, insurance may ultimately pay for PRP. Unfortunately, there is little financial incentive to conduct such studies because there is nothing for the Food and Drug Administration to approve, such as a drug or device. The centrifuges already are licensed, and the procedure uses a patient’s own blood, which is regarded as safe. The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons — which says PRP “holds great promise’’ — describes the risk as minimal.

Those who seek this treatment must look for a clinician with considerable PRP experience — someone who does the procedure several times a day, not once or twice a month — and who has a good success rate, Ferrell says.

Moreover, “you see the greatest results when the injections are done under direct visualization with ultrasound,” he adds.

By February, the ultrasound showed my tear to be about 80 percent healed. The remaining tear was quite small. Ferrell recommended a second injection to finish the job.

I had it on March 4.

When I returned to see him on April 12, I was feeling pretty good. No pain, no problems. He rolled in the ultrasound machine, and I was not surprised by the results. The tear was completely gone.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Along with quotes from the author’s physician (who has already posted the story on his website) there are quotes from a researcher who was involved in one small clinical trial on PRP. The inclusion of the researcher just barely squeaks by as sufficient to earn a Satisfactory rating here.
However, the story would have been much stronger had the author interviewed an expert who disagrees with these two sources, which wouldn’t be hard to find given the Cochrane review and other systematic reviews that cast a less rosy glow on PRP.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For centuries pathologists have relied on the microscopic examination of tumors to distinguish between atypical moles and melanoma. By analyzing the level of proteins within mole cells, mass spectrometry can aid in the diagnosis of atypical moles. In this study, mass spectrometry correlated better than the gold standard of histologic examination to determine if an atypical mole was in fact benign or a melanoma. Early diagnosis of melanoma is critical to cure and long term survival.

​​​​California Skin Institute — A recently developed test for assessing suspicious moles for melanoma is more accurate than standard analyses, according to Dr. Rossitza Lazova, a former Yale investigator. The test, which analyzes proteins in cells, could provide more reliable results for clinicians with patients who might be at risk for this deadly cancer.

The study was published on August 5th in the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology.

Melanoma is one of the most common forms of cancer and the most serious type of skin cancer. The gold standard for diagnosing melanoma is skin biopsy followed by microscopic examination of sampled tissue. However, in up to 1 in 4 cases, the results are inconclusive.

For the study, a former associate professor of Dermatology and Pathology at Yale University, Rossitza Lazova, M.D., collaborated with a national and international team of researchers to determine whether atypical moles could be more accurately diagnosed as either benign or cancerous (melanoma) using imaging mass spectrometry (IMS) — a technology that enables pathologists to focus in on individual proteins within sampled skin cells. In a prior study, the researchers used IMS to identify a molecular signature comprised of five proteins to differentiate between one type of benign mole and melanoma.

The research team retrospectively analyzed more than 100 cases of atypical moles. They compared results from IMS diagnosis to results based on standard microscopic examination of biopsies and correlated them with clinical outcomes.

The researchers found that in nearly all cases, the IMS analysis was a more accurate predictor, both of benign lesions and melanomas, than standard microscopic examination.

“Instead of pathologists being dependent solely upon the physical appearance of the cells, they now have the additional advantage of molecular information regarding the protein makeup [of cells] provided by mass spec imaging,” said Dr. Lazova, who is corresponding author on the study. “This test integrates anatomic pathology and analytical chemistry in a very useful and meaningful way.”

The finding suggests that IMS analysis, based on proteomic signatures, may improve both diagnosis and prediction of outcomes for patients with ambiguous moles, the researchers said.

The study was supported in part by a grant from the National Institutes of Health.

Dr. Lazova is currently the Director of Dermatopathology at California Skin Institute in San Jose, California.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the study was “supported” in part by the National Institutes of Health. However, neither the news release nor the study explains where other funding was obtained. The news release does not say whether any of the researchers had conflicts of interest, although no conflicts of interest were declared in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Folsom, Calif., (Nov. 19, 2015) - A new study published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition found that consuming tree nuts, such as walnuts, may lower the risk of cardiovascular disease.1 After conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis of 61 controlled trials, one of the authors, Michael Falk, PhD, Life Sciences Research Organization, found that consuming tree nuts lowers total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cholesterol, and ApoB, the primary protein found in LDL cholesterol. These are key factors that are used to evaluate a person's risk of cardiovascular disease. Walnuts were investigated in 21 of the 61 trials, more than any other nut reviewed in this study.

"Our study results further support the growing body of research that tree nuts, such as walnuts, can reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases," said Dr. Falk. "Tree nuts contain important nutrients such as unsaturated fats, protein, vitamins and minerals. Walnuts are the only nut that provide a significant amount (2.5 grams per one ounce serving) of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), the plant-based form of omega-3s."

Beyond finding that tree nuts lower total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cholesterol and ApoB, researchers also found that consuming at least two servings (two ounces) per day of tree nuts, such as walnuts, has stronger effects on total cholesterol and LDL. Additionally, results showed that tree nut consumption may be particularly important for lowering the risk of heart disease in individuals with type 2 diabetes.

Of 1,301 articles surveyed, 61 trials met eligibility criteria for this systematic review and meta-analysis, totaling 2,582 unique participants. Trials directly provided nuts to the intervention group rather than relying solely on dietary advice to consume nuts. The dose of nuts varied from 5 to 100g/day and most participants followed their typical diet.

More than two decades of research has shown that walnuts may help lower cardiovascular risk factors by decreasing LDL (bad) cholesterol by 9-16%2 and diastolic blood pressure by 2-3 mmHg2, as well as reducing total cholesterol2,3,4, raising HDL cholesterol2,3, reducing inflammation as measured by C-reactive protein5, and improving arterial function2. These factors are major contributors to heart disease risk, and reducing them is a critical step toward a healthier heart. In addition to providing omega-3s, walnuts also deliver a convenient source of fiber (2 grams per ounce) and protein (4 grams per ounce).

Co-authors with Dr. Falk are Liana C. Del Gobbo, PhD, Robin Feldman, MBA, Kara Lewis, PhD, and Dariush Mozaffarian, MD, PhD.

This study was supported in part by funds from The International Tree Nut Council Nutrition Research and Education Foundation.

The California Walnut Commission, established in 1987, is funded by mandatory assessments of the growers. The Commission is an agency of the State of California that works in concurrence with the Secretary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA). The CWC is mainly involved in health research and export market development activities. For more industry information, health research and recipe ideas, visit http://www. .

The California Walnut Commission (CWC) prohibits discrimination in all programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance programs. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact the CWC offices at (916) 922-5888. To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call 800-795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). CWC is an equal opportunity employer and provider.

The California Walnut Commission offices are located at 101 Parkshore Dr., Ste. #250, Folsom, CA 95630
• Del Gobbo, L., Falk, M.C., Feldman, R., Lewis, K., Mozaffarian, D. Effects of tree nuts on blood lipids, apolipoproteins, and blood pressure: systematic review, meta-analysis and dose-response of 61 controlled intervention trials. Am J Clin Nutr.2015; doi: 10.3945/ajcn.115.110965.
• Kris-Etherton P. Walnuts decrease risk of cardiovascular disease: a summary of efficacy and biologic mechanisms. J Nutr. 2014; 10.39:2S-8S.
• Sabaté J, Fraser GE, Burke K, Knutsen SF, Bennett H, Lindsted KD. Effects of walnuts on serum lipid levels and blood pressure in normal men.N Engl J Med. 1993; 328:603-7.
• Banel HK, Hu FB. Effects of walnut consumption on blood lipids and other cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Am J ClinNutr. 2009 Jul;90(1):56-63.
• Zhao G, Etherton TD, Martin KR, et al. Dietary alpha-linolenic acid reduces inflammatory and lipid cardiovascular risk factors in hypercholesterolemic men and women. J Nutr 2004; 134: 2991-2997.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states that the study is sponsored and funded by the California Walnut Commission with additional funding from the International Tree Nut Council Nutrition Research and Education Foundation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heart scan law could lead to 1,000s more cancer cases

Widespread use of a controversial heart disease test that Texas insurers will be required by law to cover by law could lead to thousands more cases of cancer in the United States, according to a new study.

The study offers the most definitive estimate yet of the cancer risk from the radiation exposure that comes with increasingly popular CT scans, which provide pictures of the heart's arteries and quantify the risk of heart attack in people without symptoms.

“This is an important reminder that there are always trade-offs when we talk about screening,” said Dr. Amit Khera, a cardiologist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. “Doctors and patients need to think about the cancer risk when ordering this test.”

The study, published in the new edition of Archives of Internal Medicine, found a small but real risk from the average radiation — for every 100,000 men between 45 and 75 undergoing the test every five years, there would be 42 cancers; for every 100,000 women ages 55 to 75, there would be 62.

That translates into “about 5,600 individuals developing a radiation-induced cancer in the future,” the study said.

The study comes a month after Gov. Rick Perry signed legislation that will require Texas insurance companies to cover the test for men 45 to 75 years old, and for women between 55 and 75, at intermediate or greater risk of heart attack. The law, the first in any state, takes effect Jan. 1.

The legislation was introduced in 2007 and passed quietly this year. It eventually attracted attention in cardiology circles, where the scans' costs and benefits are the subject of much debate. The scans are sometimes criticized as an example of expensive new technologies being adopted before proof is established that they're better than cheaper existing methods — an issue at the heart of the health care reform debate.

The test, a CAT scan of the heart that measures plaque buildup in the arteries, is popular because heart disease, the nation's No. 1 killer, strikes many people without the sort of very high cholesterol that usually predicts it. Doctors say they get many patients who want to know more about their risk because their father suffered a heart attack and died young.

Critics note that no study has linked the use of CT scans with better patient outcomes. They say the test's value is limited because it doesn't identify which plaque are stable and which could rupture and cause a heart attack.

CT scanning, which costs from $100 to $500, has grown exponentially in recent years. One Houston doctor said that there was just one scanner in Houston in the mid-'90s, and now the $1 million machines are all over the city. The Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography estimates more than 200,000 Americans had the test in 2008 at a cost of about $50 million.

The American Heart Association did not endorse the legislation, which Khera estimates could result in millions of Texans being screened.

The Texas legislation was pushed by Screening for Heart Attack Prevention and Eradication, a private organization that has called for CT scans on all asymptomatic men 45 to 75 and all asymptomatic women 55 to 75 — or some 50 million Americans.

Texas Rep. Rene Oliveira, D-Brownsville, the bill's sponsor, stressed the state law won't result in such widespread testing.

“The bill was written to target those people most likely to benefit from it, not everyone,” said Oliveira, who credits the test for saving his life when it revealed blockages that led to double-bypass surgery two years ago.

But Khera, an advocate of the test in select cases, said the Texas law puts the cart before the horse. He questioned unsupported cutoffs of those covered under the law and said it would have been better to wait until more data is available on who really benefits from it.

Dr. William Zoghbi, director of Methodist Hospital's Cardiovascular Imaging Institute, said the cancer risk numbers reported in the study are actually fairly low compared to other tests that take X-rays of the chest area, such as a regular CAT scan or coronary angiography.

The Texas law will require insurance companies pay $200 of the bill for patients to get the test every five years.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


The story includes experts and advocates that represent the key perspectives in debate about CT screening for calcium deposits in coronary arteries. However, it does not include information on possible conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Characterized by the World Health Organization as a "neglected tropical disease," leprosy (also known as Hansen's disease) is one of the most ancient diseases known to humankind and is caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium leprae. Nearly a quarter of a million people worldwide have leprosy, which causes disfiguration of the skin and mucous membranes as well as progressive and incurable nerve damage. While drug therapy exists for leprosy, it must be taken for many months, has many side effects and often is given too late to reverse the permanent damage caused by the bacterial infection. A viable vaccine to prevent and/or treat leprosy is the next step in the effort to bring this disease to an end.

Scientists at IDRI, along with national and international collaborators including the National Hansen's Disease Program and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of the National Institutes of Health, with financial support from American Leprosy Missions, have developed a promising leprosy vaccine candidate designed to help treat leprosy and prevent exposed individuals from developing disease and the resulting disabilities. Based on data generated in preclinical studies, the vaccine candidate, called LepVax, has progressed to Phase I clinical testing in the United States, the first stage of safety testing in human volunteers. The clinical trial is focused on safety, as well as evaluating the immune response to the vaccine.

"While previous attempts have used vaccines primarily developed for other diseases, this is the first totally defined vaccine candidate developed specifically for leprosy, using the latest technologies and offering no less than those exposed to leprosy deserve," said Steven Reed, Ph.D., IDRI President, CEO & Founder. "The leprosy vaccine program at IDRI has benefited greatly from what we've learned in the development of tuberculosis vaccine candidates over the past two decades. Although the bacteria that cause tuberculosis and leprosy are related, leprosy vaccine development posed great challenges. This vaccine represents a unique accomplishment, requiring the most advanced technologies in molecular biology and immunology, and American Leprosy Missions has been there from the beginning." IDRI scientists have also developed two vaccine candidates for tuberculosis, both in clinical stages of development.

"We are thrilled that after 15 years and an investment of over $5.1 million, made possible by our faithful donors and partners, a leprosy-specific vaccine is beginning a Phase I clinical trial," says Bill Simmons, President and CEO of American Leprosy Missions. "We believe this may be the most exciting breakthrough in leprosy treatment since multi-drug therapy, the current treatment for leprosy, was launched in the 1980s. We look forward to this vaccine improving the health outcomes of people diagnosed with leprosy. And, it may be that this vaccine can lead to interruption of the transmission of leprosy all together. What a tremendous legacy this would leave for millions of people worldwide."

The vaccine was developed through significant efforts in screening and identifying M. leprae proteins that trigger an effective immune response. IDRI scientists then produced a fusion of four leprosy proteins, which is combined with IDRI's proprietary immune-stimulating adjuvant (GLA-SE). With recent developments in vaccine technology, IDRI scientists can now induce protective responses even after infection, meaning it could be possible to prevent disease development in people already infected with the leprosy bacterium.

"This generation of a vaccine to prevent and possibly treat leprosy is the result of years of research. The development has been complicated by the fact that the organism that causes leprosy cannot be grown in culture in the laboratory," Reed explained. "This is a unique example of a vaccine produced by totally synthetic methods."

Reed added that, without the foresight and support of American Leprosy Missions, there would be no leprosy vaccine candidate. "The vision and support of American Leprosy Missions has been tremendous as we've worked with them throughout the years, moving from our work in developing a leprosy diagnostic to our current focus on a successful leprosy vaccine," he said. "The progress we've had to date would not have been possible without American Leprosy Missions' financial support and guidance." Early results from the Phase I study should be available in 2018, and the partners are currently exploring mechanisms to advance the vaccine through later-phase clinical trials should results from the Phase I study (clinical trial NCT03302897) support further evaluation.

The vaccine candidate will serve as part of an overall strategy to end leprosy, which will require detection, prevention and treatment. IDRI had developed technology to enable a rapid, affordable, point-of-care diagnostic test, which was funded by NIAID (grant numbers 1R43AI066613-01A1 and 2R44AI066613-02.)

In addition to IDRI and American Leprosy Missions, a variety of partners are taking part in efforts to eliminate leprosy, including Novartis and the Novartis Foundation. Reed, along with scientists from a variety of scientific organizations recently published "Innovative tools and approaches to end the transmission of Mycobacterium leprae" in , outlining what is needed to achieve this goal. Together with scientific, government and NGO partners, the Novartis Foundation develops and implements strategies to help interrupt leprosy transmission, while Novartis donates the treatment for leprosy free of charge.

About IDRI: As a nonprofit global health organization, IDRI (Infectious Disease Research Institute) takes a comprehensive approach to combat infectious diseases, combining the high-quality science of a research organization with the product development capabilities of a biotech company to create new diagnostics, drugs and vaccines. Founded in 1993, IDRI has 125 employees headquartered in Seattle with nearly 100 partners/collaborators around the world. For more information, visit www.idri.org.

About American Leprosy Missions: American Leprosy Missions, based in Greenville, South Carolina, is the oldest and largest Christian organization in the United States dedicated to curing and caring for people affected by leprosy and related diseases. It funds projects and partners in countries across Africa, Asia and the Americas. During its more than 100-year history, American Leprosy Missions has provided holistic care to four million people around the world including medical treatment and training, Christian outreach, community development and vaccine research. For more information, visit www.leprosy.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding sources are all clearly laid out.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The fact that heart patients receive such different treatments in sophisticated hospitals around the world highlights the central role that drug companies play in disseminating medical information, experts said.

Because prescription fish oil is not licensed to prevent heart disease in the United States, drug companies may not legally promote it for that purpose at conferences, in doctors’ offices, to patients or even on the Internet.

“If people paid more attention to guidelines, more people would be on the drug,” Dr. Jacobson said. “But pharmaceutical companies can’t drive this change. The fact that it’s not licensed for this has definitely kept doctors away.”

For example, on Solvay Pharmaceutical’s Web site for Omacor, www.solvay-omacor.com, the first question a user sees is, “Are you a U.S. citizen?”

If the answer is yes, the user is sent to a page where heart attacks are not mentioned. (In the United States, Omacor is licensed only to treat the small number of people with extremely high blood triglyceride levels.)

So community doctors do not learn how to use the drug. Lack of F.D.A. approval also means that insurers will not pay for treatment with Omacor. Approval from the agency for the use of the drug in heart disease is not expected soon.

A study published last month in The Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine found that only 17 percent of family doctors were likely to prescribe fish oil to their patients, including patients who had suffered a heart attack. There was a great need, the authors concluded, to “improve awareness of this important advice.”

The fact that fish oil is also sold as a nutritional supplement has made it harder for some doctors to regard it as a powerful drug, experts said.

“Using this medicine is very popular here in Italy, I think partly because so many cardiologists in this country participated in the studies and were aware of the results,” said Dr. Maria Franzosi, a researcher at the Mario Negri Institute in Milan. “In other countries, uptake may be harder because doctors think of it as just a dietary intervention.”

In the largest study of fish oil — conducted more than a decade ago — Italian researchers from the Gissi Group (Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza nell’Infarto), gave 11,000 patients one gram of prescription fish oil a day after heart attacks. After three years, the study found that the number of deaths was reduced by 20 percent and that the number of sudden deaths by 40 percent, compared with a control group.

Later studies have continued to yield positive results, although some scientists say there are still gaps in knowledge.

This summer, a critical review of existing research in BMJ, The British Medical Journal, “cast doubt over the size of the effect of these medications” for the general population, said Dr. Roger Harrison, an author of the paper, “but still suggested that they might benefit some people as a treatment.”

Dr. Harrison said he believed that people should generally increase their intake of omega-3 acids, best done by eating more fish.

Still, he acknowledged that it was difficult to eat foods containing a gram of omega-3 acids each day. “If you ask me do I take omega-3 supplements every day, then, embarrassingly, the answer is yes,” said Dr. Harrison, a professor at Bolton Primary Care Trust of the University of Manchester in England.

“I, too, am caught up in this hectic world where I have little time to shop and prepare the healthy foods I know I should be eating,” he said.

It seems natural for Italy to be at the forefront of the fish oil trend and home to the largest clinical trials. Scientists have long noted that Mediterranean diets are salubrious for the heart and theorized that the high content of broiled and baked fish might be partly responsible.

But the landmark Gissi-Prevenzione trial of fish oil had methodological weaknesses: the patients treated with prescription fish oil pills were compared with untreated patients, rather than with patients given a dummy pill. This meant that, despite impressive results, the trial did not meet the F.D.A.’s standards for approval. Yet by 2004, regulators in almost all European countries, including Spain, France and Britain, had approved Omacor for use in heart attack patients.

Marylou Rowe, a spokeswoman for Reliant Pharmaceuticals, which owns the license for the drug in the United States, said that further trials of Omacor would be needed for it to be licensed for heart attack patients in the United States. But she refused to discuss a timetable.

The American College of Cardiology now advises patients with coronary artery disease to increase their consumption of omega-3 acids to one gram a day, but it does not specify if this should be achieved by eating fish or by taking capsules. But over-the-counter preparations of fish oil have much less rigorous quality control and are often blends of the two fish oils know to be beneficial in heart disease with other less useful fatty acids.

For that reason, Dr. Jacobson of Emory gives the prescription drug, “off label,” to cardiac patients, even though the F.D.A. has not approved it for that use. “Then I know exactly what they’re getting, and there is no mercury,” he said.

He said he tells patients who cannot afford the prescription version that they can take the over-the-counter supplements, although there is uncertainty about the dose and they probably need three to four pills a day.

In Europe, meanwhile, research on prescription fish oil, which is now thought to act by stabilizing cell membranes, has gained momentum. The Gissi Group is conducting two huge trials using fish oil in patients with abnormal heart rhythms and in patients with heart failure.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included input from several individuals expert in cardiology and the role of omega-3 fatty acids for decreasing risk of heart attack. It would have been informative for readers to have someone explain the nature of the information on heart disease and omega-3 fatty acids and why conclusive data was not available.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most Americans hear “colorectal cancer screening” and think “colonoscopy” — the unpleasant cleanse, the snakelike scope, the wobbly ride home. It’s a process that’s undeniably inconvenient, yet one we’re told is unquestionably necessary.

That’s a shame. Because although colonoscopy certainly has its advantages, direct evidence that it’s the best way to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer is not one of them. And the drawbacks of colonoscopy — including the time commitment, not-so-fun preparation, expense and small chance of harm — are probably keeping some people from participating in colorectal cancer screening.

According to public health experts, that’s a bad thing. The United States Preventive Services Task Force says the net benefit for screening adults age 50-75 is “substantial,” adding that colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death in the country. But as of 2012, just 65 percent of eligible adults were being screened as recommended, and almost 28 percent had never been screened.

Among those who are screened, colonoscopy is by far the most popular method in the U.S. But there is a menu of options beyond colonoscopies — and they’re not necessarily any better or worse, according to the USPSTF’s recently finalized updated recommendations for screening among average-risk adults. The group said that while some tests are backed by more evidence than others, it found no head-to-head studies suggesting any strategy — including colonoscopy — is better than another. “Choose the one that fits your preferences and lifestyle,” said Douglas Owens, a physician and member of the task force.

Included on the list are two cheap, at-home poop tests intended to be done annually: the guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT) and a more sensitive test called the fecal immunochemical test, or FIT. Both look for tiny amounts of blood in the stool that might be shed by cancer or polyps. You get one from your doctor, take a poop sample at home, and then return the sample to the doctor. Only if you get a positive result do you need to have a colonoscopy. (These are different from a new stool-based DNA test, which while on the USPSTF’s list is much more expensive and has been studied less.)

Of the two, Richard Wender, a physician and chief cancer control officer of the American Cancer Society, said the FIT is preferable, both because it’s more accurate and because it requires only one poop sample and no changes in diet. It costs about $25 or less and when done every year, the USPSTF’s models estimate, it will avert 20-23 deaths from colorectal cancer per 1,000 people screened. (Wender doesn’t recommend the OTC tests that are available.)

That’s comparable to the two “scope” tests on the USPSTF’s list, flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy, which have the advantage of both detecting and removing precancerous polyps in one procedure. (Flexible sigmoidoscopy, which looks at the lower part of the large intestine, has been shown by randomized trials to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer but isn’t reimbursed as well as colonoscopy and is on the decline in the U.S.)

Colonoscopy is the most popular test in the U.S. In addition to its polyp-removing ability, if you have a negative test, you don’t have to come back for another 10 years. There is indirect evidence it reduces colorectal cancer deaths, in the form of a large study following people who did and didn’t get the test over time. And it seems logical that if sigmoidoscopy cuts colorectal cancer deaths, the more extensive colonoscopy must provide a similar benefit. But that’s not yet been proved by randomized controlled trials. Based on the available evidence and its modeling, the USPSTF estimates it reduces deaths from colorectal cancer by 22-24 per 1,000 people screened.

But that lack of trial data is why the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care earlier this year recommended against using colonoscopy as a first-line screening method. “They were very clear: We’re going to stick to the evidence, and right now we don’t have evidence for colonoscopy,” said Aasma Shaukat, section chief of gastroenterology in the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Colonoscopy also has plenty of downsides. It’s expensive, running upward of $1,000. (The test is covered without cost sharing as preventive care under the Affordable Care Act.) Most people prefer to have sedation during the procedure, which means time off from work and finding a ride home. There’s variation in the quality of the test, depending on who’s doing it. There’s a small but real risk of harm, such as a perforation.

So why do so many people prefer it to the poop test? For many, because they’ve been told it’s the best test to get. A 2012 study found primary care physicians overwhelmingly said they thought it was the best colorectal screening option. Katie Couric’s on-air colonoscopy in March 2000 boosted awareness and increased colonoscopy rates. There’s also a “more is better” attitude when it comes to medicine among many people, said Shaukat. And colonoscopies are well-reimbursed for the physicians who perform them. Hospitals have focused on marketing colonoscopies rather than alternative tests.

No one is arguing colonoscopy is a bad test. It just hasn’t been shown to be better than an annual FIT, said James Allison, a clinical professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California-San Francisco. He said the public health message is slowly changing to reflect that. The 80% by 2018 campaign from the National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable, for example, which aims to increase the rate of screening, emphasizes a suite of options. “People are very motivated to get screened when they hear colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer-related death and if they know there are tests that are affordable and can be done at home,” said Wender.

So if you want a colonoscopy after talking with your physician and digging into all its pros and cons — fantastic. But if you prefer something less invasive but more frequent, you can test your poop every year without feeling like you’re opting for, um, No. 2.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes three independent sources for information and the recommendations of agencies from two different governments.  There is no suggestion that in a story offering a selection of screening techniques, with no one preferred above another, that there is any issue with conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
More women needing the removal of one cancerous breast are having the second, healthy breast removed at the same time, despite the lack of evidence that this improves long-term survival, according to a University of Minnesota study released Monday.

Nearly 5 percent of women with cancer in a single breast had a double mastectomy in 2003, compared with 1.8 percent of women who made that choice in 1998.

U researchers confirmed the trend using federal cancer data but could only speculate why. It’s an emotional decision that women often make quickly, considering that surgeries often take place within days of their cancer diagnosis.

“I’m worried about the women who are on the fence and make a very quick decision before really considering the other options or the fact that it is an irreversible procedure,” said Dr. Todd Tuttle, the U’s chief of surgical oncology and lead author of the study in the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

When diagnosed with cancer in her right breast last year, Debra Elmore-Nesheim talked with her new husband and other relatives about the appropriate treatment. But the 43-year-old’s instinct was to have both breasts removed.

“Part of it is emotional,” said Elmore-Nesheim, a pediatric nurse who lives in St. Paul. “If I didn’t do as much as possible to eliminate the cancer, I would feel like I was almost waiting for the other shoe to drop.”

Women removing a single cancerous breast have a 1 percent chance per year of suffering cancer in the other breast. That makes removing both breasts a better option for younger women with longer life spans. Many oncologists also recommend it for women with genetic predispositions for breast cancer.

For other women, a double mastectomy might eliminate another breast cancer, but it won’t stop cancer from resurfacing in vital organs, Tuttle said. He hopes women aren’t making the choice believing it will result in longer life, because the evidence is sketchy at best.

“If that’s the case, then we have a problem on our hands, because we’re not providing adequate information to our patients,” he said.

“If it’s happening because of fear or the common reason I hear – ‘I just want to be done with it’ – that’s a different situation.”

Tuttle’s study found 60 percent of women with breast cancer chose lumpectomies, which remove only the tumors, not the whole breasts. Research has found this procedure is equally effective, particularly with smaller tumors and often when used in combination with radiation.

Of the women in Tuttle’s study who received mastectomies in 2003, 11 percent chose to have both breasts removed. That is an increase from 4.2 percent in 1998.

The rising use of magnetic resonance imaging, MRI, is likely contributing to the increase in double mastectomies, said Dr. Joseph Leach, a medical oncologist with Park Nicollet Health Services. Such scans are becoming standard for women who appear to have cancer in one breast, and half the time they raise suspicions about the other breast.

While these suspicions rarely end up as cancer, they do often result in follow-up tests such as biopsies and ultrasounds that can frighten patients, Leach said.

“Our own impression is that women in some ways are getting sort of scared into having prophylactic mastectomies because of having these uncertain tests,” Leach said.

Both Leach and Tuttle are pursuing research studies to address the why question.

Women choosing to have both breasts removed face higher surgery costs and slightly higher risks of post-surgery complications and infections.

Most women are satisfied after double mastectomies, but a Mayo Clinic survey showed that as many as 10 percent are unsatisfied because of their appearance or medical complications. The survey results came a decade ago, however, when the safety of breast implants was a major issue, said Mayo’s Dr. Lynn Hartmann.

The safety concerns have been reduced and cosmetic procedures have improved, but some women still probably regret the decision, she said.

Hartmann said doctors could take pressure off women by performing lumpectomies first to eliminate their cancer tumors. Then the women can have genetic tests and assess their risks for follow-up cancers before deciding whether to have one or both breasts removed.

“Then you’ve just put some time on the table for them rather than trying to have them make this major decision … in a brief period of time,” she said.

Elmore-Nesheim, the nurse with breast cancer, said cosmetic concerns played a role. She wondered with age what she would look like with an implant on one side and a healthy breast on the other. But mostly, she was scared for her life. Even if removing both breasts only offered a small chance at a longer life, it seemed worthwhile to her.

“It’s a survival thing,” she said. “You’re fighting for your life. If it shows up on one side, it could come back, so let’s just eliminate it.”

Jeremy Olson can be reached at jolson@pioneerpress.com or 651-228-5583.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The reporter interviews the lead author of the study, two additional credible medical experts and one patient. The patient, a nurse, is a more credible source than one often finds in news stories.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 22, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Breast cancers in women aged 40 to 49 that are diagnosed by mammograms have a better prognosis than those detected by doctors or the women themselves, a new study indicates.

"They have an earlier diagnosis, earlier stage, better prognosis," said study author Judith Malmgren, an affiliated professor of epidemiology at the University of Washington School of Public Health and Community Medicine. She is also president of HealthStat Consulting Inc. in Seattle.

The new study, like previous ones, re-ignites the ongoing debate about the best age to start routine mammograms and the best screening interval. It appears in the March issue of the journal Radiology.

In 2009, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force issued mammogram recommendations. It recommends women aged 50 to 74 who are at average risk for breast cancer have a mammogram done every two years. It also suggests that women aged 40 to 49 at average risk discuss the pros and cons with their doctors and decide on an individual basis if and when to start screening.

Meanwhile, other organizations, including the American Cancer Society, recommend women begin mammograms at age 40 and continue to have them annually.

Malmgren and her colleagues evaluated nearly 2,000 women who had breast cancer. All were aged 40 to 49 when they were treated between 1990 and 2008.

The researchers looked at the method of diagnosis, whether by mammogram or if the cancer was found by the doctor or the woman. They also took these into account: the cancer's stage at diagnosis; type of treatment; annual follow-up; recurrence; and survival.

Over the 18-year period, the number of breast cancers diagnosed at very early stages increased 66 percent, while the number of more advanced cancers (stage 3) decreased by 66 percent.

Those whose cancers were detected by mammogram rose from 28 percent in 1990 to 58 percent in 2008. The number of cancers detected by doctor or patients declined from 73 percent in 1990 to 42 percent in 2008.

Women whose cancers were detected by mammograms were more likely than the doctor- or patient-detected cancers to have lumpectomy or other breast-conserving surgery: 67 percent vs. 48 percent. The women whose cancers were detected by mammograms were less likely to be given chemotherapy.

While 4 percent of women whose cancer was found on mammogram died during a follow-up period that ranged from one to 20 years, 11 percent of those whose cancers were found by the doctor or the women died.

When the researchers looked only at invasive cancers, 92 percent of the women whose cancer was found on mammogram survived without recurrence at five years; 88 percent of the other group did.

"I don't think the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force is looking at the whole picture," Malmgren said. "They are concentrating on the harms."

Among them, according to the 2009 guidelines, are false-positives, which can lead to anxiety and unnecessary biopsies.

Malmgren, a breast cancer survivor, says more focus should be placed on the benefit of early diagnosis, because it often means less treatment is needed.

There was a decrease found in cancers being diagnosed at later stages in those whose cancers were found on mammograms. "That's where the money is," Malmgren said.

Dr. Virginia Moyer, chair of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and a professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine, reviewed the study. "The findings make sense," she said.

They found that cancers can be detected earlier by mammogram. "A screening test, if it can't find something earlier than [by] clinical presentation, is a poor test," she said.

However, she said, the study does not provide support for all women aged 40 to 49 to have routine mammograms.

When considering its recommendation, the task force took all available evidence into account, including published studies, Moyer noted. "The data from randomized trials and modeling show there is a very modest improvement in mortality with mammograms from 40 to 49," she said.

"Because it is so modest and there are risks, people need to make their own decision," Moyer said.

To learn more about mammograms, go to the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article did interview the chair of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Soon after her sister committed suicide, Caroline Downing started doing poorly at school. During math tests she would freeze up, and she found her mind wandering constantly. Officials at St. Andrew's Episcopal School in Potomac gently suggested that the high school sophomore get a mental health screening.

The idea of a psychiatric evaluation sent chills down the spine of Caroline's mother, Mathy Milling Downing, who believed that her younger daughter, Candace, had committed suicide because of an adverse reaction linked to a psychiatric drug -- the antidepressant Zoloft. Shortly after Candace's death, the Food and Drug Administration placed black-box warnings on several antidepressants to say they elevated suicidal thinking among some children. If Caroline were going to get the same kind of mental health care as Candace, Downing wanted no part of it.

Downing's family offers a powerful case study into the pros and cons of new guidelines recommending widespread screening of adolescents for mental disorders: Last month, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal group that makes public health recommendations, said that all adolescents between ages 12 and 18 should be screened for major depression. In March, the Institute of Medicine, which advises Congress on scientific matters, told policymakers that early screening was key to reducing the financial and medical burden of mental disorders in the United States.

Downing said she agreed to have her older daughter screened because the child was obviously in distress, but she told school officials that if an evaluation led to a prescription for medications, she would refuse to go along.

The screening, unsurprisingly, found that Caroline's emotional problems were linked to her sister's death. After several intensive evaluations that delved into the girl's mental and emotional history, and that obtained a family history and detailed information about Candace's death, Caroline was placed in "art therapy," painting or making sculptures with a therapist who simultaneously used the sessions to draw out the teenager's emotional problems.

The therapy had an immediate and beneficial impact and turned Mathy Milling Downing, a skeptic about some kinds of mental health treatment, into a fan of mental health treatment done right.

"My grades went from almost failing algebra to honor roll," Caroline Downing, now 20, said in an interview. The treatment worked, she said, because "getting all the stuff out of your head that you don't need there gives you more room for all the stuff you need to have in your head."

The very different experiences of the two sisters illustrate the paradox at the heart of screening recommendations: What matters is not whether screening is done but how it is done and how screening information gets used.

In the case of her younger daughter, Downing said, a child psychiatrist put Candace on Zoloft after a very brief evaluation because the child was experiencing anxieties during tests. When Candace turned 12, the psychiatrist upped the dose on the grounds that it would help her academically. When Downing expressed concerns about the drug, she said the doctor blew her off: "He said, 'What are you worried about? It is safe and effective.' "

One day in January 2004, Candace had just finished watching a show on Animal Planet with her father and sister. She had been laughing during the show. A short while later, Downing said, Candace hanged herself in her bedroom, using a belt from a bathrobe and a rod on her four-poster bed.

Candace's treatment, Downing said, involved a one-size-fits-all approach to mental health that sees medications as a magic pill. By contrast, she said, the multiple screenings that Caroline received carefully evaluated the child as an individual and homed in on the kind of therapy that was best for her.

"Screening a child to find out what the root of the problem is can be useful," Downing said. "In the case of my daughter [Caroline], it helped [that] they found a connection between her focusing problems and the death of her sister."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A number of mental health experts, several of whom served on major organization review panels on this topic.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In 2014, prostate cancer was the leading cause of newly diagnosed cancers in men and the second leading cause of cancer death in men. Writing in the January 6, 2015 issue of the journal Prostate Cancer and Prostatic Disease, a team of scientists and physicians from the University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, with counterparts at University of California, Los Angeles, describe a novel imaging technique that measurably improves upon current prostate imaging – and may have significant implications for how patients with prostate cancer are ultimately treated.

“This new approach is a more reliable imaging technique for localizing tumors. It provides a better target for biopsies, especially for smaller tumors,” said Rebecca Rakow-Penner, MD, PhD, a research resident in the Department of Radiology and the study’s first author.

The technique is also valuable in surgical planning and image staging, said David S. Karow, MD, PhD, assistant professor of radiology at UC San Diego and the study’s corresponding author. “Doctors at UC San Diego and UCLA now have a non-invasive imaging method to more accurately assess the local extent of the tumor and possibly predict the grade of the tumor, which can help them more precisely and effectively determine appropriate treatment.”

The current standard of care for detecting and diagnosing prostate cancer is contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which involves intravenously injecting patients with a contrast agent to highlight blood flow. Greater blood flow is often a requirement of growing cancer cells. When compared to surrounding healthy tissues, it’s hoped that contrast enhanced MRIs will reveal the shape and nature of any tumors present.

But many tumors do not significantly differ from surrounding healthy tissues with contrast enhanced MRI and so evade easy detection. An imaging technique called diffusion MRI measures the diffusion of water and has been a standard imaging technique in the brain and an emerging technique in the prostate. Cancer tissues are denser than healthy tissues and typically limit the amount and mobility of water within them. But diffusion MRI suffers from magnetic field artifacts that can distort the actual location of tumors by as much as 1.2 centimeters or roughly half an inch – a significant distance when surgeons are attempting, for example, to assess whether a tumor extends beyond the prostate and into adjacent nerve bundles.

The new approach described in today’s published paper is called restriction spectrum imaging-MRI or RSI-MRI. It corrects for magnetic field distortions and focuses upon water diffusion within tumor cells. By doing both, the ability of imaging to accurately plot a tumor’s location is increased and there is a more refined sense of the tumor’s extent, said Nathan White, PhD, assistant project scientist at UC San Diego, study co-author and co-inventor of the RSI-MRI technique.

In a related paper to be published in the journal Frontiers in Oncology, the same team of researchers reported that RSI-MRI appears to predict tumor grade. Higher grade tumors correlate with higher restricted water volume in the cancer cells’ large nuclei.

“Prostate cancer can often be an indolent disease, where a patient may only require surveillance rather than aggressive surgery,” noted co-author Christopher J. Kane, MD, professor of urology at UC San Diego.

“If by imaging we could predict the tumor grade,” added Robert Reiter, MD, professor of urology at UCLA, “we may be able to spare some patients from prostate resection and monitor their cancer with imaging.”

Co-authors include senior author Anders M. Dale, Hyung W. Choi, Joshua M. Kuperman, Natalie M. Schenker-Ahmed, Hauke Bartsch, Robert F. Mattrey and William G. Bradley, Department of Radiology, UCSD; J. Kellogg Parsons and Michael A. Liss, Department of Urology, UCSD; Ahmed Shabaik, Department of Pathology, UCSD; Jiaoti Huang, Department of Pathology, UCLA; Daniel J. Margolis and Steven S. Raman, Department of Radiology, UCLA; Leonard S. Marks, Department of Urology, UCLA.

Funding for this research was provided, in part, by the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health, the Department of Defense, Prostate Cancer Research Program, the American Cancer Society and the UC San Diego Clinician Scientist Program.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources are fully listed. There is no indication of a conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Folsom, Calif., (May 11, 2015) -- A new animal study from Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, led by Dr. Christos Mantzoros, indicates that a diet containing walnuts may slow colorectal tumor growth by causing beneficial changes in cancer genes.

This is the first study that evaluates whether walnut consumption can cause changes to micro-ribonucleic acids (miRNA), the nucleotides that are involved in altering gene expression. miRNA are the focus of much research in the growing field of epigenetics, or the study of how genes may be changed by environmental factors.

"Our research demonstrates that a walnut diet causes significant changes in the expression profile of miRNAs in localized colorectal cancer tissue, and that a walnut diet incorporates protective fatty acids in the colonic tumor either through its direct effects or through additive or synergistic effects of multiple other compounds present in walnuts," said Dr. Mantzoros. "While future studies are needed, we're optimistic of the role of miRNAs as biomarkers of disease and prognosis, and may demonstrate a potential therapeutic target for colorectal cancer treatment."

Researchers conducted the randomized study with two groups of mice. One group was fed the equivalent of two servings (2 ounces) per day of walnuts for humans, while the second group received a similar control diet with no walnuts. After 25 days, researchers found that in walnut-fed mice, key miRNA that may affect cancer cell inflammation, vascularization (blood supply) and proliferation were positively engaged.

The tumors of mice fed the walnut-containing diet were found to have 10 times the amount of total omega-3 fatty acids, including plant-based alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), in the tissue compared to the mice fed the control diet. The study results found that a smaller tumor size was associated with greater percentage of omega-3s in tumor tissues, suggesting that ALA may provide a protective benefit. Tumor growth rate was also significantly slower in the walnut group compared to the control group. As this study was conducted on animals, results cannot yet be implied for humans.

ALA is an essential fatty acid critical to various body processes and is known to reduce inflammation. Walnuts are the only nut that contain a significant source of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) (2.5 grams per ounce). Walnuts also contain a variety of antioxidants, (3.7 mmol/ounce), and numerous vitamins and minerals.

Colorectal cancer is the third most common type of cancer worldwide and is second to only lung cancer as the leading cause of death in Western Countries.1 Diet has been shown to be a modifiable risk factor in preventing many types of cancer, including colorectal cancer. It is estimated that 30-50 percent of colorectal cancer in men and 20 percent in women can be prevented by diet and other lifestyle changes.2

An article detailing these findings, "Dietary Walnut Suppression of Colorectal Cancer in mice: mediation by miRNA patterns and fatty acid incorporation" has been published in the Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry.3

This study was supported from a grant by the American Institute for Cancer Research and the California Walnut Commission.

The California Walnut Commission, established in 1987, is funded by mandatory assessments of the growers. The Commission is an agency of the State of California that works in concurrence with the Secretary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA). The CWC is mainly involved in health research and export market development activities. For more industry information, health research and recipe ideas, visit =.

The California Walnut Commission (CWC) prohibits discrimination in all programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance programs. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact the CWC offices at (916) 922-5888. To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). CWC is an equal opportunity employer and provider. The California Walnut Commission offices are located at 101 Parkshore Dr., Ste. #250, Folsom, CA 95630

1. World cancer research fund/american institute for cancer research. Food, nutrition, physical activity, and the prevention of cancer: A globalperspective. AICR 2007.

2. Platz EA, Willett WC, Colditz GA, et al. Proportion of colon cancer risk that might be preventable in a cohort of middle-aged us men. Cancer Causes Control. 2000;11(7): 579-88.

3. Tsoukas MA, Ko BJ, Witte TR, Dincer F, Hardman WE, Mantzoros CS. Dietary walnut suppression of colorectal cancer in mice: Mediation by miRNA patterns and fatty acid incorporation. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 Apr 1. [Epub ahead of print
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding sources were identified, netting this release a Satisfactory rating, but when a fundor is integrally related to the substance of the research, that mention belongs higher up in the story or release, rather than tagged onto the end, allowing readers to consider the context of the funding early in their reading of the material.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hormone therapy is the only FDA-approved treatment for hot flashes related to menopause, but many women are reluctant to undergo hormone therapy because its long-term use has been linked to an increased risk for breast cancer and stroke .

The study was presented in Chicago at the annual meeting of the North American Menopause Society (NAMS).

In a manufacturer-funded study, the drug Serada proved to be more effective than placebo for preventing hot flashes and reducing their severity.

Oct. 6, 2010 -- An extended-release version of the seizure and pain drug gabapentin may be one step closer to becoming the first approved nonhormonal treatment for menopause -related hot flashes .

In earlier studies, immediate-release gabapentin was shown to be an effective treatment for hot flashes. But side effects, including dizziness and daytime sleepiness, were commonly reported by users.

Michael Sweeney, MD, who is vice president of research and development for Serada manufacturer Depomed Inc., says the company’s slow-release gabapentin formulation avoids many of these side effects.

About 60% of women who took the experimental drug in one study reported side effects, compared to about 50% of women taking placebo pills. About 8% and 18% of Serada users reported daytime sleepiness and dizziness, respectively, compared to about 3% and 8% of women who took a placebo.

“These side effects, when they did occur, tended to occur early in treatment and disappear within a few weeks,” Sweeney says.

Researchers presented findings from two studies of Serada at the NAMS meeting.

In one study, the number of daily hot flashes experienced by postmenopausal women taking 1,800 milligrams of the drug per day declined from around 10 to around 2. But a similar reduction in hot flashes was seen in women who took placebo pills instead of the slow-release gabapentin.

In the second study, about 65% of women taking Serada reported significant improvement in hot flash symptoms after 12 weeks of treatment, compared to 45% of women taking placebo.

NAMS founder and former executive director Wulf Utian, MD, says Serada does not appear to be as effective as hormonal therapy, but it may be a useful alternative treatment for women who can’t take hormones or don’t want to.

Utian is now an independent consultant and was a co-author of one of the studies.

“Estrogen and estrogen-progestin drugs are about 95% effective for treating hot flashes,” he tells WebMD. “This drug was about 60% to 65% effective, which is about the same efficacy that has been reported with antidepressants [for treatment of hot flashes].”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article is up-front about where this information is coming from and the potential conflicts the sources may have. Still, the story relies heavily on comments from company representatives or researchers involved with the study. The only comment from a truly independent observer doesn’t address the research itself and is about the general need for non-hormonal treatments for hot flashes. A close one, but we’ll call it satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental therapy for type 1 diabetes, widely derided by mainstream diabetes researchers, lowered blood sugar levels to near normal, a small, ongoing trial found. Patients in the trial, whose blood sugar levels have remained near normal for five to eight years, take about one-third less insulin than they did before, reducing their risk of hypoglycemia, in which insulin lowers blood sugar to dangerously low levels.

The experimental treatment, a decades-old generic vaccine for tuberculosis called bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), seems to alter both cellular metabolism and the immune system, said Dr. Denise Faustman of Massachusetts General Hospital, senior author of the study published Thursday in npj Vaccines. “This cheap, old vaccine is lowering blood sugar to levels never achieved before,” she said.

While the results, from only nine patients, must be replicated in a larger study, said Dr. Joseph Bellanti of Georgetown University Medical Center, “if what they found is true, they really have something here.” Bellanti, who was not involved in the research, said the study’s eight-year follow-up and use of a placebo control arm made him “cautiously optimistic” that two doses of the BCG vaccine “can decrease levels of A1c,” a measure of blood glucose that predicts the likelihood of serious complications such as stroke and kidney failure.

JDRF (formerly the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation), the Joslin Diabetes Center, and several university diabetes centers all declined to speak about Faustman’s results. She has been a voice in the diabetes wilderness for nearly two decades, angering the establishment diabetes community by pursuing low-tech research very different from more popular approaches, such as embryonic stem cells and immunosupression.

Critics have gone so far as to send letters to newspapers that covered her work apologizing to patients “on behalf of Dr. Faustman” for “having their expectations cruelly raised.” She has also struggled for funding, receiving much of her research support from the private Iacocca Family Foundation, rather than in federal grants.

In Faustman’s Phase 1 clinical trial, three participants with type 1 diabetes received two doses of BCG vaccine, a month apart. After the vaccine showed signs of effectiveness, an additional six patients were vaccinated five years ago, and 111 more recently. The new paper and a presentation scheduled for a meeting of the American Diabetes Association this weekend focus on the patients who have been followed for more than five years.

All of those patients who received BCG had a statistically significant change in hemoglobin A1c. A normal level is below 6. In the vaccinated patients, A1c levels fell from an average of 7.36 before the first dose to 6.18 after five years, holding almost steady at 6.65 in the eighth year. In patients receiving a sham injection, levels showed almost no change from their initial levels of 7.10: 7.07 in the fifth year and 7.22 in the eighth.

“We wanted it to be good, but we didn’t know it would be this good,” Faustman said.

All of the patients remain on insulin, she said, but less of it. They are also able to monitor their blood sugar less frequently, which can be several times an hour. (The standard of care is a continuous glucose monitor, in which a probe is inserted into the abdomen, plus an insulin pump.) “If we can gradually move people to where they can control their blood sugar, their minute-to-minute lifestyle can improve dramatically,” Faustman said.

The A1c reductions could also bring significant health benefits. Every 10 percent drop, research shows, reduces complications such as stroke and heart attack by about one-third. The BCG vaccine lowered A1c levels 9 percent to 16 percent.

The new paper describes how the BCG vaccine, which has been used for nearly 100 years against tuberculosis and is considered extremely safe, might affect diabetes. According to studies in mice, it has two effects. It alters the immune system so as to increase levels of T regulatory cells; T regs keep other immune cells in check, including those that attack the pancreas’s insulin-making cells — the root cause of type 1 diabetes. In addition, BCG alters metabolism so cells consume higher levels of glucose, drawing more of it out of the blood, in a process called aerobic glycolysis.

“The clinical effects and the proposed mechanism demonstrated are exciting and add to the emerging consensus that the BCG vaccine can have a lasting and valuable impact on the immune system,” said Dr. Mihai Netea of Radboud University Medical Center in the Netherlands, who was not involved in the study.

A Phase 2 clinical trial of BCG is currently underway at Mass. General. It is testing multiple BCG doses in 150 patients with longstanding type 1 diabetes.

Although many studies of BCG are underway around the world in diabetes and other autoimmune diseases, including multiple sclerosis, there has been little interest among U.S. researchers outside Faustman’s lab.

“There is not a lot of enthusiasm because we’re all rewarded for discovering for-profit drugs,” she said. “Potential funders come [to my lab] and ask, ‘How can we make money off this?’”

BCG, whose one licensed manufacturer in the U.S. is Merck subsidiary Organon Teknika, costs less than a dollar a dose. (Faustman used a strain made by Sanofi.) The U.S. market for insulin meters and insulin pumps is $20 billion. “With everyone thinking they need a pump and a meter, if you come along with an inexpensive vaccine that can change this standard of care, of course there will be pushback,” Faustman said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The original journal article on which this story was based includes the researchers’ declaration that they had no conflict of interest. The story includes two sources who were not involved in the research, although one of these sources, a researcher from Radboud University Medical Center in the Netherlands, cannot be considered fully independent, because the quote appears to have been copied from a Massachusetts General Hospital news release about the study (see news release criterion, below).
The story also noted that two diabetes research centers and “several university diabetes centers all declined to speak about Faustman’s results.” This hints at the “controversy” noted in the headline, around the possibility of conflicts of interest that can occur when pharma-supported researchers/advocacy groups criticize this type of research. But the story didn’t explore this sufficiently to prove the researcher’s claim that funders aren’t interested because it has low profit potential, as noted in the summary.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- When a manufacturer recalls an implanted heart defibrillator because of a potential flaw, patients and doctors must decide whether to leave the device in the body or replace it.

A new Canadian study provides the first estimate of the risk of major complications from replacement surgery, important information for patients facing the choice.

"That risk is much higher than we initially thought," said study co-author Dr. Andrew Krahn of the London Health Sciences Center in Ontario. Some patients "might want to hang out and wait and see what happens," Krahn said.

Six percent of the 533 patients who decided to have their recalled defibrillators replaced over a 12-month period suffered major complications, including two deaths, according to a study published in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association.

In contrast, the risk of failure among recently recalled defibrillators has been estimated by the manufacturers at just 0.009 percent to 2.6 percent. And not every failure is deadly.

Implantable defibrillators can be as small as a half dollar and are placed surgically under the skin of the upper chest. Vice President Dick Cheney is among the thousands of Americans who have one.

When the device senses a dangerous and potentially deadly irregular heartbeat, it sends electrical impulses to jolt the heart back to normal. It can correct a heart that beats too fast, as in ventricular tachycardia, or quivers chaotically, a condition known as ventricular fibrillation.

A total of 270,000 defibrillators have been recalled since January 2005, though it is unclear how many were inside patients and how many were on the shelf, according to the Food and Drug Administration. About 80,000 patients received the implantable devices in 2004.

Krahn said the rate of complications from surgical removal will surprise doctors, because replacing a defibrillator is considered a minor procedure.

"It's typically performed with a local anesthetic and sedation. It takes an hour or less," he said. "Most patients return home the same day."

The researchers studied 2,915 patients who were tracked by 17 Canadian hospitals in 2004-05. All the patients had devices that were recalled by manufacturers, Canada's national health system or the FDA.

Only 18 percent decided to undergo replacement surgery. Infection, bruising or bleeding required a follow-up operation in 31 of those patients. Two patients died.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Article notes that the quoted expert has financial ties to device manufacturers, and that he asserts that this research was done without funding from the industry. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Results of a recent study to better understand modifiable factors such as physical activity that may affect a woman's ability to conceive a child suggest that walking may help women to improve their chances of becoming pregnant.

AMHERST, Mass. - Results of a recent study to better understand modifiable factors such as physical activity that may affect a woman's ability to conceive a child suggest that walking may help women to improve their chances of becoming pregnant.

The study was conducted by recent graduate Lindsey Russo and her advisor Brian Whitcomb, associate professor of biostatistics and epidemiology in the School of Public Health and Health Sciences at the University of Massachusetts Amherst.

Russo and Whitcomb's findings among healthy women ages 18 to 40 years old with a history of one or two pregnancy losses are based on their secondary analysis of the multi-site Effects of Aspirin in Gestation and Reproduction (EAGeR) study. It is led by Enrique Schisterman of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. Results are in the current online issue of Human Reproduction.

Russo says, "One of our main findings is that there was no overall relationship between most types of physical activity and the likelihood of becoming pregnant for women who had already had one or two pregnancy losses, except for walking, which was associated with higher likelihood of becoming pregnant among women who were overweight or obese."

Whitcomb, whose research on the determinants of fertility and pregnancy outcomes usually involves studying biomarkers at the molecular level, adds, "Lifestyle is definitely relevant to these outcomes because it can have an effect at the molecular level. What we eat and what we do are potential factors we can change to shape our health. So this sort of research is important because it helps provide information on the things people can actually do something about."

Further, he says, "We were happy to be able to add scientific evidence to general recommendations about physical activity. This is especially true for the results about walking for even limited blocks of time. Walking has great potential as a lifestyle change because of its low cost and availability."

For the 1,214 women in the study, the association of walking with the ability to become pregnant, known as fecundability, varied significantly by body mass index, the authors report. Among overweight/obese women, walking at least 10 minutes at a time was associated with improvement in fecundability. Further, in statistically adjusted models, women reporting more than four hours a week of vigorous activity had significantly higher pregnancy chances compared to no vigorous activity.

Moderate activity, sitting and other activity categories were not associated with fecundability overall or in BMI-stratified analyses, they add. Russo and Whitcomb say one finding that is still not clear is the different associations related to vigorous compared to moderate and low-intensity activities. Whitcomb says, "We don't know what to make of the finding that high intensity physical activity may have different biological effects than walking, but our study doesn't offer enough detail to get at why vigorous activity would work differently than other levels."

Among a number of cautions the researchers point to in this work is that physical activity is related to other behaviors and lifestyle factors, and women who are more physically active may be different from women who are less active in many ways. Russo says, "We did our best to try to account for the differences and to address them statistically."

The researchers also note that the overall generalizability of this work is limited because the study population may not be representative of the general population with regard to fecundability, and exercise habits may differ in women with prior miscarriage compared to those without.

Whitcomb says another way in which this study is distinct from other work in this area has to do with who was included in the study. The EAGeR trial focused on women with a history of one or two prior pregnancy losses. However, he adds, "We were happy to be able to conduct research considering women having the most difficulty getting and staying pregnant, and to provide messages about common lifestyle factors they may be able to address."

The researchers conclude that "these findings provide positive evidence for the benefits of physical activity in women attempting pregnancy, especially for walking among those with higher BMI. Further study is necessary to clarify possible mechanisms through which walking and vigorous activity might affect time-to-pregnancy."
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The study funders are listed on a sidebar on the EurekAlert! site, where the release is hosted. We encourage news releases to include funders and any conflicts of interest in the body of the release so that the information is carried over by news organizations or blogs running the release verbatim.
The published paper lists no conflicts of interest among the authors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The effect was so marked that the trial was stopped early for ethical reasons, so that patients in the control group could be offered the new drug. Because of that, researchers do not yet know the median survival.

“You don’t need to wait for 50 percent of 675 patients to die to conclude that one drug is much better than the other,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas of the University of California, Los Angeles, who was an investigator in the trial and has been a consultant to the developer of the drug.

The other new drug, ipilimumab (pronounced ip-ee-LIM-yoo-mab), when combined with dacarbazine, extended median survival to 11.2 months compared with 9.1 months for those who received dacarbazine alone. After three years, 20.8 percent of those who got that new drug were alive, compared with 12.2 percent of those in the control group.

The results of both trials were published online by The New England Journal of Medicine in addition to being presented here.

To be sure, more than half of patients with metastatic melanoma would not be helped all that much by either drug. Experts say more needs to be done, especially since melanoma affects more young adults than many other types of cancer.

Even if the new drugs allow patients with metastatic melanoma to live two years, “Two years is nothing when you’re 30,” said Dr. Anna C. Pavlick, head of the melanoma program at New York University.

Still, doctors and patient groups welcomed the progress because until now treatment of melanoma that had spread beyond the skin to distant organs “was terrible even by routine cancer standards,” said Dr. Vernon K. Sondak, chairman of cutaneous oncology at the Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Fla.

Also, the number of melanoma cases has been rising, unlike for many other types of cancer. Doctors say that is because of unprotected sun exposure years ago, the proliferation of tanning salons and perhaps more attention to detecting the disease.

There were about 68,000 new cases of melanoma and about 8,700 deaths last year in the United States, up from 48,000 cases and 7,700 deaths in 2000, according to the American Cancer Society. Particularly fast increases have occurred among people older than 65 and among women 15 to 39 years old.

Vemurafenib is the latest so-called targeted therapy, which inhibits the effects of genetic mutations that spur tumor growth and spread. In particular, the drug counters the effect of a mutation in a gene called B-RAF that was discovered in 2002 to be common in melanomas. (The drug’s name comes from V600E mutation in RAF.)

The drug, which is taken orally twice a day, would be used only by the roughly half of melanoma patients whose tumors have this mutation. The drug significantly shrinks tumors in about half of these patients — or about a quarter of all melanoma patients.

It was developed by Roche and Plexxikon, a biotechnology company in Berkeley, Calif., that was recently acquired by Daiichi Sankyo of Japan. The drug is expected to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration within a few months.

Ipilimumab, the other new drug, releases a brake on the body’s immune system, allowing it to more effectively attack the tumor. Developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, it was approved in March and is sold under the name Yervoy.

A series of articles in The New York Times last year followed the development of vemurafenib, then known as PLX4032, and recounted how some patients close to death seemed to make miraculous recoveries.

The effect, however, typically lasts only about seven months before the cancer starts to grow again, though some patients benefit for more than two years.

S. Taylor Chance, a 67-year-old real estate agent in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., has been taking vemurafenib in a clinical trial since March 2010. “If it weren’t for the trial I wouldn’t be here,” she said.

It has not been all good. Ms. Chance said the drug caused such extreme pain at one point that “I called in the children and said, ‘I’m done, I can’t do this any more.’ ” But she had her dose reduced and took other medications for the pain.

In the trial, sponsored by Roche and led by Dr. Paul B. Chapman of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, 38 percent of participants had to stop taking the drug or lower the dose because of side effects, including rash and joint pain. Many patients get minor skin cancers that can be removed by dermatologists.

The trial of ipilimumab, paid for by Bristol-Myers, involved 502 patients with late-stage melanoma.

Last year at this conference, researchers presented results of a trial showing a survival advantage for patients who had undergone a previous treatment. The new trial of this drug, by contrast, involved patients who were getting treated for the first time.

While the extension of median survival of two months, from about 9 months to about 11 months, was less than some experts expected, researchers said the real benefit was that a small number of patients, perhaps 10 to 20 percent, could live a long time.

Because it unleashes the immune system, ipilimumab can have serious side effects. In the latest trial, a big one was liver damage.

A course of treatment of ipilimumab costs $120,000. The price of vemurafenib has not been announced, but is expected to be at least tens of thousands of dollars per year.

Doctors are eager to try the two drugs together. Roche and Bristol-Myers said Thursday that they would conduct such tests.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent sources cited.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Over the past two decades, the number of Americans having total hip replacements has more than doubled, to more than 300,000 a year. Though most patients eventually walk again without pain or the aid of a cane, recovery and rehabilitation can be rigorous, painful and lengthy.

The surgery is extensive: As its name suggests, it involves removing the joint — the damaged bone and cartilage — and replacing it with prosthetic parts made of metal, plastic or ceramics. Typically, surgeons enter the joint from the rear, which requires cutting through muscle and cartilage. But with a relatively new procedure, surgeons enter from the front and only stretch the muscles aside, avoiding the cutting and minimizing pain and recovery time. According to those who use this anterior technique, the benefits are substantial.

Anthony Unger, medical director at the Institute of Bone and Joint Health at Sibley Memorial Hospital and a clinical professor of orthopedic surgery at George Washington University Hospital, says the anterior approach is “truly minimally invasive.” Unger, who has done about 4,000 hip replacements over 26 years and has used the anterior technique for the past eight years, says “patients have better overall functionality, can sleep on their sides and be confident the new hip won’t dislocate.”

But, as with many transitions in medical techniques, some surgeons have been reluctant to change. Although agencies and hospitals don’t track hip replacements by the type of procedure used, Unger says that, based on statistics from the American Association of Hip and Knee Surgeons, only 20 percent of its members choose the anterior approach.

Joshua Jacobs, a vice president of the American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons and chairman of orthopedic surgery at Rush University in Chicago, says the AAOS doesn’t “endorse or promote one specific technique or procedure over another.” Jacobs prefers the posterior approach, which he says has been reliable for him.

He says that while he’s heard about the benefits of the anterior approach, he’s “not aware of a randomized, controlled trial comparing the posterior and anterior approach that shows a definite superiority of one over the other.” What’s key is that “surgeons need to do the approach they’re most comfortable with to get the best outcomes.”

A study by Unger in the Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery in 2011 found that with the anterior procedure, there was less muscle damage and inflammation both in the immediate postoperative period and two days later than with the posterior approach.

Others surgeons who prefer the anterior procedure say it preserves more of the normal anatomy, which also means fewer medications and shorter hospital stays. Michael Bollinger, who operates at Palm Drive Hospital in Sebastopol, Calif., switched methods a few years ago.

With the anterior approach, Bollinger says, “we can take

X-rays during the operation, to see if the new hip is placed correctly and adjust it, when necessary.” Many surgeons use a special operating table that makes this possible.

Although surgeons can also take X-rays during the posterior procedure, it is much more difficult, and they wait until patients are in the recovery room, where, Bollinger says, “there’s not much that can be done.” He explains that while the body “tolerates an imperfect alignment pretty well, if a new hip gets dislocated, it’s often because it’s not in perfectly.”

Robert Saunders, a nurse at Alta Bates Summit Medical Center in Berkeley, Calif., sees about 200 hip replacement patients a year. He says that “nurses love the anterior approach” because there’s less worry about dislocating the joint. “With the posterior approach, we have to spread patients’ legs apart and strap them to a pillow to keep the new joint in place. If they want to move or roll over, they can’t,” he says.

Saunders says the anterior patients also have an easier time with physical therapy, which can start the same day as the surgery. “Those who’ve had the posterior procedure have a lot of pain, since, when they sit up, they’re right on top the incision,” he explains.

Patrick Kennelly, a physical therapist with Smartherapy in Chevy Chase, says people who have the anterior procedure “don’t feel so weak, because their hip muscles haven’t been cut. If they’ve had the posterior procedure, even if they don’t consciously feel weak, they tend to shift their weight onto one foot and teeter like [Charlie] Chaplin.”

Given benefits such as these, why haven’t more surgeons switched methods? Unger says that most surgeons have used the posterior approach for years, have fine results, and see no need to switch. Also, he says, they work in a “very high-stress, high-liability environment. For this reason, new techniques are adapted slowly with extreme care, and in some cases, not at all.”

Unger adds that surgeons are naturally cautious and typically wait to see results from many studies before they switch methods. Besides his study, there have only been a few others. One, a prospective, randomized study by William Barrett, an orthopedic surgeon in the Seattle area, compared the two approaches in a peer-reviewed paper he presented at the 2012 annual AAOS meeting and found benefits with the anterior approach.

Another obstacle to the widespread use of the newer approach is that if established surgeons want to switch, they face time and cost constraints. They must get training in classes and cadaver labs, and the learning curve can be steep. Unger says his was relatively short — about 20 cases. Others say it took about 50 cases.

And this creates economic issues. “If you’re a busy surgeon, you have a volume to maintain,” Bollinger says, “and it’s hard to go from doing three a day to one during the learning period.”

Christopher Chen, a surgeon who uses the anterior approach at Alta Bates Summit, adds that most doctors “still use the posterior approach because it’s the one they were taught.” And, he says, the majority of younger surgeons learn the older approach because established surgeons are typically the ones who staff the residency training programs and demonstrate the method they know best.

Most surgeons don’t profit from choosing one approach over another, Chen says. “If there is a financial incentive” for promoting the newer technique, he says, “it is that more patients will want the anterior approach, so that the surgeon does more surgeries, and therefore collects more professional fees for that.”

William Hamilton, who operates at the Anderson Orthopaedic Clinic at Inova Mt. Vernon Hospital, trains young surgeons to do the anterior approach in a year-long hip and knee replacement fellowship program. Hamilton says that “during this time, they’re taught both approaches.” But he adds that “since 2009, of the 13 fellows he trained, 12 use the anterior procedure as their primary approach in their practices.”

Hamilton says that “a decade ago, very few residencies and fellowships taught the anterior approach. Now, several institutions around the country have at least one surgeon teaching it. So when students leave and begin their practices, it’s no longer foreign to them.”

Hamilton, who has performed 1,100 anterior procedures and strongly supports the method, says that despite growing interest, “it will take a generation of new surgeons” before use of the anterior approach is widespread.

Many patients aren’t aware of the option. The case of Daniel Ellsberg — who in 1971 released the Pentagon Papers, a secret study about U.S. involvement in Vietnam — is instructive. His hip had been hurting for about a year, and when he decided to have surgery, his primary-care physician recommended a respected surgeon. Just days before the operation last July, a friend told him about the anterior approach.

“I’d never heard of it, and neither my doctor nor surgeon mentioned it. I called the surgeon’s office, learned he did the posterior procedure, asked for and got a recommendation for one who performs the anterior one, and my experience was amazing. The same day as the operation, I walked down the hall with a walker. I was home in three days, and a week later, [I] walked one or two blocks without pain or a cane. In a month, I bodysurfed at the beach,” says Ellsberg, who is 81 .

Margot Machol, who is two decades younger and lives in Washington, had both hips replaced — the first with the posterior procedure several years ago, the second with the anterior procedure last October. Unger performed both surgeries.

“After the first, I needed pain medicine when I came home from the hospital. Also, I had a long list of restrictions of what I could and couldn’t do so the hip wouldn’t pop out. For six weeks, I had to sleep on my back, couldn’t cross my legs and wasn’t able to drive.

“After the second, I didn’t take any pain pills once I was home, slept on my side soon after the surgery, had almost no rules and drove my car in two weeks. I even wanted to ski over Christmas, because I felt fine,” Machol says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes a wide variety of sources. We wish that more of the “old guard” were represented, but we give it a pass here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cooling babies deprived of oxygen at birth (perinatal asphyxia) can reduce the number of children who develop epilepsy later in childhood, according to a new study published in the journal Epilepsia.

The study has been led by Marianne Thoresen, Professor of Neonatal Neuroscience, from the Bristol Medical School: Translational Health Sciences at the University of Bristol.

It is known that newborn babies who suffer perinatal asphyxia may develop permanent brain injury resulting in cerebral palsy or other conditions, like epilepsy. Until recently, 20 to 30 per cent of these patients would develop epilepsy and many need regular antiepileptic treatment. The patients' cognitive performance, life quality and life expectancy is also affected by having the condition.

The research team has developed and delivered cooling treatment, known as therapeutic hypothermia, for newborns who suffer lack of oxygen during birth. For up to eight years, the researchers followed 165 infants who were born in the south west and who received cooling therapy at St Michael's Hospital, Bristol, part of University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust. The study examined how many babies were diagnosed with epilepsy and how many are on regular antiepileptic drug treatment at two and four to eight years of age.

The research found that babies, born after 2007, who received the cooling treatment, had much less epilepsy than before cooling treatment was introduced. At two years, seven per cent of the children had an epilepsy diagnosis, however, far fewer, only two per cent, were on regular antiepileptic drugs.

The study showed that more children had epilepsy when they reached the age of four to eight years with seven per cent on regular medication. However, these are very low numbers needing antiepileptic treatment compared to before cooling treatment was introduced as standard of care.

Before therapeutic hypothermia was introduced, poor outcome meaning death or moderate or severe disability was around 66 per cent (32 per cent death and 34 per cent surviving with disability).

In this cohort born after 2007, the number of children with poor outcome is lower at 34 per cent (11 per cent death and 23 per cent survived with disability). Also, the severity of cerebral palsy is milder and seven out of ten are able to walk. Even if a lesser severity of perinatal asphyxia is accounted for, cooling therapy has increased the number of healthy survivors and there are very few children with epilepsy needing drug treatment.

Professor Marianne Thoresen said: "Even if we account for a lesser severity of perinatal asphyxia, our research has shown that therapeutic hypothermia reduces the number of children who develop epilepsy later in childhood. Cooling treatment also reduces the number and severity of cerebral palsy and increases the number of patients who survive normally."

The research was funded by Sparks UK; University of Bristol's Alumni Foundation; The Laerdal Foundation for Acute Medicine, Norway; University of Oslo, and a private donation.

'Reduced infancy and childhood epilepsy following hypothermia-treated neonatal encephalopathy' by Xun Liu, Sally Jary, Frances Cowan and Marianne Thoresen in Epilepsia
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding sources are noted and there is no apparent conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ever since Alzheimer’s disease was described by a German doctor, Alois Alzheimer, in 1906, there was only one way to know for sure that a person had it. A pathologist, examining the brain after death, would see microscopic black freckles, plaque, sticking to brain slices like barnacles. Without plaque, a person with did not have the disease.

There is no treatment yet to stop or slow the progress of Alzheimer’s. But every major drug company has new experimental drugs it hopes will work, particularly if they are started early. The questions though, are who should be getting the drugs and who really has Alzheimer’s or is developing it?

Even at the best medical centers, doctors often are wrong. Twenty percent of people with — a and intellectual functions — who received a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s, did not have it. There was no plaque when their brains were biopsied. Half with milder memory loss, thought to be on their way to Alzheimer’s, do not get the disease. And with such a high rate of misdiagnosis, some who are mistakenly told that they have Alzheimer’s are not treated for conditions, like depression or low levels of thyroid hormone or drug side effects and interactions, that are causing their memory problems.

Brain scans that showed plaque could help with some fundamental questions — who has or is getting Alzheimer’s, whether the disease ever stops or slows down on its own and even whether plaque is the main culprit causing brain cell death.

Dr. Skovronsky thought he had a way to make scans work. He and his team had developed a dye that could get into the brain and stick to plaque. They labeled the dye with a commonly used radioactive tracer and used a PET scanner to directly see plaque in a living person’s brain. But the technology and the dye itself were so new they had to be rigorously tested.

And that is what brought Dr. Skovronsky, a thin and eager-looking 37-year-old, to his e-mail that recent day.

Five years ago, Dr. Skovronsky, who named his company Avid in part because that is what he is, had taken a big personal and professional gamble. He left academia and formed Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, based in , to develop his radioactive dye and designed a study with patients to prove it worked.

Hospice patients were going to die soon and so, he reasoned, why not ask them to have scans and then brain autopsies afterward to see if the scans showed just what a pathologist would see. Some patients would be demented, others not.

Some predicted his study would be impossible, if not unethical. But the F.D.A. said it wanted proof that the plaque on PET scans was the same as plaque in a brain autopsy.

The Avid study was designed to provide that proof. And the full results, contained in the e-mail message sent that day, May 14, were the moment of truth. When he saw them, Dr. Skovronsky said they were everything he had hoped for.

“This is about as good as it gets,” he said that day.

He went into a rotunda that serves as Avid’s lunchroom to tell the company’s 50 employees. “This is a big day for us,” he continued. “I thought about what I would say, but I have totally forgotten it.”

His employees applauded. Then they had champagne in blue plastic cups.

The type of scans used in this study, PET scans, are expensive and patients have to go to a scanning center, get injected with a radioactive dye, wait for the dye to reach their brain and then have a scan.

Other tests are being studied — ones that look for amyloid in cerebrospinal fluid that bathes the brain; scans that look for shrinkage of the brain in areas needed for memory and reasoning; PET scans that look for uptake of glucose, a cellular fuel, to show areas where the brain was active and where it was not. The tests, though, were not necessarily specific for Alzheimer’s and none had been studied to see if they accurately predicted plaque on autopsy.

Earlier this decade, two scientists at the developed an amyloid dye that while not practical for widespread use, stunned scientists by showing it seemed possible to see amyloid in a living brain.

The researchers, Chester Mathis and William Klunk, began their work two decades ago, persevering even though they had no research money. In the first 10 years, they tested more than 400 compounds. When they finally found one that seemed promising, they tested more than 300 variations.

“On and on it went,” Dr. Mathis said.

Finally, in late 2001, they began working with collaborators in to test their dye in humans.

On 2002, the Swedish researchers injected the first Alzheimer’s patient with the dye, known as Compound B, and scanned the patient’s brain.

It worked, the Swedish doctors told Dr. Mathis in an excited phone call.

A PET scan showed amyloid exactly where it would be expected. The Swedish doctors were convinced they were seeing actual plaque. They told Dr. Mathis it was time to celebrate.

But Dr. Mathis worried. What if the same pattern occurred in people without Alzheimer’s?

Two weeks later, he got another call from Sweden. His colleagues had scanned a person without Alzheimer’s. There was no sign of telltale plaques.

His sweet reward came in July 2002, when the scans were shown to an audience of 5,000 scientists at an international conference on Alzheimer’s.

“There was an audible gasp,” Dr. Mathis said. “The field was taken aback.”

Yet there was a problem. Pittsburgh Compound B used carbon 11 as its radioactive tracer. And its half-life is 20 minutes. Researchers have to make it in a cyclotron in the basement of a medical center, quickly attach it to the dye, dash over to a patient lying in a scanner, and inject it.

And a critical question remained: Was a PET scan with the Pittsburgh dye really equivalent to a brain autopsy?

Meanwhile, others, including Dr. Skovronsky, had another idea — use fluorine 18, with a half-life of about two hours. It could be made in the morning, and used that afternoon. And fluorine 18 is made routinely for two million PET scans each year.

Dr. Skovronsky, starting at the and then at Avid, worked with a University of Pennsylvania chemist, Hank Kung, for nine years to find and develop the radioactive dye. The university had the patent; Avid licensed it. Finally, on June 8, 2007, a patient at Johns Hopkins had a scan with their compound. Plaque lit up.

Most of the time, the scans were as expected — those with Alzheimer’s had lots of plaque, those with normal memories had little if any and those with mild memory impairment were in between.

But about 20 percent of people over 60 with normal memories had plaque.

“Then we looked more carefully,” Dr. Skovronsky said. “The 20 percent who had amyloid, though they were still statistically in the normal range, did worse on every memory test than the control group.”

What, Dr. Skovronsky asked, did that mean? Were they starting to develop Alzheimer’s? If so, could dementia be stalled if there were drugs to stop amyloid from accumulating?

The definition of Alzheimer’s is plaque plus memory loss and other symptoms of mental decline. But what is not known because no one could follow the development of plaque before a person died, was whether people with plaque and normal memories were developing Alzheimer’s.

“We’ve always assumed the pathology has been there, that the plaque has been there years before symptoms,” said Dr. Steven T. DeKosky, an Alzheimer’s researcher who is vice president and dean at the School of Medicine. “But we never had a way to detect plaque in living persons,” he said. And so plaque in the brains of people with normal memories has been a puzzle.

“Over the next couple of years, we will find out what it means.”

On Oct. 23, 2008, Avid and two other companies, and , that are developing fluorine 18-based dyes for amyloid scans, got a pointed question from an advisory committee to the F.D.A.: How do you know that what you are seeing on scans is the same as the amyloid you see on autopsy?

It seemed impossible to answer. If researchers wait for their subjects to die before comparing scans with autopsies they can be waiting a long time.

But Avid had a plan, and the committee agreed in principle that it would work. Hospice patients would be study subjects, some with dementia, some without. All would have memory tests and brain scans. After death, their brains would be autopsied. Avid suggested that after the first 35 died, there should be enough data to know if the scans gave a true picture of the pathology. Then the F.D.A. could decide if the results were convincing enough to approve the dye for marketing.

Some doctors had misgivings, wondering how they could ask people who were sick and dying to be scanned just to help Alzheimer’s research. But, they found, most patients and their families agreed and said they were grateful to have been asked.

That was evident on May 19, when Dr. Skovronsky gave a lunch for patients’ families in City, Ariz., to thank them for participating.

“It really touched my heart to be in this,” said Dorothy Wall, whose husband, Claude E. Wall, died of in Sun City on March 3.

“Something bad happens, and now something good happens.”

Late last year, Avid saw the initial results of its hospice study — data from the first six patients. Then, as more patients were studied, the data from them were held by a company that would analyze it. Avid did not see the results until the study was completed. But those first six were encouraging.

A man diagnosed with Alzheimer’s and cancer had a scan showing no plaque. His autopsy did not show it, either. The diagnosis was wrong. Another man with and dementia had been diagnosed as having dementia solely due to Parkinson’s. His scan showed amyloid. So did the autopsy. He had Alzheimer’s. A woman with mild memory loss had a scan showing no amyloid. Her autopsy also found none. Three others had clinical diagnoses of Alzheimer’s, confirmed by scans and autopsies.

Finally, on May 14, 35 patients had been scanned and autopsied. The Avid study was complete, and the full data will be presented at the meeting next month. Other companies, still doing their studies, did not yet have data to examine.

And Dr. Skovronsky got that e-mail message.

“This is going to have a big impact on Alzheimer’s disease, guys,” he told his staff that day.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There are outside sources, but they aren’t used to good effect. The comment from "Dr. Michael Weiner of the University of California, San Francisco, who is not part of the company’s study and directs a federal project to study ways of diagnosing Alzheimer’s" is couched in such a way that it makes us think he could be commenting on any breakthrough that would lead to sharper detection of Alzheimer’s, not necessarily this study. Did he actually review the study results? Has he seen the results of similar studies? Does this work perhaps advance his work in some way? None of that is clear. Dr. Mathis is really only used to create another eureka moment. A good question for both Weiner and Mathis would have been, "What is it exactly about this scan that makes you think it rises above all the other detection methods being studied? And how many years away from a clinical application are we in the best and worst case scenarios? Ten to 20 years? 20 to 30 years? Not in our lifetime?" Nonetheless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on at least approaching independent sources. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 17, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Less invasive biopsies done with the help of imaging to guide the needle now make up the majority of biopsies being done, a new study finds.

In fact, the use of these minimally invasive biopsies increased from 59 percent to 67 percent of all biopsies between 1997 and 2008, a trend which is likely to continue, one expert noted. A biopsy involves the removal of tissue or fluids to test for disease.

"Doing image-guided biopsy allows more definitive diagnosis and shorter hospital stays," said Dr. Robert Quencer, chair of radiology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, who was not involved on the study.

In addition, image-guided biopsies are more accurate, Quencer said. "This is a trend throughout the whole country. I doubt there is any variation to this in any major medical center."

The report is published online and in the September print edition of Radiology.

For the study, a team led by Dr. Sharon W. Kwan, a radiology resident at the University of California, San Francisco, looked at biopsies done among Medicare patients from 1997 through 2008.

During that time, the number of biopsies increased from 1,380 per 100,000 in 1997 to 1,945 per 100,000 in 2008. That's an annual growth of 3 percent in number of biopsies, the researchers noted.

Moreover, by 2008, 67 percent of these biopsies were being done through the skin with the help of CT scans, ultrasound and MRI, Kwan's group found.

"We also found that the use of imaging guidance increased over this time period, most likely because the technique enables more efficient and safe targeting of lesions," Kwan said in a news release.

This increase in less-invasive biopsies went along with a decrease in the number of more-invasive biopsies and through-the-skin biopsies where no imaging was used, the researchers found.

The only two areas where needle biopsies were not the majority of biopsies done were biopsies of lymph nodes and soft tissues. For these areas, open biopsies are easier to do and need less imaging guidance, Kwan's team noted.

Quencer thinks the use of image-guided biopsies will continue to increase over time, even for lymph nodes and soft tissues. "In time, I would expect 80 to 90 percent of biopsies will be image-guided biopsies," he said.

For more information on biopsies, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent expert was quoted, although not to provide any data-driven evidence.  And his quote, "I doubt there is variation to this in any major medical center" begs verification. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If you need a reason to become a dog lover, how about their ability to help protect kids from allergies and obesity?

A new University of Alberta study showed that babies from families with pets--70 per cent of which were dogs--showed higher levels of two types of microbes associated with lower risks of allergic disease and obesity.

But don't rush out to adopt a furry friend just yet.

"There's definitely a critical window of time when gut immunity and microbes co-develop, and when disruptions to the process result in changes to gut immunity," said Anita Kozyrskyj, a U of A pediatric epidemiologist and one of the world's leading researchers on gut microbes--microorganisms or bacteria that live in the digestive tracts of humans and animals.

The latest findings from Kozyrskyj and her team's work on fecal samples collected from infants registered in the Canadian Healthy Infant Longitudinal Development study build on two decades of research that show children who grow up with dogs have lower rates of asthma.

The theory is that exposure to dirt and bacteria early in life--for example, in a dog's fur and on its paws--can create early immunity, though researchers aren't sure whether the effect occurs from bacteria on the furry friends or from human transfer by touching the pets, said Kozyrskyj.

Her team of 12, including study co-author and U of A post-doctoral fellow Hein Min Tun, take the science one step closer to understanding the connection by identifying that exposure to pets in the womb or up to three months after birth increases the abundance of two bacteria, Ruminococcus and Oscillospira, which have been linked with reduced childhood allergies and obesity, respectively.

"The abundance of these two bacteria were increased twofold when there was a pet in the house," said Kozyrskyj, adding that the pet exposure was shown to affect the gut microbiome indirectly--from dog to mother to unborn baby--during pregnancy as well as during the first three months of the baby's life. In other words, even if the dog had been given away for adoption just before the woman gave birth, the healthy microbiome exchange could still take place.

The study also showed that the immunity-boosting exchange occurred even in three birth scenarios known for reducing immunity, as shown in Kozyrskyj's previous work: C-section versus vaginal delivery, antibiotics during birth and lack of breastfeeding.

What's more, Kozyrskyj's study suggested that the presence of pets in the house reduced the likelihood of the transmission of vaginal GBS (group B Strep) during birth, which causes pneumonia in newborns and is prevented by giving mothers antibiotics during delivery.

It's far too early to predict how this finding will play out in the future, but Kozyrskyj doesn't rule out the concept of a "dog in a pill" as a preventive tool for allergies and obesity.

"It's not far-fetched that the pharmaceutical industry will try to create a supplement of these microbiomes, much like was done with probiotics," she said.

The study, funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Allergy, Genes and Environment Network (AllerGen NCE), was published in the journal Microbiome, along with an editorial in Nature.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release tells us that the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Allergy, Genes and Environment Network (AllerGen NCE) funded the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Two new drugs using very different scientific approaches can extend survival among patients with the deadliest form of skin cancer, offering the first new hope for real progress in many years.

Advanced melanoma patients taking an experimental pill, vemurafenib, developed by Roche and Daiichi Sankyo were 63 percent less likely to die than patients given chemotherapy, according to a new trial presented on Sunday at a meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology in Chicago.

Dr. Paul Chapman of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and the study’s lead investigator called the results an “unprecedented level of difference” for patients with advanced melanoma, who typically survive just eight months on current treatments.

In a separate study presented at ASCO, previously untreated people with advanced melanoma treated with Bristol-Myers Squibb’s Yervoy, or ipilimumab, plus chemotherapy lived an average of two months longer than people who got chemotherapy alone.

Yervoy works by spurring the immune system to fight off the cancer. Vemurafenib is designed for use in patients with tumors that have a mutation in a gene known as BRAF that allows melanoma cells to grow. About half of all melanomas have the genetic aberration.

The Roche trial included 675 patients with previously untreated, inoperable late-stage metastatic melanoma with the BRAF mutation.

After a median three months of treatment, vemurafenib patients also had a 74 percent reduction in the risk of cancer progression compared to dacarbazine.

“This is a huge difference,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas, an oncologist at the University of California, Los Angeles, who has studied vemurafenib. “Even if it diminishes over time, who cares?”

“Nearly half of patients treated with the Roche drug had tumor shrinkage, compared with 5.5 percent with chemotherapy.

Side effects included skin rashes and joint pain. About 18 percent of patients developed a low-grade skin cancer.

More than 70,000 people in the United States and 160,000 worldwide are diagnosed with melanoma each year, according to the American Cancer Society. The five-year survival rate for the aggressive cancer is just 15 percent.

Analysts, on average, have forecast annual vemurafenib sales of $452 million by 2015 and expect Yervoy annual sales of $1.26 billion, according to Thomson Pharma.

ISI Group analyst Mark Schoenebaum said although the vemurafenib results look the most encouraging, the findings are unlikely to make a difference for current sales estimates, since virtually all eligible patients will be treated with both drugs, either in sequence or in combination.

MORE HELP FOR MELANOMA PATIENTS

Roche expects U.S. and European regulators to decide on approval of its drug before the end of the year.

Bristol-Myers’ Yervoy was approved in March for patients with inoperable or metastatic melanoma, based on a previous study which showed the drug given alone extended survival by four months in patients who had failed other treatments.

“What was interesting about this study was not only was it the second one to show a benefit,” but that the improvement “took place even in the presence of dacarbazine chemotherapy,” Dr. Jedd Wolchok of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, who presented the study at the meeting, said in a telephone interview.

“We worried a lot that chemotherapy could be immunosuppressive,” Wolchok said, noting that that might explain why the average survival benefit was two months instead of four.

“We don’t know what dacarbazine did to the ipilimumab, but we do know even in the presence of dacarbazine, ipilimumab still produced a durable response and extended survival.”

Doctors said taken together the new studies offer new options for patients.

“This is really unprecedented time to have two new approaches to treat advanced melanoma,” said Dr. Lynn Schuchter of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, a melanoma expert who moderated a panel discussion of the drugs.

“Once you finally understand what is driving the disease we can develop therapies that are more effective,” she said.

She and others expect vemurafenib to be approved this year. Meanwhile, doctors are already working out treatment strategies.

For patients who are stable with slow-growing tumors, Chapman said he would start them off on ipilimumab.

“That is a drug that can take a while to work, so if the person has time I would rather give him essentially two shots on goal rather than one.”

For advanced patients who need a quick response, he would use vemurafenib first.

Schuchter, who was not involved with the studies, said now the future is going to be to build upon this success and combine therapies.

“Cancer cells outwit us — they are brilliant — and figure out other pathways,” she said.

Bristol-Myers and Roche announced earlier this week a collaboration to evaluate the combination of Yervoy and vemurafenib as a therapy for metastatic melanoma.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent source – a panel moderator – and a stock analyst were quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Three long-awaited studies have shown that mechanically removing a blood clot from a stroke patient’s brain is no more useful than the older treatment of giving an IV dose of a clot-dissolving drug to the whole body.

The results of the clinical trials, presented this week at a meeting in Hawaii, shocked and surprised stroke physicians. Many had already adopted the more aggressive strategy over the past decade.

“For the stroke field, this is a really big deal,” Walter Koroshetz, deputy director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, said of the findings, which were presented over three days at the International Stroke Conference in Hono­lulu.

NINDS paid for two of the trials, one of which cost $27 million. One study took eight years to complete because it was so difficult to enroll patients willing to take the chance that they would be randomly assigned to get the older treatment.

Practitioners hoped that “endovascular treatment,” in which a catheter is threaded into a blocked artery and the clot pulled out, would do for stroke patients what it has done for heart attack patients. In them, going after clots with angioplasty balloons and stents is clearly more effective than giving clot-dissolving drugs through a vein in the arm.

“We did this study with the strong expectation that we would find a positive benefit. We were surprised,” said Joseph P. Broderick of the University of Cincinnati Neuroscience Institute, who headed one of the studies.

His view was echoed by Alfonso Ciccone, a neurologist from Milan who led a clinical trial in Italy: “We were surprised. We wanted the superiority of endovascular treatment.”

Whether the findings will cause physicians to abandon the practice is uncertain.

Insurance companies and Medicare, the health insurer for the elderly, already cover the endovascular procedure. It costs about $23,000 compared with $11,000 for acute stroke treatment using intravenous clot-dissolving drugs, known as thrombolytics.

Further, many practitioners think that newer clot-retrieving devices work better than the ones used in the three trials. Because endovascular procedures were shown to be no more dangerous than IV thrombolytics, physicians may continue to perform them and assume the outcomes can only get better.

“Will it change practice? That’s a good question,” said Koroshetz. “The payers may look at this and wonder if they should continue paying for these procedures. If it gets to that point, then clearly things will change.”

Stroke is the fourth-leading cause of death in the United States. About 800,000 people suffer a stroke each year, and about 130,000 die.

Nearly 90 percent of strokes occur when a clot blocks an artery in the brain, starving the region downstream of blood and oxygen. If flow isn’t restored quickly, brain tissue and the functions it controls — movement, speech, cognition — are damaged or can die.

Over the past 20 years, studies showed that if a person having a stroke gets a thrombolytic drug within three hours of when the symptoms start (4½ hours for certain patients), the process can be reversed and a lifetime of disability avoided. Later than that, little is gained; the brain cells are too damaged to survive. In fact, giving the drugs too late can make matters worse. Uncontrolled bleeding can occur as the dying tissue breaks down.

Early observations suggested that approaching the clot with a catheter and either injecting clot-dissolving drugs into it or snagging it and pulling it out produced better results. In 2004, the FDA began approving use of the catheters in the brain because they had been proved useful elsewhere in the body. The three studies reported this week (which will eventually be published in the New England Journal of Medicine) tested the hypothesis in a rigorous way.

In the largest trial, called IMS III, all patients got the IV clot-dissolving drug tPA within three hours of the start of stroke symptoms. Half were then assigned to get an imaging study that looked at the arteries of the brain to see whether a blockage remained. If it did, the doctors went after it with an endovascular procedure. The other half of the patients got standard treatment, which didn’t include the procedure. Forty-one percent of patients recovered completely in the endovascular group and 39 percent recovered completely in the control group, outcomes that were no different statistically. Death within three months was essentially the same too: 19 percent vs. 22 percent.

In the Italian study, called SYNTHESIS Expansion, 362 stroke patients were randomly assigned to get either IV tPA or endovascular treatment. At three months, 35 percent of the patients in the tPA group were alive without any disabilities, compared with 30 percent of the endovascular group. That also was not significantly different.

The third study, called MR RESCUE, run out of Georgetown University, was more complicated.

It randomly assigned 118 patients less than eight hours out from the start of their strokes to receive standard care or have the clot removed with a catheter device. They also got CAT or MRI scans to see whether they had a large or small amount of brain tissue still alive and salvageable. Removing the clot wasn’t better than standard care in either group — those with a lot or a little brain tissue to lose.

“I think everybody was a little surprised. But mainly disappointed,” said Chelsea S. Kidwell, the Georgetown neurologist who headed the study.

Why endovascular treatment wasn’t better is a mystery that the researchers are struggling to explain. The answer could be in the patients, the device or the timing of the procedure.

In IMS III, patients with large strokes benefited from clot removal more than those with small ones, but there weren’t enough patients in the study to make such a fine distinction with certainty.

“It’s a hint. But it’s not proof,” Broderick said.

In MR RESCUE, only 67 percent of arteries opened up completely after the clot was grabbed. Current devices, which use a mesh stent to hold the clot more firmly, are successful more than 80 percent of the time.

“The stroke community is hopeful that with the new generation devices we will show better outcomes,” Kidwell said.

In the Italian study, patients getting endovascular treatment were 3.75 hours into their stroke — an hour longer than those getting IV treatment, because of the logistics of assembling the procedure team. “That hour could have made a difference. We know that ‘time is brain,’ ” Ciccone said.

The three trials demonstrated how hard it is to test things once they’re in widespread use. History is replete with treatments (such as supplemental oxygen for premature infants) and devices (such as pulmonary artery catheters) used routinely before being shown to be harmful or of little value.

It took from 2004 to 2011 for the MR RESCUE team to recruit the 118 patients in the trial. It had permission to run the study in 30 hospitals but found only 22 that were willing to participate. More than 10 other hospitals were invited to join but declined because their neurologists were already convinced the catheter treatment was better — a view that turns out not to be true.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The deputy director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke provided some perspective, plus the reporter worked to include statements from investigators from each of the three trials and we credit that effort as satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chordoma is a cancer that occurs in the bones of the spine, sacrum and skull base. Only about 300 Americans are diagnosed with this cancer each year. The tumors can be complex to treat because they are located along the spinal cord, nerves and arteries. Chordomas are part of a group of tumors called sarcomas. While slow growing, they can be aggressive.

Blindsided by the news his tailbone pain was caused by a life-threatening tumor, Tracy sought information and opinions. His doctor referred him to specialists at a major medical center in San Francisco. He learned surgery is the most common treatment. But, a surgeon told Tracy and wife, Karin Rittenberg, he should prepare for possible complications.

Said Tracy, "We were told that I should prepare myself for the loss of functionality below the waist – including bowel, bladder and sexual functions. Even with surgery, there was a high risk of recurrence. That's when we began to research other options, such as radiation therapy."

The couple then met with a radiation oncologist. The doctor explained in cases where surgery is not an option or the outcome of surgery was unacceptable, people turn to definitive radiation therapy. He provided Tracy and Karin with a copy of a published research paper on chordoma and the effects of definitive radiation. The lead author and researcher was Dr. Peyman Kabolizadeh, clinical director, Beaumont Proton Therapy Center in Royal Oak. While the findings were written for health care professionals and very technical, Tracy was encouraged.

"Definitive radiation therapy refers to curative radiation," explained Dr. Kabolizadeh. "Radiation is the only treatment the patient receives." In his study published in the International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics, he and his colleagues found, "in circumstances where surgery may result in significant neurologic or organ dysfunction, patients can be treated definitively with radiation therapy alone. The results supported the use of high-dose definitive radiation therapy, via proton beam therapy, for selected patients with unresected spine and sacral chordomas."

The San Francisco radiation oncologist not only shared Dr. Kabolizadeh's research paper, but also his contact information. Both Tracy and Karin learned about the differences between photon and proton radiation. They did their homework on treatment options, but for Tracy it became quite frustrating. Karin persisted in her fact-finding, when Tracy was down emotionally.

"You have to understand, because this cancer is so rare, there is limited research available," Tracy said. "That was the truly scary part about making any decisions."

Second, third and more opinions

They conferred with Dr. Kabolizadeh at Beaumont in Michigan by telephone. The couple also traveled to a highly-regarded cancer center in New York City.

"It seemed everyone I spoke with had a different opinion," said Tracy. "I then determined, definitive radiation therapy was the way to go, but I had to decide which type and where. There was photon therapy available in San Francisco, but, in my research, I found out the photon beams don't stop at the tumor and have a greater possibility of affecting surrounding organs, too. I liked what I heard about the advantages of proton beams precisely targeting the tumor and stopping, sparing nearby tissue from harmful radiation."

Several factors went into Tracy's decision to choose proton therapy at Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak. Not only were he and Karin impressed with the advanced cancer killing capabilities of the pencil beam proton therapy, but also with the expertise of Dr. Kabolizadeh.

"I looked at survivability, length of life and quality of life. Right now, I'm living life to the fullest and have a beautiful wife. We travel, entertain friends and are diehard Giants fans," explained Tracy. "Beaumont has the most advanced equipment, and someone who is familiar with treatments for my rare cancer. I felt that gave me the best chance of success. Dr. Kabolizadeh has the vehicle and knows how to drive it! Every time we spoke, he was honest, open and candid. His candor was refreshing."

About 3 months after his cancer diagnosis, Tracy traveled to Royal Oak in late January to begin his proton treatments. On Tuesday, April 3, he completed his nine weeks of treatment.

He not only looks forward to watching his beloved Giants at AT&T Park, but hanging out with his dog Neyo. And Karin looks forward to him shaving the "treatment beard" he has been growing since his treatments began.

Beaumont proton team 'second to none'

"I realize I'm extremely fortunate to have been able to consider traveling to another state for treatment and live there for two and a half months," said Tracy. "I'm also fortunate that Karin's company has been supportive of her working remotely so she could stay with me. And I'm so grateful for the tremendous outpouring of love and support we've received from our family and friends during our stay in Michigan. That helped keep our spirits high."

And when asked about his treatment experience, Tracy remarked, "Every single person that I've engaged with at Beaumont has been a delight. They all made what could have been a difficult experience tolerable. The facilities are impressive, clean and welcoming, but the difference is the people – best hospital staff I've ever encountered. The team in the Proton Therapy Center is second to none."

Beaumont's center is one of just 28 proton therapy centers in the U.S. It is the only operational proton therapy center in Michigan.

Proton therapy is a high-tech alternative to X-ray radiation. A scanning beam of proton radiation with online image guidance offers greater precision to destroy cancerous cells, sparing adjacent healthy tissue with fewer side effects.

Proton therapy uses positively charged atomic particles, traveling up to two-thirds the speed of light, to fight cancer. A cyclotron, or particle accelerator, creates protons from hydrogen molecules. The proton beam is sent to the treatment room through a transport system consisting of magnets, called the beam line, finally arriving in the gantry, a device that rotates around the patient. The beam is directed to the patient through a nozzle that targets the tumor.

While proton therapy is not effective against all cancers, it is effective in treating many solid and localized tumors.

"Our IBA ProteusOne single-room treatment system includes precision technologies," said Dr. Kabolizadeh. "Intensity Modulated Proton Therapy, which combines Pencil Beam Scanning and 3-D Cone Beam CT, can target a tumor within less than a millimeter."

Pencil Beam Scanning refers to the delivery of protons in a thin beam. Like a pencil, the beam uses back and forth motions to target the treatment area – the shape, size and depth. It "paints" a radiation dose on tumors layer by layer. Compared to X-ray beams, which pass through a patient, proton beams deliver targeted radiation to the tumor and then stop – resulting in no exit dose.

Radiation oncologists at Beaumont are well versed in precise image guidance, having developed cone beam CT technology almost 20 years ago.

Dr. Kabolizadeh explained, "Image guidance allows doctors to visualize tumors during therapy to assess response and make sure the tumor is treated correctly every day."

Proton therapy is an important addition to Beaumont's comprehensive arsenal of leading-edge cancer treatments. Beaumont's Radiation Oncology department is ranked among the nation's best for advanced technology, innovative treatment and research. Advanced radiation treatments developed at Beaumont include adaptive radiation therapy, image-guided radiation therapy, intensity-modulated arc therapy, high-dose rate brachytherapy and hyperthermia therapy.

To learn more about the new center and its capabilities, call Beaumont's Radiation Oncology program at 248-551-8402 or go to www.Beaumont.org/proton-therapy.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It’s clear the release is from a proton beam therapy provider discussing one patient’s experience with undergoing the therapy. The release is clearly marked as coming from the treatment provider, so the conflict of interest is pretty straightforward. And the lack of new findings being prevented means that there is no funding source to discuss. As such, this earns a satisfactory ranking.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WHAT: A new study shows that the drug fenofibrate might reduce the risk of cardiovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetes who have high levels of triglycerides and low levels of "good" cholesterol, despite being treated with statins. The study, funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), appears in the December 28 issue of JAMA Cardiology.

Fenofibrate is primarily used to help reduce elevated levels of triglycerides, or fat, in the blood. But the researchers wanted to know if the drug, when combined with statin treatment, could also reduce the risk of heart disease in people with type 2 diabetes. People with type 2 diabetes are at high risk of cardiovascular-related events, such as heart attacks, stroke, and even death, often because their levels of triglycerides are so high, and their high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels are low.

To answer their question, the researchers followed 4,640 participants from the NHLBI-funded Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) Lipid Study for five years after the conclusion of the trial in 2009. The findings suggest that fenofibrate therapy may be beneficial in the way the researchers hoped: by reducing cardiovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetes who take statins but still have especially high triglycerides levels and low HDL cholesterol levels. However, a randomized study is needed to confirm these findings, according to the authors.

In addition to NHBLI, the study received funding from the NIH's National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, the National Institute of Aging, and the National Eye Institute.

WHO: Jerome Fleg, MD and Yves Rosenberg, MD, M.P.H., Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, NHLBI, NIH, are available to comment on the findings and implications of this research.

ARTICLE: M Elam et al. Effect of Fenofibrate Therapy on Long-Term Cardiovascular Risk in Statin-Treated Patients with Type II Diabetes. JAMA Cardiology. DOI: 10.1001/jamacardio.2016.4828

CONTACT: For more information or to schedule an interview, please contact the NHLBI Office of Science Policy, Engagement, Education, and Communications at 301-496-5449 or nhlbi_news@nhlbi.nih.gov (link sends e-mail)

Part of the National Institutes of Health, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) plans, conducts, and supports research related to the causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of heart, blood vessel, lung, and blood diseases; and sleep disorders. The Institute also administers national health education campaigns on women and heart disease, healthy weight for children, and other topics. NHLBI press releases and other materials are available online at http://www. .

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release makes the funding sources for the study clear.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - When a migraine strikes, patients might one day be able to make the experience less painful by using a smartphone-controlled device to deliver mild electric shocks to their arm, a company-funded experiment suggests.

The experimental gadget, Nerivio Migra, is a patch with a battery, electrodes and a computer chip that can wirelessly communicate with mobile devices. It’s designed to stimulate nerves under the skin in the arm and block pain signals from reaching the brain.

“All stimulation treatments given so far have been in the head,” said lead study author Dr. David Yarnitsky, an advisory board member for Theranica, the company developing the device.

“We worked on stimulation at a far away location, which makes the treatment more convenient and more discrete so people can use it even during working hours without anyone noticing,” Yarnitsky added by email.

The study involved 71 people with episodic migraines who had two to eight attacks a month and had not taken drugs to prevent the episodes for at least two months.

Participants were typically in their mid-to-late 40s and had been experiencing about five migraines a month. Most of them were female, and more than half of them reported experiencing what’s known as aura

Overall, participants had a total of 299 migraines during the study period.

Researchers asked participants to put the device on their upper arm as soon as possible after the start of a migraine and use it for 20 minutes. They were also asked not to take any medicines for migraines for two hours after the start of the episode.

For the experiment, researchers randomly programed the devices to give either placebo stimulation at a very low frequency or deliver one of four levels of active electrical stimulation treatment.

The four active treatment programs were set at a pulse rate of 80 to 120 Hertz (Hz) with pulse widths of 200, 150, 100 and 50. People feel less stimulation at lower pulse widths. At higher pulse widths than this device used, people might feel their muscles contract.

When researchers excluded the lowest pulse width, they found 64 percent of people in the other active treatment groups had at least a 50 percent pain reduction two hours after treatment, compared with 26 percent of people in the placebo group.

At the highest level of stimulation, 58 percent of the people who started out with moderate to severe pain reported little or no pain after treatment. So did 24 percent of people in the placebo group.

The timing of treatment also mattered.

People who started using the device within 20 minutes of the start of a migraine reported average pain reductions of 47 percent, compared to a 25 percent reduction in pain for people starting the device later.

Even though the study’s participants were not told whether they were assigned active or placebo treatment, one limitation of the experiment is that participants often stopped placebo treatments before the recommended 20-minute course of stimulation was done, the authors note in Neurology.

The technology known as transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation (TENS) that was tested in the current study has been examined in other devices for migraine pain for decades, said Dr. Jean Schoenen, a neurology researcher at the University of Liege in Belgium who wasn’t involved in the current experiment.

One shortcoming of the current study is that researchers didn’t examine how long the pain relief lasts beyond two hours, Schoenen said by email.

“Rapid and sustained relief is what patients want,” Schoenen added.

If the device works in larger trials and becomes widely available for migraine patients, it might offer an alternative for people who can’t tolerate migraine drugs or an option patients could try in addition to medication when they don’t get enough pain relief from drugs alone, Schoenen said.

“The percentage of attacks for which TENS is sufficient as sole treatment and allows sustained pain relief remains to be determined,” Schoenen cautioned.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included cautionary comments from a neurology researcher, which helps balance and contextualize the study’s results. The story also disclosed that the study was “company-funded” and that the study’s lead author is “an advisory board member for Theranica, the company developing the device.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An improved therapy to replace essential steroids in the body is a step closer thanks to new research.

The new treatment - expected to have fewer side effects than existing therapies - could help people with disorders of the adrenal gland whose bodies are unable to produce a class of steroids called corticosteroids.

Corticosteroids are involved in a wide range of physiological processes in the body, including regulating metabolism, blood pressure and helping the body to cope with physical stress.

The therapy could help people with conditions such as Addison's disease and congenital adrenal hyperplasia, who need steroid treatment to avoid the risk of potentially fatal illness during physical stress.

Treatment usually involves replacing one of the steroids they are unable to produce - called cortisol - with a medication. However, this approach also affects fat tissue and can lead to excessive weight gain, high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes.

Researchers at the University of Edinburgh's British Heart Foundation Centre for Cardiovascular Science studied another steroid called corticosterone, which is also naturally produced by the body. Until now, there has been little research into its activity.

In a mouse study, the team showed that the effects of corticosterone on fat cells were reduced compared with cortisol. They found the effects were reduced because fat cells have a pump that removes corticosterone - but not cortisol - from the fat cells.

The researchers tested the therapy in a small group of patients with Addison's disease. The team found that corticosterone was as effective as cortisol, but had reduced effects on fat cells compared with cortisol.

Professor Brian Walker, Head of the BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: "These findings suggest that corticosterone could provide a safer alternative to traditional cortisol replacement therapy for conditions such as Addison's disease and congenital adrenal hyperplasia."

The researchers say that, with further research, these findings may one-day lead to improved therapies for other conditions that respond to steroid treatment, including asthma and rheumatoid arthritis.

Dr Mark Nixon, of the BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: "The discovery of this selective corticosterone pump in fat cells could lead to a completely new approach in our search for safer steroid medications."

The study, published in the journal Science Translational Medicine, was funded by Wellcome, the British Heart Foundation, the Medical Research Council and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The text offers information about funding sources. The reader must infer that the two sources in the release were involved in the research, but their full identifications make that relatively easy to do. Possible conflicts of interest are nowhere to be found.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A mind-altering drug called ketamine is changing the way some doctors treat depression.

Encouraged by research showing that ketamine can relieve even the worst depression in a matter of hours, these doctors are giving the drug to some of their toughest patients. And they're doing this even though ketamine lacks approval from the Food and Drug Administration for treating depression.

"It became clear to me that the future of psychiatry was going to include ketamine or derivatives of ketamine," says David Feifel, a professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Diego, who began administering the drug to patients in 2010.

Ketamine was developed as an anesthetic and received FDA approval for this use in 1970. Decades later, it became popular as a psychedelic club drug. And in 2006, a team from the National Institute of Mental Health published a landmark study showing that a single intravenous dose of ketamine produced "robust and rapid antidepressant effects" within a couple of hours.

Since then, thousands of depressed patients have received "off-label" treatment with ketamine.

One of those patients is Paul, 36, who lives in San Diego and is a patient of Dr. Feifel. We're not using his last name to protect his medical privacy.

Paul's depression began with anxiety. "I was an extremely anxious child," he says. "I would always make choices based on fear. My life was really directed by what was the least fearful thing that I could do."

As Paul grew up, his extreme anxiety led to major depression, which could leave him unable to get out of bed for days. "I lived in pain," he says.

Paul managed to get through college and a stint in the Peace Corps. But most days were a struggle. And Paul has spent much of his adult life searching for a treatment that would give him some relief.

He tried just about every drug used for depression, as well as cognitive behavioral therapy, acupuncture, and even electroconvulsive therapy, which induces a brief seizure. But nothing worked — at least not for very long.

Paul says he was increasingly haunted by "this comforting thought of pressing a cold gun against my forehead where I felt the pain the most."

Then one day, while investigating depression on the Internet, Paul discovered the research on ketamine. "It was clear to me that this was real," he says.

Ordinarily, there would have been no legal way for Paul to get ketamine. He didn't qualify for most research studies because of his suicidal thoughts. And doctors usually won't prescribe a mind-altering club drug to someone with a mental illness.

But the studies of ketamine have produced results so dramatic that some doctors, including Feifel, are bypassing the usual protocols.

By the time Feifel began hearing about ketamine, he had become frustrated with existing depression drugs. Too often, he says, they just weren't helping his patients.

A major study on antidepressant medication published in 2008 seemed to confirm his suspicions. It found that current antidepressants really aren't much better than a placebo.

Many psychiatrists criticized that study. But not Feifel. "I was kind of like, I'm not surprised," he says. "These really don't seem like powerful tools."

Feifel remembers feeling "professionally embarrassed" that psychiatrists didn't have something better to offer their depressed patients. Something like ketamine.

He knew the drug had risks. It could be abused. It could produce hallucinations. And it didn't have the FDA's OK for treating depression.

But he also knew that doctors had a lot of experience with ketamine. It's been used for decades as an anesthetic that can rapidly stop pain without affecting vital functions like breathing. And ketamine's safety record is so good that it's often the painkiller of choice for children who arrive in the emergency room with a broken bone.

So in 2010, Feifel decided he wanted to offer low doses of the drug to some patients. The decision put him at odds with some prominent psychiatrists, including Tom Insel, director of the National Institute of Mental Health. "While the science is promising, ketamine is not ready for broad use in the clinic," Insel wrote in his blog a few months ago.

"There are a lot of pundits who remain skeptical or feel we need to research this ad infinitum before it's ready, which doesn't make sense to me," Feifel says. It's hard to take the wait-and-see approach when you're treating patients who are desperate for help, he adds.

Paul was one of those desperate patients when he was referred to Feifel in March of 2014. The referral was from a local psychiatrist who had run out of ideas, Feifel says.

And Paul jumped at the chance to try ketamine. "If there was even a 1 percent chance that this worked, it would have been worth it to me," he says. "My life was hanging in the balance."

And for Paul, the benefits of ketamine became obvious soon after one of his early injections.

"I remember I was in my bathroom and I literally fell to my knees crying because I had no anxiety, I had no depression," he says

For the past year, Paul has been getting ketamine every four to six weeks. He feels an altered sense of reality for an hour or two after getting the drug. The effect on depression and anxiety, though, lasts more than a month.

Ketamine doesn't always work that well, Feifel says. After treating more than 100 patients, he's beginning to understand the drug's limitations.

One is that its ability to keep depression at bay can fade pretty quickly. Feifel recalls one patient whose depression would disappear like magic after a dose of ketamine. But "we could never get it to sustain beyond maybe a day," he says.

Also, ketamine treatment is expensive because patients need to be monitored so closely. Feifel charges about $500 for each injection and $1,000 for an intravenous infusion, which takes effect more quickly. Insurers don't cover the cost because the treatment is still considered experimental.

Even so, ketamine clinics are popping up around the country and they have already treated thousands of patients willing and able to pay out of pocket. Some of the clinics are run by psychiatrists. Others have been started by entrepreneurial anesthesiologists and emergency room doctors, who are familiar with ketamine but may not know much about depression.

"We've seen ketamine clinics open up as pure business models," Feifel says. "I'm a little bit concerned about that."

Feifel fears something bad will happen to a depressed patient at one of these clinics. And that could set back efforts to make the drug more widely available.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story relies almost entirely on a single passionate advocate and a single compelling patient. The story would have been strengthened and balanced by an interview with someone with a contrary opinion. We’ll give the story a pass for featuring a skeptical blog quote from the director of the National Institute of Mental Health. But the story could have done more to highlight experts who are critical of the use of ketamine and feature patients who didn’t respond to the drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — LOS ANGELES (EMBARGOED UNTIL 7 A.M. EDT on APRIL 14, 2015) – An injection of stem cells into the eye may soon slow or reverse the effects of early-stage age-related macular degeneration, according to new research from scientists at Cedars-Sinai. Currently, there is no treatment that slows the progression of the disease, which is the leading cause of vision loss in people over 65.

“This is the first study to show preservation of vision after a single injection of adult-derived human cells into a rat model with age-related macular degeneration,” said Shaomei Wang, MD, PhD, lead author of the study published in the journal STEM CELLS and a research scientist in the Eye Program at the Cedars-Sinai Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute.

The stem cell injection resulted in 130 days of preserved vision in laboratory rats, which roughly equates to 16 years in humans. Age-related macular degeneration affects upward of 15 million Americans. It occurs when the small central portion of the retina, known as the macula, deteriorates. The retina is the light-sensing nerve tissue at the back of the eye. Macular degeneration may also be caused by environmental factors, aging and a genetic predisposition.

When animal models with macular degeneration were injected with induced neural progenitor stem cells, which derive from the more commonly known induced pluripotent stem cells, healthy cells began to migrate around the retina and formed a protective layer. This protective layer prevented ongoing degeneration of the vital retinal cells responsible for vision.

Cedars-Sinai researchers in the Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell (iPSC) Core, directed by Dhruv Sareen, PhD, with support from the David and Janet Polak Foundation Stem Cell Core Laboratory, first converted adult human skin cells into powerful induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC), which can be expanded indefinitely and then made into any cell of the human body. In this study, these induced pluripotent stem cells were then directed toward a neural progenitor cell fate, known as induced neural progenitor stem cells, or iNPCs.

“These induced neural progenitor stem cells are a novel source of adult-derived cells which should have powerful effects on slowing down vision loss associated with macular degeneration,” said Clive Svendsen, PhD, director of the Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute and contributing author to the study. “Though additional pre-clinical data is needed, our institute is close to a time when we can offer adult stem cells as a promising source for personalized therapies for this and other human diseases.”

Next steps include testing the efficacy and safety of the stem cell injection in preclinical animal studies to provide information for applying for an investigational new drug. From there, clinical trials will be designed to test potential benefit in patients with later-stage age-related macular degeneration.

This work was supported by the Simon and Beathrice Apple Stem Cell Fund for Eye Research, the David and Janet Polak Foundation Stem Cell Core Laboratory; National Institutes of Health (R01 EY020488), Department of Defense (W81XWH-12-1-0617), Foundation Fighting Blindness and the Knights Templar Eye Foundation Inc.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release includes at the end a listing of funding sources for this research and there is no information to suggest any conflict of interest.  The original research paper specifically states there are no conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla., July 26, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- New research published in Lancet Neurology and reported by CNN has found using a green tea extract (decaffeinated) in combination with cognitive training improves some measures of cognition and behavior in subjects with Down syndrome.

Eighty-seven volunteers aged 16 to 34 with Down syndrome were enrolled in the phase 2, randomized, controlled trial. The study was conducted at the IMIM-Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute in Barcelona, Spain.

Participants were randomly assigned to take the decaffeinated green tea extract or placebo for one year. All subjects also underwent cognitive training during the 12-month trial.

After one year of treatment, functional brain scans (fMRI) showed that epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)-treated subjects had improved neuronal connectivity in certain brain regions. Participants who took the green tea extract also scored significantly better on assessments of visual recognition memory, inhibitory control, and adaptive behavior compared with those who took the placebo.

"It's an important trial," says Dr. Steven Hirsh, director of clinical research for Life Extension in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. "The findings are very noteworthy and support further study in randomized controlled trials with larger sample sizes and durations. It is very encouraging that this catechin, EGCG, from green tea extract, has the potential to benefit people with Down syndrome."

Down syndrome is a genetic condition that affects about 250,000 Americans. Individuals with Down syndrome have an extra full or partial copy of chromosome 21.

The team of researchers, led by Dr. Rafael de la Torre, program director of IMIM Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute and study co-principal investigator, and Dr. Mara Dierssen, group leader at Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, and study co-principal investigator, proposed that EGCG might have conferred these benefits by inhibiting an enzyme called DYRK1A, which has been implicated in Down syndrome and neurodegenerative conditions including Alzheimer disease.

The level of DYRK1A-positive cells is elevated in certain regions of Alzheimer disease patients' brains, and is roughly 20-fold higher in the frontal cortex, compared to normal brains. DYRK1A is implicated in the formation of neurofibrillary tangles (via tau hyperphosphorylation) and amyloid plaques, both of which are features of Alzheimer disease.

Tea catechins may also modulate the damaging effects of amyloid-beta. Several animal studies have found that EGCG and related compounds from tea suppress amyloid-beta-induced cognitive dysfunction and neurotoxicity. Other possible mechanisms by which EGCG may influence cognition include epigenetic regulation, restoration of mitochondrial function, and anti-oxidative functions.

In an earlier pilot study supported by Life Extension, Drs. de la Torre and Dierssen's team showed that three months of EGCG treatment improved symptoms in individuals with Down syndrome, and in mice with a Down-syndrome-like condition characterized by overexpression of DYRK1A.

"We are excited that the benefits observed in the early pilot and preclinical research extended to this larger trial," says Luke G. Huber, ND, MBA, vice president of product innovation and scientific development at Life Extension. "This new research adds to the growing body of evidence that suggests compounds in green tea, such as EGCG, may support cognitive health."

In acknowledging the novelty of their findings and calling for more research, the Spanish research team noted that "…this study is the first well-powered trial that shows improvement in adaptive behavior (functional academics) and brain-related changes in young adults with Down's syndrome. However, more research is needed to clarify the nature of the beneficial association between the EGCG and cognitive training intervention (ie, synergistic or additive)."
• de la Torre R, de Sola S, Hernandez G, et al. Safety and efficacy of cognitive training plus epigallocatechin-3-gallate in young adults with Down's syndrome (TESDAD): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. The Lancet Neurology. 2016;15(8):801-810.
• Senthilingam M. Cable News Network (CNN) U. S. Edition [online]. Can green tea boost your brainpower and treat disease? http://www.cnn.com/2016/06/16/health/green-tea-health-brain-down-syndrome/. Last updated 6/20/2016. Accessed 7/1/2016. 2016.
• CDC. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Birth Defects. Key Findings: Prevalence of Down syndrome in . http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/features/key-findings-down-syndrome-prevalence.html. Last updated 2/29/2016. Accessed 7/18/2016. 2016.
• NDSS. What Is Down Syndrome? 2012; http://www.ndss.org/Down-Syndrome/What-Is-Down-Syndrome/. Accessed 6/8/2016.
• Souchet B, Latour A, Gu Y, et al. Molecular rescue of DYRK1A overexpression in cystathionine beta synthase-deficient mouse brain by enriched environment combined with voluntary exercise. Journal of molecular neuroscience : MN. 2015;55(2):318-323.
• Wegiel J, Gong CX, Hwang YW. The role of DYRK1A in neurodegenerative diseases. The FEBS journal. 2011;278(2):236-245.
• Kim TI, Lee YK, Park SG, et al. l-Theanine, an amino acid in green tea, attenuates β-amyloid-induced cognitive dysfunction and neurotoxicity: reduction in oxidative damage and inactivation of ERK/p38 kinase and NF-κB pathways. Free Radical Biology and Medicine. 2009;47(11):1601-1610.
• Rezai-Zadeh K, Arendash GW, Hou H, et al. Green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) reduces β-amyloid mediated cognitive impairment and modulates tau pathology in Alzheimer transgenic mice. Brain research. 2008;1214:177-187.
• Haque AM, Hashimoto M, Katakura M, Hara Y, tea catechins prevent cognitive deficits caused by Abeta1-40 in rats. The Journal of nutritional biochemistry. 2008;19(9):619-626.
• De la Torre R, De Sola S, Pons M, et al. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate, a DYRK1A inhibitor, rescues cognitive deficits in Down syndrome mouse models and in humans. Molecular nutrition & food research. 2014;58(2):278-288.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release makes it clear that the study was supported by Life Extension and discloses Life Extension’s involvement in an earlier pilot study. The two sources quoted in the news release have ties to Life Extension – a fact the news release also makes clear in their titles.
We applaud the news release for disclosing this information, which is why we give it a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SEATTLE - Dec. 5, 2016 - Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center announced promising results from an early trial in which patients with high-risk acute myeloid leukemia received genetically engineered immune cells. Of the 12 AML patients who received this experimental T-cell therapy after a transplant put their disease in remission, all are still in remission after a median follow-up of more than two years.

Giving these cells when disease is in remission after transplant "might actually be helping patients who have a high risk of relapsing to not relapse down the line," said Dr. Aude Chapuis, cancer physician and immunotherapy researcher at Fred Hutch, one of the study's leaders. Chapuis presented these results at the 2016 annual meeting of the American Society of Hematology in San Diego, California.

The findings in this group of trial participants contrast with the outcomes the researchers observed in a cohort of similar patients who received transplants around the same time but did not receive engineered T cells. In all of these transplant-only patients, the transplants produced remissions, but more than a quarter of them relapsed within just 10 months.

In the experimental T-cell therapy tested in this trial, certain T cells from each patient's transplant donor were genetically engineered to produce receptors that allowed the T cells to recognize, very specifically, a target molecule called WT1. WT1 is 10 to 1,000 times more common in leukemia cells than their noncancerous cousins, making it a natural target for therapies designed to destroy cancer cells while leaving most healthy cells alone.

This is the team's first trial of this strategy, which was initially developed in the lab of Dr. Phil Greenberg, one of the study's leaders and the head of Fred Hutch's Program in Immunology. Because it was the first study of this particular approach, the researchers focused on a high-risk group -- AML patients undergoing bone marrow transplant who had certain genetic or disease characteristics that decrease the chance of long-term transplant success -- "a hard population of patients," Chapuis said, many of whom "were horribly sick."

Each patient's therapy was created just for them in a specialized Fred Hutch facility. Certain T cells from each patient's matched donor were given the genetic instructions to make a receptor that specifically reacts to WT1. Then came a blood stem cell transplant: Patients' leukemic bone marrow and blood cells were destroyed and replaced with healthy cells from their donors. A month later, when the team examined these 12 patients' marrow, they found no trace of the cancers. Rapidly thereafter, once the transplanted cells fully engrafted, each patient then received up to 10 billion of the genetically engineered donor cells, infused into their arm through an IV.

Chapuis's role in this trial is on the laboratory side of the research, ensuring the quality of the genetically engineered cell products and monitoring the activity of the cells after infusion. She co-leads this research with Greenberg and Dr. Dan Egan of Fred Hutch, the trial's principal investigator and the care provider for trial participants. The study was supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health and spinoff Juno Therapeutics, of which Greenberg is a scientific co-founder.

Outside of this trial, Chapuis treats cancer patients at Fred Hutch's clinical care partner, Seattle Cancer Care Alliance. Watching her patients undergo bone marrow transplant ? itself the first clear and reproducible example of cancer immunotherapy, developed at Fred Hutch ? has made her want to work toward something better.

"That's my source of inspiration. I'm always horrified by the intense treatment that we inflict on bone marrow transplant patients and the hardship that we make them go through. And I really think we can do better," Chapuis said. "That's why I'm doing this."

At Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, home to three Nobel laureates, interdisciplinary teams of world-renowned scientists seek new and innovative ways to prevent, diagnose and treat cancer, HIV/AIDS and other life-threatening diseases. Fred Hutch's pioneering work in bone marrow transplantation led to the development of immunotherapy, which harnesses the power of the immune system to treat cancer with minimal side effects. An independent, nonprofit research institute based in Seattle, Fred Hutch houses the nation's first and largest cancer prevention research program, as well as the clinical coordinating center of the Women's Health Initiative and the international headquarters of the HIV Vaccine Trials Network. Private contributions are essential for enabling Fred Hutch scientists to explore novel research opportunities that lead to important medical breakthroughs. For more information, visit fredhutch.org or follow Fred Hutch on Facebook, Twitter or YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release reports that funding came from the National Institutes of Health and from Juno Therapeutics. It says that one of the researchers is “a scientific co-founder” of Juno Therapeutics. So we will give the release a passing grade on this criterion. However, readers have to have sharp eyes to intuit that this disclosure means that the researcher owns part of the company and so stands to profit from any treatments that result from this work.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Patients who have robot-assisted surgeries on their kidneys or prostate have shorter hospital stays and a lower risk of having a blood transfusion or dying — but the bill is significantly higher, a study found.

The analysis, which appeared in the Journal of Urology, compared increasingly common robotic surgery with two other techniques for the same surgery and found that direct costs can be up to several thousand dollars higher for the robotic type.

Touted as less invasive and more efficient, robotic surgeries typically use a laparoscopic or “keyhold surgery” approach, in which tools and a tiny video camera are inserted into the body through one or two small incisions.

Robotic surgery replaces a surgeon’s hands with ultra-precise tools at the ends of mechanical arms, all operated by the surgeon from a console.

“I think the take home message is that robotic (surgery), looking at our study, had certain beneficial outcomes compared to open and laparoscopic procedures,” said study leader Jim Hu at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

Hu and his team analyzed surgery data from a national government database to see if the costlier robotic surgeries were cost effective with extra benefits over older techniques.

During the last three months of 2008 — the most recent data available that allowed a comparison among robotic, open and laparoscopic surgeries — more than half of all prostate removals involved robot-assisted surgery.

About three percent of prostate patients had standard laparoscopic surgery and 44 percent had open surgery. Open and laparoscopic surgeries were still more common than robotic surgeries for kidney repairs and removals.

Among patients who had their prostate removed, none died from laparoscopic or robotic surgery, whereas two out of every 1,000 died after the open procedure.

About five percent of the men who had open surgery needed a blood transfusion, compared to less than two percent of men who had robot-assisted surgery. The open-surgery group also stayed in the hospital about one day longer than the robotic group.

The results were similar for people who had kidneys removed.

The trade-off was the cost, with robotic prostate removal costing about $10,000 on average, roughly $700 more than laparoscopic surgery and $1,100 more than open surgery.

For kidney removal, robotic surgery cost $13,900, which was $2,700 more than laparoscopic and $1,300 more than open surgery.

David Penson, a surgeon at Vanderbilt University Medical Center who was not part of the study, said more consideration should have been given to the state of patients afterwards. Emphasis should be lmited on procedure, he said, as opposed to surgical skill.

“Years ago, this was thought to be the be-all-end-all operation, particularly with prostate surgery. We were going to get patients out of the hospital quicker, have better potency and incontinence outcomes,” he told Reuters Health.

"And the reality of it is that... there are some benefits -- but not as much as we had hoped." SOURCE: bit.ly/zZIYa1
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included some input from the editorial writer – although, as stated above in the “Evidence” criterion – perhaps not to its greatest effectiveness.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every month, some 50 percent of women suffer from monthly period-related pain. And there's not a whole lot they can do beyond trying to blunt it with pain-relieving pills or oral contraceptives.

Whoopi Goldberg recently stepped in with a new line of medical marijuana–based edibles and bath products (of questionable effectiveness) aimed at this underserved market.

Now there's Livia, a medical device that's being marketed as the "off switch for menstrual pain."

Here's how it works: Users simply attach two electrodes to the areas on their abdomen that hurt and switch on the colorful, palm-size gadget. According to Livia's makers, the device immediately sends nerve-stimulating electric pulses through the two electrodes, and poof! — the pain is gone.

Livia has received rave reviews in international women's magazines like Cosmopolitan and Glamour, and more than 3,000 crowdfunders from around the world have put upward of $284,000 into Livia's Indiegogo campaign. For now, it's only possible to preorder the device (at a cost of $85) and wait six months for it to ship.

As far as gadgetry for women's health goes, this one is novel. But does Livia actually work? There's no good way to evaluate that right now, since Livia's makers haven't made the findings of their studies on the device's effects public.

But there's some reason for optimism: The device is basically a repackaging of another (cheaper) technology that has already been proven to help women who suffer with their monthly cycles.

To learn more about Livia, I reached out to Chen Nachum, the company's founder and CEO. He explained that the key to the device is TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation), those electronic nerve stimulators you've probably seen in strip malls that hook up to the body to treat neck or back pain. (They're also available on the internet's strip mall, Amazon.)

TENS devices are generally thought to work through the "pain-gate theory" of pain. "The idea is the nerve system cannot work with two types of signals at the same time," Nachum explained, "so what Livia does is transmit frequency to the nerve system that it is very similar to the body's frequency, but it's not something the body knows."

When the frequency from the device hits the brain faster than the pain, the brain takes that signal first and is distracted from the menstrual aches, the company claims.

So far, Nachum said they have tested the device on 163 women in two different trials — and more than 80 percent experienced relief with the device. The company is currently working on another study, which will include about 60 women. 



Based on these studies, Nachum is trying to get Food and Drug Administration approval to market Livia as a menstrual pain reliever.

Jen Gunter, an OB-GYN and pain medicine specialist, noted that the idea of using TENS for menstrual pain is actually very sound. In fact, there's enough research that the Cochrane Collaboration was able to put together a review of the evidence. Its conclusion: "High-frequency nerve stimulation may help relieve painful menstrual cramps."

In an email, Gunter said she frequently prescribes high-frequency TENS (pulses between 50 and 120 hertz at a low intensity) to treat patients who suffer through their periods: "I have done so for more than 15 years. Prescribed one this morning in fact." They really help some women, she added.

The benefit here is that, unlike anti-inflammatories and oral contraceptives, TENS is a non-drug intervention, and according to the Cochrane Review, there's research that suggests women even take fewer pain relievers when using these devices.

Gunter's main question about Livia is whether it will be significantly different from the already available and effective TENS devices, which usually cost around $35. "Nothing [the CEO] has disclosed makes Livia sound like anything other than a TENS unit," she wrote. "So I guess it's an expensive, pink TENS unit?" 



(The company says the device would retail at $149, about the cost of four TENS units. But this assumes Livia will take off enough to justify retailing.)



Gunter also wondered whether Livia will be high frequency enough to be helpful. As that Cochrane review found, low-frequency TENS don't seem to do much to cut pain for women.



When I asked Nachum about the device's frequency, he said, "We can't share this information at this point."



And while he claims that Livia is more effective at treating period pain than the cheaper, already available TENS units (he said "its frequency and wave shape are unique and optimized especially for relieving menstrual pain"), without publicly available studies comparing the two, all we have to go on is his word. (The Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists wouldn't comment on Livia because no studies on it have been published.)



For now, Gunter pointed out, the TENS units that are already available can help women — and raising awareness about that might be Livia's biggest benefit.

"If [Livia] gets more women to know about TENS, then great," she said. "[B]ut to call it something new or different seems disingenuous, unless of course they have published ... data that says otherwise."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The comments from an independent expert help ground the claims made by the company CEO. The outside source is the key to balance in this article.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By now, you've probably heard all the buzz about the Mediterranean diet, or perhaps you've tried it. Aside from helping to prevent the metabolic syndrome– a cluster of risk factors for heart disease and diabetes- a new study in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology says, the diet can have positive global effects on the individual risk factors: low HDL ("good") cholesterol, high triglycerides, high blood pressure and a high blood sugar rate, as seen by your doctor through a blood test. In addition, waist size is a risk factor- a waist more than 35 inches for women and 40 inches for men is of concern.

The syndrome is present when someone has three of those five risk factors.

"[The study is] one of the first studies that evaluated the role of Mediterranean diet on metabolic syndrome, and revealed a beneficial association- quite a big influence, taking into account that the Mediterranean diet is a non-pharmacological mean," said study author Demosthenes Panagiotakos, from the Department of Science of Dietetics-Nutrition at Harokopio University of Athens in Greece.

Take this test to see how well you're managing your diabetes

The researchers looked at over half a million people from 50 previous studies on the Mediterranean diet, which included people in Spain, Greece, the U.S., France, Sweden, Italy and Australia, among other countries.

They found the beneficial effects from diets rich in fruits and vegetables, olives and olive oil, low-fat dairy products and whole grain cereals. Other components included: a moderate daily intake of alcohol with meals- mostly from red wine; eating fish, poultry or tree nuts (like walnuts or cashews) weekly; and limiting eating red meat to about twice a month. The researchers say what's responsible are the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects.

Panagiotakos added that the diet includes all main food groups, but in a balanced way. The study notes physical activity is also an important part in preventing the risk factors for the metabolic syndrome.

The Mediterranean diet isn't just a little extra olive oil, noted Dr. Robert Eckel, an endocrinologist and past president of the American Heart Association.

"It's all these other components," Eckel said.

"I think the health professional needs to recognize that people that meet the criteria for the metabolic syndrome are at higher risk [for heart disease and diabetes] and we strongly recommend that lifestyle intervention is used to prevent the syndrome and also to modify its prevalence," he said.

According to the American Heart Association, data from 2003-2006 shows a third of adults age 20 and older met that criteria. And just a few years earlier, over 9 percent of adolescents ages 12-19 were classified as having the syndrome. That translates into 2.9 million young people.

But it's not only in the U.S.

"This is a global epidemic," Eckel emphasized. "This is not simply America. It's occurring throughout Mexico, Central and South America, Southeast Asia, Australia and around the world."

Eckel said obesity is by far the largest issue responsible for the metabolic syndrome. According to the World Health Organization's 2008 figures, at least one in three of the world's adult population is overweight, and almost one in 10 people is obese. For children, the numbers are also sobering: 20 million kids under age 5 are overweight.

Panagiotakos concludes that this pattern of eating can be easily adopted by people of various cultures and populations.

"The macro-environment we are living promotes obesity in all age groups of people... the choice of a healthy diet, like the Mediterranean diet, is on our hands. Better eating (from childhood to older life) contributes to better quality of life," he said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Independent perspective provided by a past president of the American Heart Association.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 12, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Higher vitamin D levels in patients with advanced colon cancer appear to improve response to chemotherapy and targeted anti-cancer drugs, researchers say.

"We found that patients who had vitamin D levels at the highest category had improved survival and improved progression-free survival, compared with patients in the lowest category," said lead author Dr. Kimmie Ng, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Those patients survived one-third longer than patients with low levels of vitamin D -- an average 32.6 months, compared with 24.5 months, the researchers found.

The report, scheduled for presentation this week at the Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium in San Francisco, adds more weight to suspicions that vitamin D might be a valuable cancer-fighting supplement.

However, colon cancer patients shouldn't try to boost vitamin D levels beyond the normal range, one expert said.

The study only found an association between vitamin D levels and colon cancer survival rates. It did not prove cause and effect.

Researchers for years have investigated vitamin D as a potential anti-cancer tool, but none of the findings have been strong enough to warrant a recommendation, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society.

"Everyone comes to the same conclusion -- yes, there may be some benefit, but we really need to study it carefully so we can be certain there aren't other factors that make vitamin D look better than it is," Lichtenfeld said. "These findings are interesting, and show that vitamin D may have a role in improving outcomes in cancer care."

In this study, researchers measured blood levels of vitamin D in 1,043 patients enrolled in a phase 3 clinical trial comparing three first-line treatments for newly diagnosed, advanced colon cancer. All of the treatments involved chemotherapy combined with the targeted anti-cancer drugs bevacizumab and/or cetuximab.

Vitamin D is called the "sunshine vitamin" because human bodies produce it when the sun's ultraviolet rays strike the skin. It promotes the intestines' ability to absorb calcium and other important minerals, and is essential for maintaining strong, healthy bones, according to the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

But vitamin D also influences cellular function in ways that could be beneficial in treating cancer, Ng said. For example, she said it appears to reduce cell growth, promote the death of diseased cells, and inhibit the formation of new blood vessels to feed cancerous tumors.

The study authors found that certain types of cancer patients tended to have lower vitamin D levels. These included people whose blood specimens were drawn in the winter and spring months, people who live in the northern and northeastern states, older adults, blacks, overweight or obese people, and those who had lower physical activity and were in worse physical condition.

The patients were divided into five groups based on vitamin D levels, ranging from low to high. After adjusting for prognosis and healthy behaviors, the researchers found that patients in the group with the highest levels of vitamin D lived about eight months longer on average than those in the group with the lowest levels.

"We had a lot of information on their tumor, their treatment and their survival times, and their diet and lifestyle," Ng said. "That really allowed us to adjust for other potential factors that could influence what we're seeing."

It also took longer for cancer to progress in people with higher vitamin D levels -- an average 12.2 months compared with about 10 months in the group with the lowest. No significant differences were seen with regard to the type of therapy the patients received.

This increase in progression-free survival is the most compelling evidence indicating that vitamin D makes a difference in colon cancer, said Dr. Smitha Krishnamurthi, an associate professor of hematology and oncology at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine in Cleveland.

"That is interesting because that's more of a cancer-specific endpoint as opposed to overall survival, which could be influenced by other factors like heart health," Krishnamurthi said.

Everyone should maintain healthy vitamin D levels anyway, to protect their bone health, Ng and Krishnamurthi said.

Based on this new study, Krishnamurthi said she would emphasize the importance of vitamin D for patients with colon cancer.

"They should take supplements to bring it into normal range, because we know it is good for bone health and it may have an anti-cancer effect," she said.

However, "if someone has a normal vitamin D level, I wouldn't take supplements to increase it because we won't know the true effect on cancer until we see the results of a clinical trial," she said.

The U.S. National Institutes of Health funded the study. Research presented at meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more on vitamin D and cancer, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes an outside expert offering an important piece of context and caution about the findings. And it includes a statement from a second outside source with expertise in oncology who underscores the important finding about progression-free survival. Yes!
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
That, said Dr. Leon of Columbia, who was the trial’s principal investigator, was remarkable. “If we treat five patients, we would save a life in the first year,” he said. “There are very few treatments in all of cardiovascular medicine that could claim that — I can think of heart transplant, and that’s it.”

The results were even more notable, he said, because the early versions of the devices were clunky, stiff and difficult to use.

The F.D.A. approved the method with the Edwards device for patients at extremely high risk in 2011.

That year, Dr. Mack, who was then the president of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and other leaders met with the F.D.A. and Medicare to devise a plan to restrict the device’s spread to places where doctors had sufficient skill to implant them safely. The result was a requirement that a hospital should be doing at least 50 surgical aortic valve replacements a year to have access to the technology. It was written into the Medicare coverage decision, a first for a medical device.

“This technology is expensive and high risk,” Dr. Mack said. The consensus of the group, he said, was that “not every one of the 1,150 cardiac surgery programs or the 1,600 cath labs in the U.S. should be able to do it.”

In June 2014, after another company, Medtronic, did similar studies, its device was approved, too, for high-risk patients.

Former skeptics like Dr. Cohn now recommend the procedure for high-risk patients.

More recent 2015 data from Medtronic indicates that its valve is better than surgery for high-risk patients, resulting in fewer deaths, at least in the first two years. And new data from another large study by Edwards found that patients at intermediate risk did better with the newest version of its valve than would be expected with surgery in the first 30 days, when most deaths occur. “Truly phenomenal early results,” Dr. Herrmann said.

Last Wednesday, the F.D.A. approved the new Edwards valve for high-risk patients; it had been available only in clinical trials. Medtronic also has a new version of its valve that cardiologists expect will soon be approved.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article features in-depth reporting with plenty of expert testimony — a rarity in health news today and a delight to these reviewers. It might have been nice to include a source who could better explain some of the harms of TAVR.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have raised the possibility of using statins – drugs used for reducing cholesterol – to stop some breast cancer tumours returning.

The most common form of breast cancer uses oestrogen to grow. Drugs such as tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors cut off the supply of oestrogen, reducing the chances that the cancer will return after surgery. But about 12,000 of the 40,000 diagnosed oestrogen-receptor positive (ER-positive) cancers still recur every year.

Early research – most of it still in the lab – published in the journal Breast Cancer Research has shown that some early breast cancer tumours can produce a molecule made from cholesterol called 25-hydroxycholesterol (25-HC). It can mimic oestrogen and encourage tumours to grow.

Dr Lesley-Ann Martin at the Institute of Cancer Research in London, where the research has been carried out, said: “During the course of treatment, ER-positive breast cancers, that are ‘fed’ by oestrogen, often become resistant to standard hormone therapy. Our research has demonstrated that these cancer cells can use a cholesterol molecule to mimic oestrogen so that they continue to grow without it.

“This is hugely significant. Testing the patient’s tumour for 25-HC or the enzymes that make it may allow us to predict which patients are likely to develop resistance hormone therapy, and tailor their treatment accordingly. Our study also demonstrates that statins could be a valuable addition to breast cancer treatment, and that this warrants investigation in clinical trials.”

The research has not yet been tested in humans. The scientists grew cancer cells in the lab in the absence of oestrogen and found they produced an alternative fuel, in the form of the cholesterol molecule. They then interfered with production of the molecule and found it slowed the cancer cells’ growth by between 30% and 50%.

The scientists say the findings are boosted by two studies which found the over-activation of certain genes linked to cholesterol production were linked with a poorer response to the anti-cancer drugs.

Cholesterol production by the tumour will not be the only reason why ER-positive breast cancers recur, but campaigners are excited by the possibilities for a treatment if further research corroborates these findings.

Delyth Morgan, chief executive at Breast Cancer Now, which funded the research, said: “This is a really crucial discovery. Far too many women have to deal with the potentially devastating consequences of their breast cancer coming back and this research presents an important opportunity to improve the effectiveness of today’s most commonly used treatments.

“This study breaks new ground in uncovering how some breast cancers continue to survive without oestrogen and suggests that women could benefit from adding statins to standard anti-hormone treatments. But this is early research and greater clinical evidence is now needed to understand the potential risks and benefits of this approach.”

Another charity, Breast Cancer Care, said the research was promising but needed further trials. “This early study raises an interesting question of whether cholesterol-reducing treatment, such as statins, could help lower the chances of breast cancer returning for some women who have developed a resistance to hormone therapy,” said Jane Murphy, clinical nurse specialist.

“We know that many women can be consumed with fear of their breast cancer coming back, which can have a huge impact on their ability to move forward after treatment. This discovery may, in future, help reduce these concerns for some patients, by allowing doctors to test if their cancer is likely to return, and tailor treatment accordingly.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It states that the research was funded by Breast Cancer Now, the UK’s largest breast cancer charity. It also quotes a clinical nurse specialist from an unrelated UK charity, Breast Cancer Care. This is sufficient enough to be Satisfactory.
However, It does not mention funding from the National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre at the Royal Marsden National Health Service Foundation Trust and the Institute of Cancer Research, also based in the UK.The story could have quoted more outside experts in order to shed light on the challenge of hormone resistance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Fast food outlets should hand out free cholesterol-lowering statin drugs to their customers to “neutralize” the heart risks of eating fatty foods like burgers and fries, British scientists suggested on Thursday.

But a few experts say you might want to ask your server to hold the statin at this point.

In a study published in the American Journal of Cardiology, scientists from the National Heart and Lung Institute at Imperial College London calculated that the reduction in heart disease risk offered by a statin could offset the increase in risk from eating a cheeseburger and a milkshake.

“Statins don’t cut out all of the unhealthy effects of a burger and fries. It’s better to avoid fatty food altogether. But we’ve worked out that in terms of your likelihood of having a heart attack, taking a statin can reduce your risk to more or less the same degree as a fast food meal increases it,” said Dr. Darrel Francis, who led the research team.

“When people engage in risky behaviors like driving or smoking, they’re encouraged to take measures that minimize their risk, like wearing a seatbelt or choosing cigarettes with filters. Taking a statin is a rational way of lowering some of the risks of eating a fatty meal.”

Still, Peter Weissberg, medical director at the British Heart Foundation (BHF) health charity, said Francis’ idea should not be taken too literally. He urged people to focus on maintaining a good diet and taking exercise to keep their hearts healthy.

“Statins are a vital medicine for people with — or at high risk of developing — heart disease,” he said. “They are not a magic bullet.”

A study in June in the Archives of Internal Medicine suggested, in fact, that statins do not save lives in patients without heart disease, although they may prevent some non-fatal heart attacks.

Dr. Franz Messerli, the director of the hypertension program at two New York hospitals, St. Luke’s and Roosevelt, worried about the message handing out statins would send to burger-eaters.

“Complimentary statin packets are prone to ... give Quarter Pounder consumers a sense of false security,” he told Reuters Health by email.

While statins might combat some of the toll that fatty foods take on cholesterol, there’s a lot they can’t negate: “sodium content is high, fibres are absent, and caloric load gargantuan,” Messerli said of the fast food the authors looked at.

Statins are among the most widely used drugs for the treatment and prevention of heart disease and strokes — the world’s top killers.

One statin, a generic drug called simvastatin, is already available in low doses over the counter at pharmacies in Britain without a prescription. Other statins such as Pfizer’s Lipitor and AstraZeneca’s Crestor - which are among the biggest-selling drugs in the world — are for prescription only.

In the U.S., all statins are only available by prescription.

“Although no substitute for systematic lifestyle improvements, including healthy diet, regular exercise, weight loss, and smoking cessation, complimentary statin packets would add, at little cost, one positive choice to a panoply of negative ones,” the scientists write in their paper.

Francis’ team — who worked independently and had no funding from the drug or food industries for their research — used data from a previous large study to quantify how a person’s heart attack risk increases with their daily intake of total fat and harmful trans fats.

They compared this with the decrease in risk from taking statins, using data from seven previously published trials.

“It makes sense to make risk-reducing supplements available just as easily as the unhealthy condiments (such as salt or ketchup) that are provided free of charge,” Francis said in his report of the research. “It would cost less than 5 pence ($0.07) per customer — not much different to a sachet of ketchup.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The use of independent voices here is key, and the reporting team did a lot of reading to give readers a fuller picture of the debate about statins. If people could hear more doctors saying that a particular drug is "not a magic bullet" in news stories, we probably would pay far less for the drugs that do work well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Warfarin is a blood thinner that is commonly prescribed to patients to prevent life-threatening blood clots. Despite its longtime use, warfarin remains tricky to dose because a person's genetic makeup influences how the drug is processed in the body. Too much warfarin can cause internal bleeding; too little warfarin fails to prevent blood clots.

Now, a new study led by Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis shows that dosing warfarin (Coumadin and others) is safer -- producing fewer adverse events such as hemorrhage -- when key elements of a patient's genetic makeup are considered.

The research, published Sept. 26 in the Journal of the American Medical Association, reports results from the clinical trial known as GIFT (Genetics Informatics Trial of Warfarin to Prevent Deep Venous Thrombosis).

"Physicians have been prescribing warfarin since the Eisenhower administration," said first author Brian F. Gage, MD, a professor of medicine at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. "It's a widely used anticoagulant, but it causes more major adverse events than any other oral drug. Thousands of patients end up in the emergency department or hospital because of warfarin-induced bleeding. But we continue to prescribe it because it is highly effective, reversible and inexpensive. So our goal is to make warfarin safer. GIFT showed that precision-medicine based on clinical factors and three genes improves the safety of initiating warfarin therapy."

Patients in the trial were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group received warfarin dosing based on standard factors such as age, height and weight; the second group was dosed based on these clinical factors plus genetic variants. Participating sites in the trial included Washington University School of Medicine, Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, Intermountain Healthcare, University of Utah, and Rush University Medical Center.

Of the 789 patients who were dosed in the traditional manner, 116 experienced at least one adverse event (14.7 percent). Of the 808 patients whose warfarin dosing was guided by genetic testing, 87 experienced an adverse event (10.8 percent). Compared with patients receiving traditional warfarin dosing, patients dosed with the genetic approach had a 27 percent reduction in adverse events, which was statistically different. The adverse events were bleeding, formation of blood clots in the veins and warfarin overdoses. No patient died during the trial.

Earlier studies looking at whether genetic testing could improve warfarin dosing had produced conflicting results. However, these studies were smaller and considered fewer genes than GIFT. GIFT enrolled 1,600 patients age 65 and older at high risk of blood clots because they underwent hip- or knee-replacement surgeries.

Unlike prior studies, GIFT took into account genetic variants in three genes for 11 days of warfarin therapy. Genetic variants were assessed on a commercial platform called GenMarkDx. Variants in one gene affect vitamin K recycling. Variants in another gene affect warfarin sensitivity. Variants in the third gene alter warfarin metabolism in the liver and can cause an overdose if the dose is not adjusted soon enough.

"There are additional genetic variants that may help to guide warfarin dosing, especially among patients with African ancestry," Gage said. In the future, we hope to quantify how these variants affect warfarin."

Gage also noted how health-care costs relate to dosing warfarin in a genetically guided manner. "Although genetic testing is more expensive than clinical dosing, the cost is falling," he said. "In our study, we estimated that genetic testing costs less than $200 per person, which is less than one month of a newer anticoagulant."

This work was supported by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers R01HL097036 and UL1TR000448; the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, grant number CAG-00400N; and GenMarkDx, which supplied instrumentation.

Gage BF, Bass AR, Lin H, Woller SC, Stevens SM, Al-Hammadi N, Li J, Rodriguez Jr. T, Miller JP, McMillin GA, Pendleton RC, Jaffer AK, King CR, DeVore B, Porche-Sorbet R, Napoli L, Merritt K, Thompson AM, Hyun G, Anderson JL, Hollomon W, Barrack RL, Nunley RM, Moskowitz G, Davila-Roman V and Eby CS for the GIFT investigators. Effect of genotype-guided warfarin dosing on clinical events and anticoagulation control among patients undergoing hip or knee arthroplasty: the GIFT randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. Sept. 26, 2017.

Washington University School of Medicine's 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked seventh in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Nicely done and quite complete.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Tens of thousands of kids may benefit from cholesterol-lowering medication, but no one would know because screening guidelines exclude too many children, U.S. doctors said Monday.

In a report published in the journal Pediatrics, they call for screening of all children, expanding one set of current recommendations that target only those whose parents or grandparents have heart disease or high cholesterol. Another existing set of guidelines doesn’t call for screening in any children.

Screening all children would “identify a number of children who are of very significant risk of premature heart disease,” said Dr. William Neal of West Virginia University in Morgantown, who led the new study.

Neal said treating youth with cholesterol-lowering drugs, the so-called statins, would curb the risk that they went on to develop heart problems in middle age. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the Western world.

Based on data from West Virginia, Neal and colleagues found that more than one percent of all fifth-graders had cholesterol levels that warranted drug treatment. But a third of those children didn’t have relatives with heart disease or high cholesterol, and so wouldn’t have been screened under the current guidelines, issued by the government’s National Cholesterol Education Program.

“I have gradually become convinced that universal screening in children is not only preferable, but necessary,” said Neal. He added that although universal screening would be expensive, it would save a lot of money later on if heart disease could be prevented.

But not all scientists agree that screening is a good idea. For example, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal expert panel, currently doesn’t recommend routine cholesterol screening in any children.

“Unfortunately, there is no evidence that starting a ten-year-old on cholesterol-lowering drugs will prevent heart disease 40 years later,” said Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, a member of the task force.

He said statin treatment in children was still controversial, and that no long-term safety data existed.

The new study tapped into data from more than 20,000 children who had been screened at public schools in West Virginia over five years.

More than seven in 10 school kids had first-degree relatives with heart disease, and about one percent of those had “bad” cholesterol (LDL cholesterol) levels that might require drug treatment in addition to diet changes and exercise, according to the researchers.

Yet among the kids without heart disease in their family, the percentage of children who might benefit from treatment was closer to two percent than to one, meaning that family history didn’t seem to make a difference.

“It is therefore prudent to implement universal screening in the pediatric population independent of family history,” the researchers conclude.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The journal Pediatrics stated that the study authors did not report any relevant financial interests. The story did include comments from an independent expert.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 15, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- The quit-smoking drug Chantix may also help problem drinkers cut their alcohol consumption, a small new study suggests.

Exactly how this drug curbs drinking is not fully understood, but its use may increase blood pressure, heart rate and feelings of sadness and nausea, thereby blunting the pleasurable effects of alcohol, the researchers said.

"Chantix might reduce alcohol consumption by reducing overall enjoyment of the alcohol drinking experience," said study author Emma Childs, a research associate at the University of Chicago.

"Chantix increased the unpleasant effects of alcohol, for example feeling drowsy and irritable, [and] participants also reported that they didn't like the alcohol effects as much," Childs said.

Approved to help smokers quit in 2006, Chantix (varenicline) has its share of potential side effects. In July 2009, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration mandated that Chantix carry a "black box" warning about the potential risks of depression and suicidal thoughts. Recently, the drug was linked to a small but significant risk of heart attack and stroke among people with pre-existing heart disease. Chantix costs roughly $3 per pill.

The results of the new study were released online in Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research prior to publication in the May print issue.

The study included 15 healthy participants who took part in six sessions. They received a 2-mg dose of Chantix and an inactive placebo, followed three hours later by a beverage containing either a placebo, a low dose of alcohol, or a high dose of alcohol.

Before and after the sessions, the researchers asked the participants about their mood, tested visual ability and measured physiological responses such as blood pressure and heart rate.

The participants found the Chantix-booze combination increased the unpleasant effects of alcohol and reduced the rewarding aspects of drinking.

Whether the drug might someday be approved to help problem drinkers cut back remains to be seen, said the researchers, who acknowledged that the study's small size is a limitation.

"We are not currently performing any studies with Chantix, although other groups are actively pursuing this line of research with a view to developing Chantix as an aid to people wanting to quit or cut down their drinking," Childs said.

Dr. Ihsan Salloum, professor of psychiatry and director of the alcohol and drug abuse treatment program at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, termed the study encouraging.

Noting that new ways of treating alcoholism are much needed, Salloum said that Chantix may have a niche among smokers with alcohol-dependence issues. "We need a lot more options in terms of medicines to help curb drinking," he said. "We have many options for depression and need more for alcoholism, considering it is one of the most common diseases around the world."

More research is needed, he noted, but "this medication may be helpful for people with a drinking problem who are also smokers."

The study was funded by the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse and the U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.

Learn more about alcoholism and how it is treated at the U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does include an independent source. There was no disclosure statement included with the preview copy of the research article, so it is not known whether any of the researchers have ties to Pfizer (the maker of Chantix) or other pharmaceutical companies in this area.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — LEAWOOD, KS — Osteoarthritis (OA) is one of the leading causes of disability in adults in the United States and knee OA specifically is ranked within the top 10 non-communicable diseases for global disability-adjusted life years. The lifetime risk of suffering symptomatic knee OA is estimated to be 44.7% and approximately 1 in 11 of the US population is diagnosed with symptomatic knee OA by age 60. With this knowledge, the American Medical Society for Sports Medicine (AMSSM) has released a new scientific statement that provides guidance for physicians and healthcare professionals who provide care for those patients with knee osteoarthritis.

There is a general consensus that the initial management of knee OA treatment should include weight loss and strengthening exercises. However, certain aspects of treatment for knee OA are controversial. In light of these issues, the AMSSM convened an expert writing group of four sports medicine physicians to review the latest data and provide recommendations for the sports medicine community.

“We do not treat groups of people we treat individuals,” said Dr. Thomas Trojian, Lead Author and Past AMSSM Board of Director. “It is important to look at how a person responds to a medication. Does the person improve if given an injection of viscosupplementation more likely than placebo or intra-articular steroid? Using a network meta-analysis we are able to compare the multiple studies done on viscosupplementation and have found that people are more likely to show clinical improvement with viscosupplementation over placebo (saline) and intra-articular steroids. This is different than studies recently published that say the average response differs.” The full report, published ahead of print in the Clinical Journal of Sport Medicince (CJSM) and will appear in the (British Journal of Sports Medicine) BJSM, entitled, AMSSM Scientific Statement Concerning Viscosupplementation Injections for Knee Osteoarthritis Importance for Individual Patient Outcomes, includes the following notable AMSSM recommendations and one suggestion:
• AMSSM RECOMMENDS viscosupplementation injections for Kellgren and Lawrence (KL) grade II-III knee osteoarthritis in those patients above the age of 60 based on HIGH quality evidence demonstrating benefit using OMERACT-OARSI Responder Rating but the evidence should be downgraded due to indirectness for those under 60 years of age.
• AMSSM SUGGESTS viscosupplementation injections for knee osteoarthritis for those under the age of 60 based on MODERATE quality evidence due to response of treatment in those over 60.
• AMSSM RECOMMENDS clinicians and researchers collect OMERACT-OARSI responder data to track individual response to the viscosupplementation.

The full paper will be published in print in the January 2016 issues of CJSM and BJSM.

Thanks to members Drs. Thomas Trojian (AMSSM Past Board of Director), Susan Joy (AMSSM Foundation Board Member), Andrew Concoff and John Hatzenbuehler along with Whitney Saulsberry, PharmD and Craig Coleman, PharmD for serving on the expert writing group for this paper. The AMSSM hopes that this information can assist healthcare professionals as they provide care for patients with osteoarthritis.

About AMSSM: AMSSM is a multi-disciplinary organization of 3,000 sports medicine physicians dedicated to education, research, advocacy and the care of athletes of all ages. The majority of AMSSM members are primary care physicians with fellowship training and added qualification in sports medicine who then combine their practice of sports medicine with their primary specialty. AMSSM includes members who specialize solely in non-surgical sports medicine and serve as team physicians at the youth level, NCAA, NFL, MLB, NBA, WNBA, MLS and NHL, as well as with Olympic teams. By nature of their training and experience, sports medicine physicians are ideally suited to provide comprehensive medical care for athletes, sports teams or active individuals who are simply looking to maintain a healthy lifestyle. www.amssm.org
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The information is being provided by the American Society for Sports Medicine, a multidisciplinary group of clinicians who specialize in sports medicine. There is a potential for an inherent bias. In case that needs spelling out the potential bias is that the association may be seeking new patients beyond its athlete patient base, and expanding into the aging population of “baby boomers” who have the greatest incidence of knee osteoarthritis.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bethesda, MD (June 5, 2017) -- There may soon be a new tool in the fight against childhood obesity. Prebiotics reduce body fat in children who are overweight or obese by altering their gut microbiota, according to new research published in Gastroenterology, the official journal of the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA). Prebiotics are non-digestible food ingredients (such as fiber) that act as fertilizers to help stimulate the growth of good bacteria already in the gut, different from probiotics, which introduce new bacteria into the system.

"This is a well-designed trial that demonstrates how a prebiotic could potentially help combat one of the most prevalent and costly conditions afflicting children in the developed world -- overnutrition -- by targeting the gut microbiome," said Geoffrey A. Preidis, MD, PhD, a member of the AGA Center for Gut Microbiome Research and Education scientific advisory board. "It is promising to see this evidence that alteration of the gut microbiota can be used to restore health. As a clinician, I hope that continued research into prebiotics will lead to a new strategy for the treatment of obesity."

For this study, researchers from the University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada, performed a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with 42 participants. Participants included children, 7 to 12 years old, who were classified as overweight or obese (>85th percentile of body mass index) but otherwise healthy. Participants were randomly assigned to groups given either the prebiotic fiber -- oligofructose-enriched inulin -- or a placebo, once daily for 16 weeks. The prebiotic was provided as a white powder, mixed in water.

"Powdered fiber, mixed in a water bottle, taken once a day is all we asked the children to change, and we got, what we consider, some pretty exciting results -- it has been fantastic," added Raylene A. Reimer, PhD, RD, professor and researcher in the Faculty of Kinesiology at University of Calgary, who led the study.

Based on four-month intervention data, the annual projected body weight increase in the prebiotic group would be 3 kilograms (6.6 pounds), within the expected healthy range, whereas the projected increase in the placebo group was 8 kilograms (17.6 pounds), almost triple the expected yearly weight increase. Thus, supplementation with the prebiotic improved outcomes in children who were overweight or obese. Importantly, the researchers show that the prebiotic induced specific gut bacterial shifts compared to placebo.

This is the first randomized controlled study to assess comprehensive changes in gut microbial composition with prebiotic intervention in children who are overweight and obese. Excess weight in childhood tends to persist into adulthood and is an early risk factor for obesity-associated morbidity and mortality, highlighting the importance of early intervention.

The metabolic and microbial findings from this study provide a foundation for a larger clinical trial in the pediatric population. Prebiotics are inexpensive and non-invasive and therefore a plausible dietary treatment in the overweight and obese pediatric population.

This work was supported by grants from the BMO Financial Group Endowed Research Fund in Healthy Living, Alberta Children's Hospital Foundation, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP115076-1). Clinicaltrials.gov no: NCT02125955.

Nicolucci, A.C., Hume, M.P., Martínez, I., Mayengbam, S., Walter, J., Reimer, R.A. Prebiotic Reduces Body Fat and Alters Intestinal Microbiota in Children With Overweight or Obesity. Gastroenterology (2017), doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2017.05.055

The American Gastroenterological Association is the trusted voice of the GI community. Founded in 1897, the AGA has grown to more than 16,000 members from around the globe who are involved in all aspects of the science, practice and advancement of gastroenterology. The AGA Institute administers the practice, research and educational programs of the organization. http://www. .

Gastroenterology, the official journal of the AGA Institute, is the most prominent scientific journal in the specialty and is in the top 1 percent of indexed medical journals internationally. The journal publishes clinical and basic science studies of all aspects of the digestive system, including the liver and pancreas, as well as nutrition. The journal is abstracted and indexed in Biological Abstracts, Current Awareness in Biological Sciences, Chemical Abstracts, Current Contents, Excerpta Medica, Index Medicus, Nutrition Abstracts and Science Citation Index. For more information, visit http://www. .

Like AGA and Gastroenterology on Facebook.

Follow us on Twitter @AmerGastroAssn, @AGA_Gastro (New!)

Check out our videos on YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding sources were listed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study that tracked tens of thousands of midlife and older men for more than 20 years has found that vigorous exercise and other healthy lifestyle habits may cut their chances of developing a lethal type of prostate cancer by up to 68 percent.

While most prostate cancers are 'clinically indolent,' meaning they do not metastasize and are nonlife-threatening, a minority of patients are diagnosed with aggressive disease that invades the bone and other organs, and is ultimately fatal. Lead author Stacey Kenfield, ScD, of UCSF, and a team of researchers at UCSF and Harvard, focused on this variant of prostate cancer to determine if exercise, diet and smoke-free status might have life-saving benefits.

In the study, published today, Nov. 17, 2015, in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, the researchers analyzed data from two U.S. studies: the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study that tracked more than 42,000 males ages 40 to 75, from 1986 to 2010; and a second, the Physicians' Health Study that followed more than 20,000 males ages 40 to 84, from 1982 to 2010.

To gage the effects of lifestyle habits, the researchers developed a score based on the results of the health professionals survey, then applied it to the physicians' study. They assigned one point for each affirmative response to questions about regular intense exercise that induced sweating, body mass index (BMI) under 30, tobacco-free status for a minimum of 10 years, high intake of fatty fish, high intake of tomatoes and low intake of processed meat.

To reduce error, participants had to be free of diagnosed cancer at the start of the study and a four-year lag was imposed to rule out those who unknowingly had lethal prostate cancer, which was determined by evidence of 'prostate cancer death or metastasis to the bones or other organs, excluding the lymph nodes.' Cases were confirmed through medical records and pathology reports, and cause of death was determined by death certificate and medical record, and secondarily by next of kin.

The researchers identified 576 cases of lethal prostate cancer in the health professionals' group and 337 cases in the physicians' group. Participants with 5 to 6 points in the health professionals' group had a 68 percent decreased risk of lethal prostate cancer and a 38 percent decreased risk was observed in the physicians' group for the same comparison. For dietary factors alone, men with three points, versus those with zero points, had a 46 percent decreased chance of developing lethal prostate cancer in the health professionals' group. In the physicians' group this decrease was 30 percent.

While there were fewer cases and less detailed data collected in the physicians' study, the score was similar in both populations, indicating the potential benefit of healthy lifestyle habits in warding off lethal prostate cancer, said the authors.

"We estimated that 47 percent of lethal prostate cancer cases would be prevented in the United States if men over 60 had five or more of these healthy habits," said Kenfield, assistant professor in the Department of Urology at UCSF Medical Center, and formerly of the Department of Medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston, where the study was initiated.

"It's interesting that vigorous activity had the highest potential impact on prevention of lethal prostate cancer. We calculated the population-attributable risk for American men over 60 and estimated that 34 percent of lethal prostate cancer would be reduced if all men exercised to the point of sweating for at least three hours a week," Kenfield said.

The researchers also calculated that lethal prostate cancer among American men over 60 would be cut by 15 percent if they consumed at least seven servings of tomatoes per week and that 17 percent would be spared this diagnosis if they consumed at least one serving of fatty fish per week. Reducing intake of processed meats would cut the risk by 12 percent, they reported. In contrast, the population-attributed risk for smoking was 3 percent, largely because the majority of older American men are long-term nonsmokers.

"This study underscores the ongoing need for more effective prevention measures and policies to increase exercise, improve diet quality and reduce tobacco use in our population," said senior author June M. Chan, ScD, from the departments of Urology, and Epidemiology and Biostatistics at UCSF. "It takes co-operation and effort from multiple areas, like insurance companies, employers, policy makers and city planners, to figure out how to creatively support and encourage more exercise into most busy adults' working day. These lifestyle habits align with other recommendations to prevent diabetes and heart disease."

About one man in seven will be diagnosed with prostate cancer during his lifetime, making it the most frequently diagnosed cancer in the United States, excluding non-melanoma skin cancer. According to the American Cancer Society, in 2015 there will be approximately 220,800 cases of prostate cancer and approximately 27, 540 deaths.

This study was supported by grants from the Prostate Cancer Foundation and the National Institutes of Health.

Co-authors are Erin Van Blarigan, ScD, of the departments of Urology, and Epidemiology and Biostatistics at UCSF; Howard Sesso, ScD, MPH; Edward Giovannucci, MD, ScD; Meir Stampfer, MD, DrPH, and Julie Batista, ScD, all of Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital; Mary Kathryn Downer and Jaquelyn Jahn both of Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, and Brigham and Women's Hospital.

UCSF is a leading university dedicated to transforming health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. Founded in 1864 as a medical college, UCSF now includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with world-renowned programs in the biological sciences, a preeminent biomedical research enterprise and top-tier hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals. Please visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding sources were clearly identified, and there are no clear conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The antidepressant Prozac may alleviate repetitive behavior and obsessive-compulsive symptoms in adults with autism, reducing these defining symptoms of the disorder, according to new research.

The research, which included 37 high-functioning autistic adults, mainly diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome, followed participants for 12 weeks. Taking Prozac (fluoxetine) doubled the chances that a patient would show overall improvement, measured by their clinicians. Half of the participants taking Prozac had significant reductions in obsessive-compulsive symptoms, compared with 8% taking placebo. Side effects were mild to moderate and participants taking Prozac did not show increases in suicidal thoughts or ideas.

“Repetitive behavior is a core symptom of the illness,” says lead author Dr. Eric Hollander, medical director of the Autism and Obsessive-Compulsive Spectrum Program at Montefiore Medical Center in New York, explaining that “from a very early age, these children have rituals and routines. For example, they like to line up their toys and they get very bent out of shape if there is any deviation.”

MORE: What Does a 400% Increase in Antidepressant Use Really Mean?

A previous, larger study of a similar medication, Celexa (citalopram), in autistic children did not find a reduction in repetitive behaviors, but the drug did reduce irritability and was superior to placebo among children who had the highest levels of irritability. Irritability can sometimes lead to repetitive behaviors because autistic people often engage in these activities to soothe themselves.

Both Prozac and Celexa belong to a class of antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs. Prior research on SSRIs in autistic people has also looked at Luvox (fluvoxamine) and found a reduction in repetitive behavior in adults but not children. It is not known if the differences between these studies are due to differences between the medications or other factors.

Obsessive behaviors may also arise in autistic people in response to the stress or discomfort of unpredictable situations. “Many of these individuals have expectations for what’s going to happen, and if there is an unexpected deviation, they experience a lot of discomfort and then they do all these kinds of behaviors,” says Hollander. That’s why people with autism may obsessively avoid locations where they previously experienced discomfort, for example, or they may engage in a repetitive habit like washing, checking, counting, touching or tapping.

When taking Prozac, Hollander says, “Patients acknowledge experiencing less discomfort. They’re more able to go outside their comfort zone and to better resist their habits and rituals.” One participant in Hollander’s study was previously too anxious to take the subway or eat in a restaurant, but, when taking Prozac, was able to tolerate these unpredictable environments.

“It takes the edge off,” Hollander explains, noting that the findings were statistically significant and clinically meaningful. “The clinicians could tell that people were doing better not only in terms of OCD symptoms but overall distress and ability to function.”

MORE: Why Are So Many Foster Care Children Taking Antipsychotics?

The only drugs approved to treat irritability and repetitive behaviors in autistic children are the atypical antipsychotics Risperdal (risperidone) and Abilify (aripiprazole), which tend to have more severe side effects than Prozac does. Those drugs carry significant risk for weight gain, diabetes and movement disorders.

Responding to the research, Yale Child Study Center director Fred Volkmar told WebMD: “The question remains, ‘Is fluoxetine better than risperidone for this symptom?’ It would be interesting to see studies comparing these two drugs head to head.”

Hollander has previously received funding from pharmaceutical companies, but the current study was paid for by a grant from the Food and Drug Administration’s “orphan” drug program. That program funds research on rare conditions with new drugs or those no longer patented that are not likely to be pursued by industry. When the research was originally funded, Hollander says, autism was considered to be a rare condition.

The study was published in the American Journal of Psychiatry.

Maia Szalavitz is a health writer at TIME.com. Find her on Twitter at @maiasz. You can also continue the discussion on TIME Healthland’s Facebook page and on Twitter at @TIMEHealthland.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story briefly quotes another story in which Yale Child Study Center director Fred Volkmar commented on the study, indicating that more research was needed. We would have liked to have seen more independent voices helping readers understand whether there was anything new here. The story also says, “Hollander has previously received funding from pharmaceutical companies, but the current study was paid for by a grant from the Food and Drug Administration’s “orphan” drug program.”
 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — RESEARCH TRIANGLE PARK, NC— Major depressive disorder affects more than 32 million Americans, and their first stop for treatment is often their primary care provider. A recent evidence review of several alternatives to medication found that using cognitive behavioral therapy as the first treatment for depression can be equally effective as using a second generation antidepressant.

The research from the RTI International-University of Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center was published today in the British Medical Journal. The authors focused specifically on comparing second generation antidepressants, such as Wellbutrin, Lexapro and Prozac with cognitive behavioral therapy, which includes several in-person or phone sessions with a therapist to examine how actions and thoughts can impact depression. Second-generation antidepressants refers to newer antidepressants introduced primarily in the 1980s and 1990s.

"Major depressive disorder is a disabling and prevalent form of depression, experienced by more than 16 percent of U.S. adults during their lifetime," said Arlene Bierman, M.D., Director, Center for Evidence and Practice Improvement, at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which funded the study. "Most patients will be prescribed antidepressants. However, the evidence shows that cognitive behavioral therapy can be just as effective, providing important information for patients and their physicians to consider when choosing among available treatment options."

After conducting a full review of the scientific literature available, the researchers examined 11 randomized controlled trials with 1,511 patients that compared a second generation antidepressant with cognitive behavioral therapy. They found that symptom improvement and rate of remission were similar between the two options, whether used alone or in combination with each other.

"Primary care clinicians and their patients may not automatically consider alternatives when discussing treatment," said Halle Amick, research associate at the RTI International-University of Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center and lead author. "Our findings indicate that both options should be considered effective initial treatment strategies."

Side effects from antidepressants can include constipation, diarrhea and dizziness. Patients also sometimes express concerns about becoming addicted to medications and therefore prefer psychotherapy. However, psychotherapy can be time-consuming and may be substantially more expensive, depending on the patient's insurance benefits.

"Given comparable effectiveness, doctors need to discuss advantages and disadvantages of both treatment options with their patients. Such shared and informed decision making might enhance treatment adherence which is one of the main challenges of treating major depressive disorder," said Gerald Gartlehner, M.D., associate director of the RTI-UNC Evidence-based Practice Center, who was the principal investigator of the evidence review, which was also published today by AHRQ.

A journal article describing all the review findings will be published in the Annals of Internal Medicine in January.

"Bringing psychotherapy into discussions of treatment may also enhance coordination of care between primary care and mental health care providers in addition to addressing the issue of patient-centered care," Amick said. "If primary care providers discuss psychotherapy with their patients as a valid treatment option, it may empower patients to voice their preferences and truly participate in medical decision-making and encourage them to adopt and adhere to effective treatment of their depression."

RTI-UNC Evidence-based Practice Center is a collaboration between RTI and the five health professions schools and the Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research at UNC. It is funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) funded the study. AHRQ is a government agency that studies and promotes improved quality in health care.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE: 11 A.M. (ET), WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 5, 2015

Media Advisory: To contact corresponding author Gretchen A. Brenes, Ph.D., call Marguerite Beck at 336-716-2415 or email marbeck@wakehealth.edu. To contact editorial author Eric J. Lenze, M.D., call Jim Dryden at 314-286-0110 or email jdryden@wustl.edu.

To place an electronic embedded link to this study in your story Links will be live at the embargo time: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.1154 and http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.1306

Telephone-based cognitive behavioral therapy was better at reducing worry, generalized anxiety disorder symptoms and depressive symptoms in older adults who live in rural areas, where access to mental health treatment may be limited, according to an article published online by JAMA Psychiatry.

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is one of the most common anxiety disorders in older adults and is associated with poor quality of life, increased health care utilization and impaired memory. Medications and psychotherapy are the primary treatments. Many older adults prefer psychotherapy to medication for the treatment of anxiety. However, older adults who live in rural areas can face a number of barriers, including living in an area where psychotherapy is not available, so alternate methods of providing treatment could increase utilization, according to the study background.

Gretchen A. Brenes, Ph.D., of the Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, N.C., and coauthors compared telephone-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) with telephone-delivered nondirective supportive therapy (NST) in a randomized clinical trial of 141 adults 60 or older with generalized anxiety disorder. The participants (70 were assigned to telephone CBT and 71 to telephone NST) were followed up at two months and four months.

Telephone CBT consisted of up to 11 sessions (nine required) and focused on, among other things, anxiety symptom recognition, cognitive restructuring, relaxation, coping statements and problem solving. Telephone NST was 10 sessions where participants discussed their feelings but no direct suggestions for coping were provided.

The clinical trial demonstrated both treatments reduced symptoms of worry, depression and GAD, but telephone CBT was superior to telephone NST and resulted in a greater reduction of symptoms.

At four month’s follow-up there was greater decline in worry severity among telephone CBT participants but no significant differences in general anxiety symptoms. At four months’ follow-up there also was greater decline in self-reported GAD symptoms and depressive symptoms among participants in the telephone CBT, according to the results.

“Telephone-delivered psychotherapy is one way to overcome some barriers to mental health treatment that rural older adults face,” the study concludes.

This work was funded by a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Editorial: Solving the Geriatric Mental Health Crisis in the 21st Century

In a related editorial, Eric J. Lenze, M.D., of the Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, writes: “Therefore, we are in the midst of the following two unprecedented trends: the aging of the population and the transformation of everything in our lives by mobile technology. These two trends are inextricably linked in the area of geriatric mental health and our search for better, more effective treatments with greater reach.”

The author made conflict of interest disclosure. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and funding from the Taylor Family Institute for Innovative Psychiatric Research. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An end note points out that this study was funded by the National Institute of Mental Health.  There was no indication of any conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Phone support can help ease postpartum depression, a small study suggests, offering an option for mothers who are unable or unwilling to seek therapy in person.

In the study, women with postpartum depression received telephone counseling from other women who had previously suffered from the disorder and recovered. The new moms found that the conversations helped relieve symptoms.

“Postpartum depression is a problem for one in seven women, and many of them don’t get help because there’s a stigma and they don’t have time and it’s expensive,” said study leader Dr. Nicole Letourneau, a professor and research chair in parent-infant mental health at the University of Calgary. “Training peer counselors to do phone counseling is an effective, low-cost and non-stigmatizing way for new moms to get the help they need.”

Particularly for first-time mothers, postpartum depression can be hard to distinguish from the stress and fatigue that come with caring for a new infant around the clock, Letourneau said. Symptoms can include sadness, insomnia, difficulty concentrating and making decisions, feelings of shame or guilt, as well as difficulty bonding with the baby or thoughts about harming the baby.

To assess the effectiveness of phone counseling for easing these symptoms, Letourneau and colleagues identified 64 mothers with symptoms of major depression within 24 months after delivery and offered them up to 12 weekly peer support calls.

The average mom with depression was about 26 years old. Most had symptoms of depression before they got pregnant, and many had previously been treated with medication or professional counseling.

The women who volunteered as peer counselors attended an eight-hour training course and received reference materials about postpartum depression. They also had nurses available for phone consults if they had concerns about anything the moms said during their conversations.

By midway through the study, 37 new moms had received at least one call from a peer counsellor. On average, the women spoke more than eight times and the calls typically lasted about 38 minutes, the researchers reported in the Journal of Advanced Nursing.

Over the second half of the study, 34 mothers had at least one phone conversation with a peer counsellor. On average, they spoke about three times.

Mothers who left the study said they no longer needed support, sought counseling from mental health professionals, or didn’t have time for the phone calls.

While all of the mothers were depressed at the start of the study, at mid-point only 32 percent were at risk for depression, and this declined to 15 percent at the end. Furthermore, at mid-point, 60 percent of the mothers had low depression scores; this percentage rose to 75 percent at end.

Even though the small study had several women drop out and lacked a control group of moms who received different treatment, the results are consistent with previous research that has proven peer counseling works, said Dr. Ruta Nonacs, a psychiatrist at the Center for Women’s Mental Health at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.

“It is a very powerful experience to be able to talk to a woman who has gone through the same thing and come out the other side,” said Nonacs, who wasn’t involved in the study. “A lot of first-time moms wonder what’s normal, what’s depression, and what to do with the fact that they feel overwhelmed and alone and like their experience looks nothing like the happy moms they see smiling in all of the baby food and diaper commercials.”

Because postpartum depression is the most common complication of childbirth, it makes sense to explore peer counseling and other interventions that can reach women in rural or suburban areas where access to mental health professionals may be limited, said Dr. Samantha Meltzer-Brody, director of the perinatal psychiatry program at the Center for Women’s Mood Disorders at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

“Most people in the world have access to a telephone,” said Meltzer-Brody, who wasn’t involved in the study. “This study, while small, suggests that peer phone counseling could be a very effective, widespread public health intervention.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes two outside sources and notes explicitly that they were not involved in the current study. Gratifying!
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gut Check is a periodic look at health claims made by studies and by newsmakers. We ask: Should you believe this?

The Claim: If you drink coffee you’ll live forever! Well, almost: nurses and other health professionals who drink coffee (regular or decaf) had a lower risk of premature death than coffee abstainers.

The Backstory: . . . is enough to make STAT cross-eyed. Decades of studies have examined links between coffee drinking and health outcomes. Overall, the conclusions have been pro-coffee. Lots of research has linked coffee drinking to a lower risk of dying early, including this, this, and this. Other studies have found associations with lower risk of specific conditions, like this on cardiovascular disease (by many of the same authors as the new study), this on stroke, this on heart failure, and this on diabetes. Most research has found the greatest benefits with daily consumption of around three or four cups — usually 6 to 8 ounces, and without distinguishing regular from decaf. Fewer studies link coffee to a higher likelihood of dying prematurely, but this classic found a link between 6-plus cups a day and dying of cardiovascular disease, while this 2013 paper, on 43,727 people followed for a median of 17 years, concluded that adults under 55 who averaged more than 4 cups a week had a 56 percent (men) or 130 percent (women) higher risk of dying over the study period than non-coffee drinkers.

First Take: The new research, published in Circulation on Monday and funded by the National Institutes of Health, mined three large, ongoing epidemiological studies (74,890 women in the Nurses’ Health Study, 93,054 women in the Nurses’ Health Study 2, and 40,557 men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study), following them for at least 20 years. Overall, the heaviest coffee-drinkers (more than five cups a day, regular or decaf) had a tiny 2 percent additional risk of dying compared with coffee abstainers. Those drinking 1.1 to 3 cups, and 3.1 to 5 cups, had slightly (9 percent and 7 percent) lower risks of dying.

Then the researchers, led by Dr. Frank Hu of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, did something clever: they ran the analysis on nonsmokers only. That eliminated the stereotypical coffee-swilling, cigarette-sucking types. Result: people drinking 1.1 to 3 cups a day had an 8 percent lower mortality risk, while the 3.1-5-cup crowd had a 15 percent lower mortality risk, mostly due to lower risk of deaths from cardiovascular disease, neurological diseases, type 2 diabetes, and suicide. Even the 5-plus’s had 12 percent lower mortality.

A co-author of the 2013 study linking heavy coffee drinking to higher mortality called the new one “very good,” especially since it controlled for the deadly effects of smoking, which the earlier one did not. It “supports the safety and efficacy of even high doses of coffee in non-smokers,” said Dr. Carl Lavie, a cardiologist at Ochsner Health System. But given the 2013 research suggesting “toxicity of high coffee doses” in some people, he said, “to me the most reasonable approach would be to keep coffee intake to two to three cups most days.”

Second Take: STAT knows better than to get between coffee lovers and their cup o’ joe, so if you want to take this study as permission to keep beating a path to your Keurig, we’re not going to slow you down.

This is another observational study, where researchers look for associations between people’s freely-chosen diet and other lifestyle decisions and subsequent health outcomes. Correlations do not establish causation: a link between Behavior A and Health Outcome B might or might not mean that A caused B. It might mean instead that a third factor — another behavior, socioeconomic status, even personality or genetics — might go hand in hand with Behavior A and be the true cause of Outcome B. Maybe people who drink coffee have some genetic, psychological, or behavioral trait (drinking fewer sugary beverages? eating less junk food?) that causes the observed benefit.

But surely the population in this study is so huge and socioeconomically similar (all health professionals) that correlation is more likely to reflect causation?

More likely, yes, but don’t count on it. This same Nurses Health Study, for instance, infamously found a correlation between post-menopausal hormone therapy and lower risk of cardiovascular disease and death, here and here. That turned out to be wrong. The definitive, randomized Women’s Health Initiative study showed that hormone therapy raised the risk of cardiovascular disease, contradicting the NHS and shocking nearly everyone.

Takeaway: Observational studies that associate coffee drinking with health benefits are strongly suggestive but not definitive. If you do want to infer causation from this latest study, know that drinking coffee reduced the absolute mortality risk from 6.8 deaths a year per 1,000 people to, at best, 5.8. That is, each year, coffee would be keeping 1 person in 1,000 from dying.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The STAT story included not just any  “outside” expert comment, but chose  a co-author of a seminal 2013 study, whose professional credibility added to the story’s. And unlike the CNN story, it offered details of the ongoing epidemiological studies from which the new data were drawn.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — DURHAM, N.C. -- Patients suffering from noninfectious uveitis, a group of diseases that causes eye inflammation, can get effective treatment from a corticosteroid alternative that has previously been approved for treatment of arthritis and Crohn’s disease, according to a study led by a Duke Health researcher.

The Food & Drug Administration recently approved the additional use of adalimumab (sold as Humira) for patients with noninfectious uveitis. Corticosteroids have traditionally been the only FDA-approved treatment for these diseases, although some doctors had prescribed adalimumab off-label.

The FDA’s approval is limited to treatment of the three types of noninfectious uveitis that pose the greatest threat of vision loss. Glenn Jaffe, M.D., a professor in the Department of Ophthalmology at Duke University School of Medicine, said adalimumab works to treat uveitis by targeting a protein that is thought to promote inflammation. Jaffe led one of two clinical studies that formed the basis of the FDA’s approval and was senior author of the study appearing Sept. 8 in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM).

“Patients may have many unwanted side effects when taking steroids long-term, as many uveitis patients do,” Jaffe said. “The goal of these studies was to determine whether there was an alternative that could replace or minimize the use of steroids. The studies also looked at whether an alternative would be better tolerated or more effective, yet still safe.”

The study consisted of 217 adults who had active, non-infectious intermediate or posterior uveitis, or panuveitis. Participants were randomly assigned to a group that received either adalimumab or a placebo at the start of the trial and every two weeks thereafter. All participants also initially received standard doses of the corticosteroid prednisone, and continued to receive it in diminishing doses over the course of 15 weeks.

Jaffe and colleagues then analyzed patients’ time to treatment failure, or how soon they saw a recurrence or worsening of one or more of four signs of inflammation: new areas of inflammation in the back of the eye, reduced visual clarity, more inflammatory cells in the front of the eye, or more cloudiness of the gel that fills the eye. Jaffe said the study focused on time to treatment failure because delaying or preventing inflammation is the key to successful treatment.

“It is the active inflammation, caused by the body’s immune system reacting against itself, that can potentially permanently decrease the patient’s vision and cause unwanted symptoms, such as eye pain and floaters in the field of vision,” he said. “The hope is that by delaying or eliminating recurrences, the symptoms will be minimized or eliminated.”

The researchers found that median time to treatment failure was 24 weeks in the adalimumab group and 13 weeks in the placebo group. Patients in the adalimumab group were also significantly less likely to experience treatment failure during the duration of the study (80 weeks) and they were at lower risk of treatment failure due to each of the four signs.

Jaffe said the study’s results are significant not only because they indicate adalimumab delays treatment failure, but also because the investigation considered several signs as causes for treatment failure.

“Using these multiple, possible endpoints was something unique to this study,” Jaffe said. “Since each of these signs can be associated with different types of uveitis, the study’s results broaden the applicability of treatment for patients.”

The study authors note, however, that patients in the adalimumab group reported serious adverse effects, such as respiratory tract infections and allergic reactions, more frequently than those in the placebo group.

In addition to Jaffe, co-authors include Andrew D. Dick, Antoine P. Brézin, Quan Dong Nguyen, Jennifer E. Thorne, Philippe Kestelyn, Talin Barisani-Asenbauer, Pablo Franco, Arnd Heiligenhaus, David Scales, David S. Chu, Anne Camez, Nisha V. Kwatra, Alexandra P. Song, Martina Kron, Samir Tari, and Eric B. Suhler.

AbbVie, the pharmaceutical company that manufactures and markets adalimumab as Humira, sponsored the study. Dr. Jaffe served as a consultant for AbbVie, and other study authors also report financial relationships with the company. Further author disclosures are available in the study’s manuscript.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release dedicates a whole paragraph to summarizing potential conflicts of interest, which is welcome and we hope to see this kind of transparency showing up in more releases in the future. It further directs readers to the published study’s supplementary documents for more extensive disclosure information.
In the PDF of supplementary materials we learned that only two out of the 17 authors had no conflicts of interest to declare. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Note: A media teleconference with researchers and patients from Johns Hopkins and New York University will be held on Wednesday, Nov. 30, from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. ET. To participate, U.S.-based media may call 855-698-2663; international media should dial 011-646-754-2524. The access code is 48330192. Phone lines open at 10:50 a.m., and all media should place speakers on mute unless posing a question. Reporters wishing to ask a question should email their name and outlet to david.march@nyumc.org during the briefing so they may be placed in a queue; the moderator will call on individual media members to ask a question in the order names and outlets were received.

In a small double-blind study, Johns Hopkins researchers report that a substantial majority of people suffering cancer-related anxiety or depression found considerable relief for up to six months from a single large dose of psilocybin -- the active compound in hallucinogenic "magic mushrooms."

The researchers cautioned that the drug was given in tightly controlled conditions in the presence of two clinically trained monitors and said they do not recommend use of the compound outside of such a research or patient care setting.

The Johns Hopkins team released its study results, involving 51 adult patients, concurrently with researchers from New York University Langone Medical Center, who conducted a similarly designed study on 29 participants. Both studies are published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology on Dec. 1.

The Johns Hopkins group reported that psilocybin decreased clinician- and patient-rated depressed mood, anxiety and death anxiety, and increased quality of life, life meaning and optimism. Six months after the final session of treatment, about 80 percent of participants continued to show clinically significant decreases in depressed mood and anxiety, with about 60 percent showing symptom remission into the normal range. Eighty-three percent reported increases in well-being or life satisfaction. Some 67 percent of participants reported the experience as one of the top five meaningful experiences in their lives, and about 70 percent reported the experience as one of the top five spiritually significant lifetime events.

"The most interesting and remarkable finding is that a single dose of psilocybin, which lasts four to six hours, produced enduring decreases in depression and anxiety symptoms, and this may represent a fascinating new model for treating some psychiatric conditions," says Roland Griffiths, Ph.D., professor of behavioral biology in the Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and of Neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. He notes that traditional psychotherapy offered to people with cancer, including behavioral therapy and antidepressants, can take weeks or even months, isn't always effective, and in the case of some drugs, such as benzodiazepines, may have addictive and other troubling side effects.

Griffiths says his team's new study grew out of a decade of research at Johns Hopkins on the effects of psilocybin in healthy volunteers, which found that psilocybin can consistently produce positive changes in mood, behavior and spirituality when administered to carefully screened and prepared participants. The study was designed to see if psilocybin could produce similar results in psychologically distressed cancer patients.

"A life-threatening cancer diagnosis can be psychologically challenging, with anxiety and depression as very common symptoms," says Griffiths. "People with this kind of existential anxiety often feel hopeless and are worried about the meaning of life and what happens upon death."

For the study, the investigators recruited 51 participants diagnosed with life-threatening cancers, most of which were recurrent or metastatic. They were chosen from a total of 566 individuals reached through flyers, web advertisements and physician referrals. Most participants had breast, upper digestive, GI, genitourinary or blood cancer, and each had been given a formal psychiatric diagnosis, including an anxiety or depressive disorder.

Half of the participants were female with an average age of 56. Ninety-two percent were white, 4 percent were African-American and 2 percent were Asian.

Each participant had two treatment sessions scheduled five weeks apart, one with a very low psilocybin dose (1 or3 milligrams per 70 kilograms) taken in a capsule and meant to act as a "control" placebo because the dose was too low to produce effects. In the other session, participants received a capsule with what is considered a moderate or high dose (22 or 30 milligrams per 70 kilograms).

To minimize expectancy effects, the participants and the staff members supervising the sessions were told that the participants would receive psilocybin on both sessions, but they did not know that all participants would receive one high and one low dose. Blood pressure and mood were monitored throughout the sessions. Two monitors aided participants during each session, encouraging them to lie down, wear an eye mask, listen to music through headphones and direct their attention on their inner experience. If anxiety or confusion arose, the monitors provided reassurance to the participants.

In addition to experiencing changes in visual perception, emotions and thinking, most participants reported experiences of psychological insight and often profound, deeply meaningful experiences of the interconnectedness of all people.

The researchers assessed each participant's mood, attitude about life, behaviors and spirituality with questionnaires and structured interviews before the first session, seven hours after taking the psilocybin, five weeks after each session and six months after the second session. Immediately after the sessions, participants completed questionnaires assessing changes in visual, auditory and body perceptions; feelings of transcendence; changes in mood; and more.

Structured clinical interviews, such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, and patient questionnaires, like the Beck Depression Inventory and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, assessed depression and anxiety. Other questionnaires assessed quality of life, death acceptance, meaningful existence, optimism and spirituality -- generally defined as a search for the meaning of life and a connection to something bigger than one's self. To measure the changes in attitudes, moods and behavior over time, the researchers administered a questionnaire that assessed negative or positive changes in attitudes about life, mood and behavior.

With regard to adverse effects, Griffiths says 15 percent of participants were nauseated or vomited, and one-third of participants experienced some psychological discomfort, such as anxiety or paranoia, after taking the higher dose. One-third of the participants had transient increases in blood pressure. A few participants reported headaches following the session.

"Before beginning the study, it wasn't clear to me that this treatment would be helpful, since cancer patients may experience profound hopelessness in response to their diagnosis, which is often followed by multiple surgeries and prolonged chemotherapy," says Griffiths. "I could imagine that cancer patients would receive psilocybin, look into the existential void and come out even more fearful. However, the positive changes in attitudes, moods and behavior that we documented in healthy volunteers were replicated in cancer patients."

Up to 40 percent of people with cancer suffer from a mood disorder, according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.

Anticipating wide interest in the psilocybin research from scientists, clinicians and the public, the journal solicited 11 commentaries to be co-published with the study results written by luminaries in psychiatry, palliative care and drug regulation, including two past presidents of the American Psychiatric Association, a past president of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology, the former deputy director of the U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy, and the former head of the U.K. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority. In general, the commentaries were supportive of the research and of using these drugs in a clinical setting as tools for psychiatry.

Additional authors included Matthew Johnson, Michael Carducci, Annie Umbricht, William Richards, Brian Richards, Mary Cosimano and Margaret Klinedinst, all of The Johns Hopkins University.

The study was funded by grants from the Heffter Research Institute, the RiverStyx Foundation, William Linton, the Betsy Gordon Foundation, the McCormick family, the Fetzer Institute, George Goldsmith, Ekaterina Malievskaia and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (R01DA03889).
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly lists the sources of funding for the research. That’s enough to earn it a satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
While use of the products in such operations has since fallen, one expert said the new report should convince doctors to stop using them in anterior cervical fusions, as the procedure is known. The use of a bioengineered protein should be “discontinued either permanently or until further information becomes available regarding how to use it safely,” said Dr. Thomas A. Einhorn, chairman of orthopedic surgery at Boston University.

One form of the bioengineered protein is marketed by Medtronic under the brand name Infuse, and another form is sold by Stryker as OP-1 Putty.

Infuse is also at the center of a controversy in which Army officials have accused a Medtronic consultant who was a former military doctor of falsifying data in a study about the product. Medtronic recently suspended its relationship with that doctor, Timothy R. Kuklo.

Federal and state investigators are conducting separate investigations to determine whether either company illegally promoted off-label use of their products for procedures including cervical fusions. Both companies deny the accusations. Although doctors are free to use any product on the market for whatever purposes they choose, companies may promote them only for their federally approved uses.

The products’ use in cervical fusion procedures is a small component of their total sales, which reached an estimated $760.3 million in 2008, with Medtronic’s share the larger one, according to Millennium Research Group, a consulting firm in Toronto.

Marybeth Thorsgaard, a Medtronic spokeswoman, said the company was close to completing a clinical trial involving the use of Infuse in anterior cervical fusion. In a statement, she said the trial would help address how the procedure, if approved by federal regulators, “should be appropriately managed to minimize complications.”

Some experts have speculated that the adverse effects were dose-related. Medtronic has also noted such effects in Infuse’s warning label.

The study published Tuesday found that patients who had received the bioengineered proteins during spinal fusions for lower or middle back pain did not have increased complications when compared with those who did not get the product. But complications rates while patients were still in the hospital were 50 percent higher for cervical fusions procedures, researchers reported.

Dr. Kevin S. Cahill, a neurosurgeon at Brigham and Women’s, who led the study released Tuesday, said he believed the complication rates for the cervical fusion procedures were actually higher than those reported in the study because complications often occurred after a patient left the hospital.

“Ours is probably a bottom estimate,” Dr. Cahill said.

He added that the study also confirmed how quickly physicians had adopted the proteins both for approved and unapproved uses. By 2006, just four years after such products were first sold, the proteins were used in about 25 percent of all spinal fusions, the review found.

Dr. Richard A. Deyo, a spine expert who is a professor at Oregon Health and Science University in Portland, said the new study also suggested that the F.D.A could do a better job monitoring problems by analyzing hospitals records, just as Dr. Cahill and his colleagues had done.

The research team based its report on records collected through a database known as the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, which gathers information from 20 percent of the nation’s hospitals. The high complication rate was seen in 2006 data..

“I would have hoped that this sort of surveillance would be a routine part of F.D.A practice,” Dr. Deyo said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


 
The story includes comments from two independent experts, as well as a study author and a spokeswoman for a manufacturer. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“There’s really no precedent for another drug that does this,” said Dr. Matthew R. Smith, a prostate cancer specialist at the Massachusetts General Hospital.

Also, bone scans actually measure bone formation, not the presence of cancer itself. So it cannot be completely ruled out that XL184 somehow stopped bone growth without killing the cancer. However, Dr. Smith said he doubted that was the case because there were signs the drug also controlled tumors outside the bones.

Drugs now used to treat advanced prostate cancer, like Taxotere, do not have much affect on bone scans, Dr. Smith said. Bone drugs like Zometa from Novartis and denosumab from Amgen can protect cancerous bones from fractures, but have not been shown to fight the cancer itself.

Another investigator in the trial, Dr. David C. Smith of the University of Michigan, said he could not believe it when the bone scan of one patient, who previously had widespread cancer in his bones, came back completely clean.

“I thought they had scanned the wrong person,” said Dr. Smith, who is not related to the doctor in Massachusetts. “I’ve never seen anything like this.”

Exelixis will now add many prostate cancer patients to the midstage clinical trial from which the results were drawn, said Michael M. Morrissey, the company’s chief executive. A late-stage trial could begin as early as next year, he said.

XL184 is believed to block the formation of blood vessels that feed tumors and also inhibits a protein called MET that helps spur tumor growth.

Provenge from Dendreon, by contrast, trains the patient’s immune system to attack the tumor. The drug was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in April after a clinical trial showed that those getting the drug had a median survival of about 26 months, four months longer than those in a control group.

Some critics say Medicare would not be doing a review of a drug already approved by the F.D.A. were it not for its high cost.

“One has to wonder if today’s meeting is about something other than science, namely the cost,” Brad Loncar, an investor in Dendreon whose grandfather died of prostate cancer, told the Medicare Coverage Advisory Committee on Wednesday.

Dr. Louis Jacques, director of the coverage and analysis group at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said cost was not a factor and that the agency had reviewed products approved by the F.D.A. in the past.

Dr. Jacques said he ordered the review after being contacted by federal lawmakers questioning why their constituents could not get the drug. He realized that reimbursement by regional Medicare contractors was inconsistent, so he decided the agency should have a uniform national policy.

The Medicare Coverage Advisory Committee, which met in Baltimore, did not discuss the cost of Provenge or make a coverage recommendation. It reviewed the clinical trial data and then rated the strength of the data on a scale of 1 to 5.

The 10 voting members, mainly doctors and health policy experts, averaged 3.6 on the question of how much confidence they had that there was adequate evidence to conclude that Provenge significantly prolongs survival.

That is between 3, which is intermediate confidence and 5, which is high confidence. But some analysts said that should be enough for reimbursement. Trading in Dendreon shares, halted during regular market hours, rose 6 percent after hours.

However, the panel gave very low scores to evidence that the drug would help prostate cancer patients other than the type who participated in the clinical trial, which were men with advanced cancer, but no or minimal symptoms. That could give Medicare grounds for denying payment when the drug is used off-label, as cancer drugs often are.

Medicare is scheduled to put a proposed decision out for comment by March 30, with a final decision around the end of June.

Provenge has stirred passions since the F.D.A. initially declined to approve it in 2007. Some Dendreon investors and prostate cancer patients staged protests and advertising campaigns and sued the F.D.A. Two doctors who had spurred investor wrath by voting against the drug’s approval at an advisory committee meeting attended a major cancer conference accompanied by bodyguards.

Medicare’s review has drawn hundreds of comments, mostly in favor of coverage. One criticism of the drug was filed by a law firm, Willkie Farr & Gallagher, on behalf of a client who the law firm said wanted to remain anonymous because of the “public vilification of anyone that questions Provenge.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted at least one clinical expert who did not appear to have ties to the study reported on or the company that makes the drug. It would have greatly improved this story if insight from an expert on prostate cancer, especially castration-resistant prostate cancer had provided a context for evaluating the benefit of the drugs reported on – including quality of life issues.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Drugs To Prevent Weak Bones Linked To Unusual Fractures In Women

There's fresh evidence pointing to a troubling link between commonly used osteoporosis drugs and a rare type of thighbone fracture.

When a hip bone breaks because of osteoporosis, the fracture usually involves either the ball at the top of the femur or the narrow neck just below the ball. The unusual fractures that may be associated with certain osteoporosis drugs called bisphosphonates occur lower on the bone. Ironically, that's where the femur, the longest bone in the body, is usually strongest.

These unusual fractures can occur suddenly without any trauma, such as a fall. And they can be complex breaks that are difficult to fix and slow to heal.

In the study, published in current issue of JAMA, researchers looked at 716 of these fractures in more than 200,000 Ontario women who had taken bisphosphonates.

Women who had taken the drugs for five years or longer had nearly a three times higher risk of suffering atypical fractures compared with women who had only transient exposure to such drugs.

That's called the relative risk, and it seems alarming. But the "absolute risk" of these unusual fractures is still pretty low — 13 fractures per year for every 10,000 people taking bisphosphonates for five years or longer. That is, long-term users have a risk of about a tenth of 1 percent.

Moreover, the study verified that long-term use of bisphosphonate drugs reduces the risk of typical osteoporosis fractures by 24 percent. That's obviously a lot more benefit than risk.

"The big message really is the number of typical hip fractures is much, much larger than the number of unusual thigh fractures," says Dr. Gillian Hawker of St. Michael's Hospital in Ontario, an osteoporosis specialist and study author. "So although we believe there is an increased risk of these unusual fractures, it doesn't outweigh the benefit" of taking osteoporosis drugs.

Merck, which makes Fosamax, the original and leading bisphosphonate drug, criticizes the new study. The company said in a statement to Shots that women who had atypical fractures were different from those who didn't. For instance, they started out with a history of more fractures, so the comparison isn't valid.

"Merck believes that the results must be interpreted with caution and should not be overstated," says the company's statement.

Still, the accumulating evidence that there is a risk of these serious, unusual fractures associated with bisphosphonates is getting a lot of attention in the medical community.

Last fall the Food and Drug Administration issued a "safety update" urging doctors and patients to be on the lookout for the problem. Often, the FDA says, an atypical fracture is preceded by pain in the thigh, apparently from a small stress fracture that signals bone weakness. "Although it is not clear if bisphosphonates are the cause, these unusual femur fractures have been predominantly reported in patients taking bisphosphonates," the FDA says.

The concern is heightened by another, even rarer possible side effect – osteonecrosis of the jaw. Basically, it means that part of the jawbone dies.

Some reports – including one published earlier this month in the Journal of Dental Research — have found a higher risk of the jaw problem in dental patients taking bisphosphonates.

Again, Merck disputes the connection. Earlier this month it convinced a New Jersey jury that Fosamax did not cause one woman's jaw problems.

Amid all the debate, many specialists are wondering if women on bisphosphonates should take a "holiday" from the drug from time to time. The idea is that perhaps they'd get the osteoporosis benefit without the risks of osteonecrosis and unusual fractures. "You could do five years on, five years off," Dr. Clifford Rosen, a bone specialist at Maine Medical Center, tells Shots. "Some people are doing three on and three off."

But at some point, should these patients start taking the drug again? "I don't think anybody knows," Rosen says. "The thought is you would have to put them back on at some time."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: NPR provides us with three fresh sources beyond the JAMA article itself.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DURHAM, N.C. -- Duke University researchers have developed a handheld device for cervical cancer screening that promises to do away with uncomfortable speculums and high-cost colposcopes.

The "pocket colposcope" is a slender wand that can connect to many devices, including laptops or cell phones.

If widely adopted, women might even use the device to self-screen, transforming screening and cure rates in low-income countries and regions of the United States, where cervical cancer is most prevalent.

Cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer in women, with more than 500,000 new cases occurring annually worldwide. In the United States, physicians diagnose more than 10,000 cases each year. While more than 4,000 American women die of the disease each year, the mortality rate has dropped more than 50 percent in the past four decades, largely due to the advent of well-organized screening and diagnostic programs.

While the Pap smear can be performed by a non-specialist, colposcopy requires visualization of the cervix, relying on highly trained professionals and expensive equipment that is not easily accessible to underserved populations. These factors make cervical cancer more prevalent in women living in low socioeconomic communities.

In a new paper published on May 31 in the journal PLOS One, researchers from Duke believe they have found a better way.

"The mortality rate of cervical cancer should absolutely be zero percent because we have all the tools to see and treat it," said Nimmi Ramanujam, the Robert W. Carr, Jr., Professor of Biomedical Engineering at Duke. "But it isn't. That is in part because women do not receive screening or do not follow up on a positive screening to have colposcopy performed at a referral clinic. We need to bring colposcopy to women so that we can reduce this complicated string of actions into a single touch point."

Current standard practices for cervical cancer screening require three things: a speculum, a colposcope and a trained professional to administer the test.

The speculum is a metal device designed to spread the vaginal walls apart. The colposcope is a magnified telescopic device and camera designed to allow medical professionals to look through the speculum to see the cervix, which is located three to six inches inside the vagina. Colposcopes and people who know how to use them are difficult to find in many low-income regions, both domestically and internationally.

Ramanujam believes she can replace at least two of these requirements. Her laboratory has developed an all-in-one device that resembles a pocket-sized tampon with lights and a camera at one end. Health providers -- or even women themselves -- are able to capture images of the cervix using the rounded tip of the device to manipulate its position if necessary. The device also includes a channel through which contrast agents used for the cervical cancer screening procedure can be applied.

"We recruited 15 volunteers on Duke's campus to try out the new integrated speculum-colposcope design," said Mercy Asiedu, a graduate student working on the project in Ramanujam's lab. "Nearly everyone said they preferred it to a traditional speculum and more than 80 percent of the women who tried the device were able to get a good image. Those that couldn't felt that they just needed some practice."

Ramanujam and Asiedu are now working on clinical trials to see how their design stacks up against the traditional colposcopy used with a speculum. By using both methods to visualize the cervix, the researchers will be able to make a direct comparison.

Asiedu is also working to automate the screening process. By using image processing and machine learning to teach computers how to spot signs of precancerous and cancerous cells, Asiedu hopes to remove the need for a trained physician at any point in the screening process and shift the task to midwives, community health workers and even the women themselves.

"There have been a few other attempts to come up with a better solution, but none of them have succeeded," said Asiedu. "One design using an inflatable cylinder proved just as uncomfortable as a traditional speculum. Another using directed airflow is just as bulky and expensive as a modern colposcope. With our handheld, low-cost design, we're hoping to redefine the entire procedure."

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (1R01CA195500, 1R01CA193380).

CITATION: "Design and Preliminary Analysis of a Vaginal Inserter for Speculum-Free Cervical Cancer Screening," Asiedu MN, Agudogo J, Krieger M, Miros, R, Proeschold-Bell, RJ, Schmitt JW, Ramanujam N. PLOS One, May 31, 2017. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177782
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release acknowledges in a footnote that the research was funded by the National Institutes of Health. That’s enough to meet our standard, but putting this information in the body of the release would make it more likely to be picked up by syndicators and others who might redistribute this content.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
After decades of dreaming about getting patients' immune systems to fight cancer, immunotherapy is finally here. The Food and Drug Administration approved Provenge this spring to treat advanced prostate cancer.

But now the study that led to FDA approval is finally out in this week's New England Journal of Medicine. And it's clear that experts are still scratching their heads about just how Provenge works.

It does work, sort of.

In the study, men with prostate cancer that no longer responds to hormone therapy (basically, chemical castration) lived about four months longer if they took Provenge than if they got placebo treatment. That's better than the only other approved treatment for such advanced cancers.

But, as the study's lead author Dr. Philip Kantoff acknowledges, "It's not a home run; this is not going to cure prostate cancer."

The primary mystery is how Provenge extends life, since it doesn't shrink prostate tumors, as far as anyone can tell. "Prolongation of survival without a measurable antitumor effect is surprising," writes Dr. Dan Longo of the National Institute on Aging in a NEJM editorial.

Deep in the data is further mystery.

Provenge is supposed to work by, in effect, vaccinating patients against their own cancers using a patient's own white blood cells.

The theory is that the custom-made vaccine incites patients' immune cells to attack the cancer. The study shows that patients who got Provenge were indeed more likely to mount immune-cell responses to a prostate cancer antigen in the test tube. But oddly, the patients who had these activated immune cells didn't survive any longer than those who didn't.

The other side of the immune system – the antibody arm -- showed a different picture. Patients who had a good antibody response to Provenge lived longer than those who didn't.

Nobody yet knows just how to explain these results. Longo, the NEJM editorialist, says he'd be more convinced if the placebo patients had received infusions of white blood cells that had been exposed just to the general immune-stimulating part of the Provenge treatment, without the prostate antigen part.

The way the study was done, he says, "does not allow one to conclude" that Provenge is working because it mobilizes the immune system specifically against prostate cancer.

But, after all, Provenge is just the first cancer immunotherapy on the market. So it's not surprising there's a lot to be learned, and that it's pretty pricey.

Other immunotherapy approaches are in the pipeline, along with fancier versions of drugs to block the hormones that feed prostate cancer.

Meanwhile, Dendreon, the Seattle-based company that makes Provenge, says there's a waiting list for the drug. The company estimates 100,000 American men have the kind of hormone-resistant, metastatic cancer the drug is approved to treat. But the company can only make enough at this point for 2,000 patients in the first year.

So does the waiting list contain thousands of men? Tens of thousands? "Can't say," replies Dendreon COO Hans Bishop.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Solid quotes from the written editorial accompanying the study in the New England Journal of Medicine and even an appropriately cautious quote from the lead author of the study. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS, Oct. 20, 2015 -- Botox -- known for reducing facial wrinkles -- may also prevent irregular heart rhythms when injected into fat surrounding the heart after bypass surgery, according to research in the American Heart Association journal Circulation: Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology.

Botulinum toxin, commonly known as Botox, is produced by Clostridium botulinum bacteria. When a small amount of Botox is injected into a muscle, it blocks nerve signals that tell muscles to contract.

Atrial fibrillation (also called AFib or AF) is a quivering or irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia) that can lead to blood clots, stroke, heart failure and other heart-related complications.

"About a third of all patients undergoing bypass surgery will develop atrial fibrillation, putting them at higher risk for cardiovascular complications," said Jonathan S. Steinberg, M.D., senior study author and Adjunct Professor of Medicine at the University of Rochester and Director of the Arrhythmia Institute in the Valley Health System in Ridgewood, New Jersey. "Atrial fibrillation is also always associated with lengthened hospitalization and that means increased healthcare costs."

In two Russian hospitals, researchers randomly assigned 60 patients to receive Botox or saline injections. The injections were made in the four major fat pads surrounding the heart. To avoid bias, neither patients nor doctors knew whether the injections contained Botox or saline.
• In the 30 days following surgery, those who received Botox injections during heart bypass surgery had a 7 percent chance of developing AF, compared to 30 percent chance in patients who received saline.
• One year after surgery, none of the patients who received Botox had AF, compared to 27 percent of the patients who received saline.
• No complications from the Botox injections were reported. But complications from the bypass surgery were similar in both groups, including time in intensive care and on a breathing machine, and infection rate.

The results must be replicated in larger studies before Botox injections are routinely used to prevent AF after bypass surgery, researchers said. If confirmed in heart bypass patients, Botox injections could also help prevent AF in people undergoing valve repair or replacement. About half of those patients will develop AF after surgery.

"This first-in-man study has opened a whole new line of thinking and research," Steinberg said. "In the near future, botox injections may become the standard of care for heart bypass and valve patients, but we're not quite there yet."

Co-authors are Evgeny Pokushalov, M.D.; Boris Kozlov, M.D.; Alexander Romanov, M.D.; Artem Streinikov, M.D.; Sevda Bayramova, M.D.; David Sergeevichev, Ph.D.; Alexander Bogachev-Prokophiev, M.D.; Sergey Zheleznev, M.D.; Vladimir Shipulin, M.D.; Vladimir Lomivorotov, M.D.; Alexander Karaskov, M.D. and Sunny S. Po, M.D. Author disclosures are on the manuscript.

The Russian State Research Institute of Circulation Pathology and the Siberian Division of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences funded the study.

Researcher photo, heart graphic, and beating heart animation are located in the right column of this release link: http://newsroom. 

About Your Bypass Surgery Brochure 

What is Atrial Fibrillation 

Follow AHA/ASA news on Twitter @HeartNews.

Statements and conclusions of study authors published in American Heart Association scientific journals are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the association's policy or position. The association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations are available at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources (The Russian State Research Institute of Circulation Pathology and the Siberian Division of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences) are noted in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eugene Overton was given two options after being diagnosed with melanoma last year: standard chemotherapy or an experimental treatment.

Overton chose the experiment, an injection he receives every three weeks. The idea is simple: Instead of poisoning the cancer and causing grueling side effects, it signals the patient's immune system to attack malignant cells, much as the body does with viruses and bacteria.

"I figured chemotherapy would, at most, just control the cancer," says Overton, 74, a retired surgeon who lives in Lampasas, about 85 miles north of Austin. "But if my body could be trained to recognize wandering cancers, that might be a cure."

Doctors aren't using the word cure — Overton hasn't even finished treatment — but after years of painstaking research, immunotherapy is starting to show promise as a cancer treatment. Famously unsuccessful in previous decades, it's poised to break through in the near future, say cancer immunologists.

Around the country, about 140 immunotherapy trials are under way, some of them the final hurdle before they go up for Food and Drug Administration approval. Leading the way is the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, which three years ago opened a state-of-the-art immunology research center.

In one high-profile success, one of the therapies has helped keep an M.D. Anderson doctor healthy and thriving nearly 15 months after he was diagnosed with the deadly disease he treats: brain cancer. The cancer, glioblastoma, typically kills within that time.

The greatest promise seems to involve blood and microscopic cancers, but targets for immunotherapies in clinical trials range from lymphoma and brain cancer to cancers of the breast, prostate, colon and lung. More are on the way.

"It's the first time I've seen usually jaded oncologists excited about the prospects with immunotherapy," says Dr. Amy Heimberger, an M.D. Anderson neurosurgeon whose study of the glioblastoma immunotherapy drug won a Young Investigator's Award from the American Association of Neurological Surgeons. "Suddenly, senior doctors who once pooh-poohed immunotherapy are referring patients to junior researchers in the field."

The treatment — shots that grab the immune system and jolt it to fight against rebel tumor cells — has been a dream for more than a century. It dates back to 1891, decades before antibiotics, when New York doctor William Coley inoculated cancer patients with live streptococcal cultures and some experienced remissions.

Over the years, the shot fell by the wayside, a victim of its own inconsistent results and the growing dominance of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. Other attempts flopped, often after grandiose claims by practitioners. By the 1970s, when cancer researchers referred to immunotherapy, it usually was dismissively.

However, in the years after, the first real seeds of the science were being planted via a better understanding of immunology. By the mid-90s, textbooks had grown to 1,000 pages. Researchers began describing early immunotherapy efforts as so crude they really had little in common with the new field.

The challenge was getting the immune system to recognize the enemy. A sort of anatomical turncoat — good cells gone bad — cancer doesn't set off the immune system's attack dogs like germs do. The new knowledge, much of it thanks to the genomics revolution, is helping cancer scientists remedy that.

Specifically, researchers discovered markers unique to cancer cells the immune system can be trained to target. They also found naturally occurring, immune system-boosting compounds that can be produced in the laboratory. As a result, the researchers are now giving one-two punches of drugs that energize the immune system and direct it to go after cancer cells it had hardly noticed.

"It's made a big difference," says Dr. Jeff Molldrem, an M.D. Anderson professor of blood and marrow transplantation. "It's like suddenly having the cancer's postal address and being able to activate the immune system to deliver its blow there."

Some early returns have been impressive. One therapy at M.D. Anderson produced complete responses in a clinical trial for patients with acute myeloid leukemia for which no other intervention had been successful. Another, the trial involving glioblastoma, found that median survival for 23 participants significantly surpassed that for patients treated with the most current chemotherapy and radiation regimen.

At the Mary Crowley Medical Research Center in Dallas, scientists developed an immunotherapy that produced responses — sometimes years-long remission — in half of trial participants with a kind of lung cancer that typically kills within four to six months. And at the National Cancer Institute, a mix of cancer-specific T cells and a booster produced unheard-of improvement in patients with advanced melanoma.

Surprisingly, some research shows immunotherapy works best in conjunction with chemotherapy or radiation, which suppress the immune system. An M.D. Anderson study found immunotherapy helped fight an aggressive form of lymphoma, even though prior chemotherapy had eliminated virtually all the B cells thought necessary to mount a defense.

Because it doesn't inflict the damage to healthy tissue caused by chemotherapy and radiation, immunotherapy's great appeal is its nontoxicity. Overton, for instance, boasts he's not only had no recurrence of his melanoma, he's also had no side-effects from the treatment.

Despite the endorsements, not everyone is ready to proclaim immunotherapy the future of cancer treatment.

"So many claims have been made about immunotherapy that have not borne out," says Dr. Steven Rosenberg, an NCI scientist who conducted the melanoma study but also published a review about the lack of randomized trials in support of the therapy. "The field is promising, but there's always danger in making claims before the real data's in."

Researchers acknowledge immunotherapy's promise is furthest from realization for bulky solid tumors, perhaps too advanced for the immune system to beat. They say the greatest strides are being made against cancers where the immune system can fight them in manageable stages, such as in the blood or lymph nodes.

That's why immunotherapy's greatest successes will come when it can be used early in treatment, they say. Now, because drugs are mostly tested on patients whose cancer has resisted previous treatment, it's usually used on tumors advanced to often fatal stages.

If all goes well, researchers hope to learn enough to not just trigger the immune system to fight cancer, but to prevent it. A few such cancer vaccines exist — notably, the recently approved cervical cancer vaccine — but they prevent viruses that cause those cancers, and most cancers aren't caused by viruses. Such research already is under way — a potential antidote for people whose genetics seemingly fate them for cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes two MD Anderson researchers as well as a scientist at the NCI, who provides much needed balance at the end of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Max, Rowan and Charlie Vertin’s muscles have been slowly collecting damage since the day they were born. Someday, they will not be able to walk. They will not be able to stand. Eventually, they will not be able to live. The brothers, ages 6 through 11, suffer from a debilitating and deadly genetic condition called Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD).

Yet on September 28, Max, Rowan and Charlie Vertin got dressed up. In dark suits and blue shirts, with serious expressions on their round faces, they walked to stand next to their mother in a very beige room outside Washington, D.C. The people in that room, they believed, could change the course of their lives.

For years, the Vertin brothers have been participating in a clinical trial for a new medication called ataluren, intended to keep the progression of their disease at bay. By October 24, they’ll know if they will be able to keep taking that drug. That is the deadline for the Food and Drug Administration to make a choice. The agency could approve the drug, allowing the brothers and others like them to continue to take it. Or it could reject the drug for the third time and throw them into an uncertain future.

An FDA committee has already voted that data about the drug’s effectiveness was inconclusive. The agency’s final decision almost always echos the decisions of its committees. So, if this were any other kind of drug at any other time in FDA history, the FDA’s final answer would be a very predictable no.

If they do say no, the Vertins could lose access to the drug that has stabilized their condition. But there’s still a chance the FDA could approve the drug. Input from people affected by DMD may have convinced the agency once before to approve a drug for the condition despite iffy data. That is what the Vertins—and the company that produces the drug—are hoping will happen again.

“It started out so innocent,” his mother, Betty Vertin, told Newsweek. Max was a big infant, born 10 lbs, 3 oz and nearly two feet long. “When he was missing milestones, I just thought it was because it was a big baby.” Even doctors assumed that he would eventually catch up. But when he started preschool, the difference between Max and other children became more obvious. “When other kids were running and jumping and climbing, Max wasn’t doing those things. He was just behind, physically.”

When Max was 4, in 2010, a genetic test confirmed that he had DMD. Betty had never heard of it. “Before we started living this life, I was clueless,” she said.

DMD is one of a class of similar genetic disorders. About 15 boys out of every 100,000 in the United States under 24 years old have DMD or a milder form, called Becker muscular dystrophy. (Most of the children affected are boys.) The illness affects the way their legs, heart, and lungs work.

Max’s diagnosis was devastating for Betty. “I feel like I walked into the room with a healthy four-year-old boy and I walked out with a child that was dying,” she said.

But the family’s struggles with DMD were just beginning. At the time, Rowan was 2, and Betty suspected that he also had the disease; she’d seen how her son struggled to stand up onto a stepstool in the bathroom to brush his teeth. She was also ten weeks pregnant with Charlie.

Genetic tests eventually confirmed both Rowan and Charlie also had DMD. Betty’s two daughters, Lexi, 16, and Mary, 2, as well as a fourth son, Chance, 10, do not.

“I felt like we had a year and a half of the same horrible diagnosis over and over and over again,” she said. “It was the hardest 18 months I’ve ever had and I hope I ever had.”

DMD always results in muscle weakness due to a lack of a protein called dystrophin. Some of the newest treatments for the condition try to fix that. One drug, which the FDA approved in 2016, works for people whose illness springs from a mutation in the gene that codes for dystrophin.

The drug, called Exondys 51 or eteplirsen, allows the genetic machinery that produces the protein to skip over the mutated part to make something that will work better. About 13 percent of people with DMD have this particular mutation, according to the FDA.

The Vertin brothers are not among them; the drug shouldn’t help them at all. So they tried ataluren. (The drug’s brand name is Translarna.) The company that produces ataluren, PTC Therapeutics, says that its drug forces cells to make the proteins in spite of a different kind of mutation called a nonsense mutation. Instead of having an error in the protein, the protein is accidentally cut short. This is the kind of mutation that three of Betty Vertin’s children have.

The Vertins have received the drug free through the clinical trial, and expenses for their trip from Nebraska to Washington, D.C. were paid by PTC Therapeutics.

Ataluren works by ordering a cell to use a slightly different piece to build the protein—as if someone spray-painted the word “don’t” on the molecular version of a stop sign. Exactly how it does that is still mysterious. A paper published by the company’s scientists in the Proceedings of the National Academies of Science said it probably affected the ribosome, a key part of how proteins are put together in a cell. (Researchers not affiliated with the company did not find the same kind of activity.)

Regardless of what mutation causes the illness, most people with DMD die in their 20s. Betty was told to expect her oldest son, Max, to be in a wheelchair full-time by the time he was 9 or 12.

Max is 11 now. His 12th birthday is in early November. He uses an electric mobility scooter for long distances, but he can still walk. He rides a bike without training wheels and without any modifications. He has a part in a school play and goes up and down stairs to get to the stage. He even plays a trumpet in his school’s band. “He’s got the lung capacity to blow that thing, very loudly,” Betty said.

For that, Betty credits ataluren, which Max started three years ago.

“His life is—it’s not like his peers, but he’s getting a lot of the experiences that his peers are having,” she said. “He’s living a sort of a typical sixth-grade life and that diagnosis—I didn’t know what it would look like for him. I didn’t expect it to look like this.”

But not everyone considers ataluren to be a miracle drug—with good reason. The clinical trial results haven't been great. Most of the company’s studies tested how fast a child could go about 30 feet or walk up and down stairs, or how far they could walk in six minutes. They did see some slight positive results, many of which came from a study done with the specific kind of patient the company discovered benefited most in a previous trial.

The FDA needs good data to make their decision, because when the agency approves a drug is sends a signal to the world. An approval is the FDA saying, “this drug is safe and effective. You could use it for your child, too.”

PTC Therapeutics has tried to get FDA approval for the drug twice before. Both times the agency refused to even consider the application. This time, the application for approval was filed over the FDA’s protest. (The drug has been conditionally approved in Europe.)

Part of the reason that the drug has struggled is because of this requirement: if the drug is effective, the data should show it. But that hasn't happened consistently with ataluren. Many of the clinical trials failed to satisfy the statistical requirement to prove a drug works—at least not for the main outcome the company was looking at. Other, secondary measurements did seem to have good statistics. Certain groups of children seemed to have better results than others, too.

PTC Therapeutics founder and CEO Stuart Peltz says the statistics aren't a reason to reject the drug. Just because a drug doesn’t measure up in that way, he says, “doesn’t mean the drug is not effective.”

But even if the FDA agrees to overlook some of the negative data about ataluren, insurers may not. That could be a million-dollar issue for the families with affected children.

“If the evidence isn’t good, then insurance companies won’t pay for [drugs],” said National Center for Health Research (NCHR) president Diana Zuckerman. Two recently approved drugs have run into this problem: Spinraza, a drug for spinal muscular atrophy, and Exondys 51. Both drugs cost hundreds of thousands of dollars a year. Pharmaceutical companies traditionally will not discuss prices before drugs are approved; that said, ataluren costs about £220,000 in Britain. During clinical trials, participants like the Vertins normally do not pay for the treatment.

The NCHR also presented at the FDA meeting in September to discuss ataluren, urging the agency to not approve the drug without more research. The organization’s statement also raised concerns about side effects associated with the drug, specifically about the chance that it raises blood pressure and cholesterol levels in children. The company says these shifts are small and "not clinically significant."

In an e-mailed statement, FDA spokesperson Sandy Walsh confirmed that the FDA’s decisions are all “based on an assessment of the available data and whether the benefits of the drug outweigh its risks.” That data can include the experience of patients like Max, Rowan and Charlie.

To Betty, the benefits are clear, even if they aren’t easily quantified. Rowan’s gait seems better. Max still doesn’t need to use a wheelchair all the time, bucking the prediction she heard when he was first diagnosed.

However, financial analysts who track the biotech sector are not optimistic about ataluren’s immediate prospects. Matthew Eckler, a senior biotechnology analyst at RBC Capital Markets, said that analysts and investors are betting the FDA will not approve the drug.

The FDA hasn’t said no yet. The agency still has nearly two more weeks to make a decision. Until then, Betty and her sons are living with a lot of uncertainty. “I’m really scared that my boys will have to go off [ataluren],” she said. Will they have access to the drug if it’s rejected? Would their conditions deteriorate if they didn’t? What other options do they have?

Betty has no good answers. She is hoping she won’t need to come up with them.

“DMD is a progressive disease, and my boys are stable,” Vertin said. “If we can just have a few more years with our boys or buy some time until there is a cure out there, that’s huge.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Quite a few sources were interviewed for the story. And, all sources are clearly identified, including the CEO of the company that is apparently funding the clinical trials.
However, we do think the story would have been stronger had it tapped the viewpoints of an expert in muscular dystrophy who has no vested interested in the drug receiving approval.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>

• Effectiveness shown in tests on ovarian and bowel cancer
• Developed by researchers at the University of Warwick’s Warwick Cancer Research Centre
• New drug could be cheaper to produce and less harmful to healthy cells

Tests have shown that a new cancer drug, FY26, is 49 times more potent than the clinically used treatment Cisplatin.

Based on a compound of the rare precious metal osmium and developed by researchers at the University of Warwick’s Department of Chemistry and the Warwick Cancer Research Unit, FY26 is able to shut down a cancer cell by exploiting weaknesses inherent in their energy generation.

The researchers argue that the drug could be cheaper to produce, less harmful to healthy cells than existing treatments and has been shown to be active against cancer cells which have become resistant to platinum-based drugs.

The experiments conducted by the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute comprising 809 cancer cell lines found that FY26 was 49 times more potent than cisplatin. Similar results were obtained by the National Cancer Institute USA in tests conducted on 60 cell lines.

The new drug works by forcing cancer cells to use their mitochondria, the ‘power house’ of a cell, to generate the energy necessary to function. Whilst healthy cells use mitochondria to generate energy, cancer cells contain defective mitochondria which are incapable of sustaining the cell’s energy requirements.

In the absence of FY26, cancer cells switch from using their defective mitochondria to using metabolic activity in their cytoplasm to generate energy. By stopping this switch of energy source, the drug causes the cancer cell to die.

Lead researcher Professor Peter Sadler, of the University of Warwick’s Department of Chemistry, said explains:

“Healthy cells generate their energy in organelles called mitochondria, but cancer cells have defective mitochondria and are forced to generate energy through glycolysis in the cytoplasm. Our new compounds work by attacking the energy balance in cancer cells”.

Commenting on the drug’s benefits when compared to existing platinum-based drugs, such as Cisplatin, Professor Sadler says:

“Platinum-based drugs are used in nearly 50% of all chemotherapeutic regimens and exert their activity by damaging DNA and cannot select between cancerous and non-cancerous cells. This can lead to a wide-range of side-effects from renal failure to neurotoxicity, ototoxicity, nausea and vomiting.”

“Existing platinum-based cancer treatments often become less effective after the first course, as cancer cells learn how they are being attacked, but our new osmium compound with its different mechanism of action, remains active against cancer cells that have become resistant to drugs such as Cisplatin”.

The research could also lead to substantial improvements in cancer survival rates, suggests co-researcher Dr Isolda Romero-Canelon:

“Current statistics indicate that one in every two people will develop some kind of cancer during their life time, with approximately one woman dying of ovarian cancer every two hours in the UK according to Cancer Research UK and two deaths every hour from bowel cancer.

“It is clear that a new generation of drugs is necessary to save more lives and our research points to a highly effective way of defeating cancerous cells”.

The research, supported by the European Research Council and titled Potent organo-osmium compound shifts metabolism in epithelial ovarian cancer cells, is published by PNAS. The paper describes the comprehensive systems biology approach used to elucidate the mechanism of osmium action of FY26, led by PhD student Jess Hearn. Importantly this analysis also pinpointed 3 mutations in the mitochondrial DNA of ovarian cancer cells.

Following the successful test results the researchers have been awarded a Wellcome Trust Pathfinder grant to begin preclinical development of organo-osmium compounds.

The researchers thank the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (Grant 324594, Systems Biology studentship for J.M.H.), the European Research Council (Grants 247450 and 324594), and the Wellcome Trust (Grants 086357 and 102696) for support, as well as the European Union COST Action CM1105.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources were carefully noted in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Highlight
• A healthy diet high in fruits, vegetables, fish, legumes, cereals, whole grains, and fiber, and low in red meat, salt, and refined sugars was linked with a reduced risk of early death in an analysis of 7 studies.

Newswise — Washington, DC (December 8, 2016) — A diet that emphasizes healthy foods rather than individual nutrients may help patients with chronic kidney disease live longer. The findings appear in an upcoming issue of the Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology (CJASN).

Patients with chronic kidney disease are advised to follow dietary recommendations that restrict individual nutrients such as phosphorus, potassium, protein, and sodium; however, empirical evidence suggests that these restrictions—which can be difficult to abide by—have limited effects on reducing patients’ risk of premature death.

Emerging evidence indicates that overall eating patterns may have greater effects on patients’ health and longevity. To investigate, a tem led by Giovanni Strippoli, MD, PhD (University of Bari, in Italy and Diaverum, in Sweden), and Jaimon Kelly (Bond University, in Australia) analyzed the medical literature, finding 7 relevant studies that included a total of 15,285 participants.

Healthy dietary patterns were generally higher in fruits, vegetables, fish, legumes, cereals, whole grains, and fiber, and they were lower in red meat, salt, and refined sugars. In 6 studies, healthy dietary patterns were consistently associated with a 20% to 30% lower rate of mortality, with 46 fewer deaths per 1000 people over 5 years. There was no significant association between healthy dietary patterns and risk of kidney failure.

“Chronic kidney disease now affects about 10% to 13% of the adult population and substantially increases risks of cardiovascular complications and early death,” said Prof. Strippoli. “In the absence of randomized trials and large individual cohort studies, this study is the best available evidence to drive clinical decision-making by patients and doctors on whole dietary approaches in chronic kidney disease.”

Disclosures: The authors reported no financial disclosures.

The article, entitled “Healthy Dietary Patterns, Mortality and End-Stage Kidney Disease in CKD: A Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies,” will appear online at http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/ on December 8, 2016, doi: 10.2215/CJN. 06190616.

The content of this article does not reflect the views or opinions of The American Society of Nephrology (ASN). Responsibility for the information and views expressed therein lies entirely with the author(s). ASN does not offer medical advice. All content in ASN publications is for informational purposes only, and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, drug interactions, or adverse effects. This content should not be used during a medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. Please consult your doctor or other qualified health care provider if you have any questions about a medical condition, or before taking any drug, changing your diet or commencing or discontinuing any course of treatment. Do not ignore or delay obtaining professional medical advice because of information accessed through ASN. Call 911 or your doctor for all medical emergencies.Since 1966, ASN has been leading the fight to prevent, treat, and cure kidney diseases throughout the world by educating health professionals and scientists, advancing research and innovation, communicating new knowledge, and advocating for the highest quality care for patients. ASN has nearly 16,000 members representing 112 countries. For more information, please visit www.asn-online.org or contact us at 202-640-4660.# # #
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release says that the authors had no financial conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 11, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- As a major organization of pediatricians considers revising its recommendations on circumcision of newborn boys, two new reviews of existing research offer conflicting conclusions about the bitterly debated procedure.

One review, from Australia, says there's no evidence that infant circumcision will reduce the risk of sexually transmitted disease later in life, and it warns of significant psychological harm. But another from the United States gives more weight to findings from Africa that show the procedure, when it's performed on adult men, makes a major difference in preventing such diseases as AIDS.

The findings come as the American Academy of Pediatrics debates updating its recommendations regarding circumcision among newborns. The academy now takes a neutral stance.

In general, "there is still a lot of uncertainty surrounding the risks and benefits of circumcision," said Dr. Douglas S. Diekema, a pediatrician at the University of Washington who's familiar with both reviews and serves on a task force working on the academy's recommendations.

"There are some clear benefits to circumcision," he said. "There are some risks to circumcision, although the significant ones appear to be rare."

Not so, write the Australian researchers, who examined eight studies for a review in the latest issue of the Annals of Family Medicine. Two studies involved neonatal circumcision, and six involved older males, roughly 14 to 49 years old.

The review's lead author, researcher Caryn Perera of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons, said the risk of major complications ranges from 2 percent to 10 percent. "These may be considered unacceptable for an elective procedure," she said.

Parents who think circumcision has medical benefits should be aware that there's "a lack of consensus and robust evidence" on that, she added.

Though African studies have linked circumcision in adult men to lower rates of sexually transmitted diseases, including the virus that causes AIDS, Perera said that only future studies will tell if those findings are applicable to the Western world, where AIDS is much less prevalent.

And there's more to consider, Perera said. She said that circumcision poses problems from a mental point of view, potentially causing "significant anger or feeling incomplete, hurt, frustrated, abnormal or violated."

As to whether circumcision reduces sexual sensitivity, Perera said there's no evidence that it affects sensation when performed on adults. The highest-quality studies, known as randomized controlled trials, don't report whether infant circumcision affects sensation, she said.

A review in the January issue of Archives of Pediatrics & and Adolescent Medicine, which examined three studies, took a different tack. It says that risks of complications from circumcision are less than 1 percent, and "serious long-term complications are extremely rare."

Dr. Matthew Golden, an associate professor of medicine at the University of Washington Center for AIDS and STD, said the ideal study would randomly assign thousands of infants to either get circumcised or not get circumcised and then follow them for decades. But "that trial is never getting done, nor should it be done," Golden said.

For now, he said, when it comes to circumcision, "we know it's pretty safe, and we have a lot of evidence for some benefit."

The American Academy of Pediatrics has more on circumcision.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON — Prostate cancer is more likely to be life-threatening if the man's PSA level rose rapidly during the years before he was diagnosed, says a new study that may help change how PSA tests are used.

The finding could help doctors diagnose aggressive cancers earlier, when they might be easier to fight.

Perhaps more important, it suggests a more in-depth evaluation of the common blood tests could better predict who needs aggressive treatment and who has a slower-growing tumor that may be OK to monitor instead.

"This is a test that doesn't just diagnose prostate cancer. It diagnoses prostate cancer that's going to actually cause harm," said Dr. H. Ballentine Carter, urology chief at Johns Hopkins University, who led the research published Tuesday in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

The study is far from proof that making health decisions based on so-called PSA velocity can really save lives.

But Carter contends the findings suggest that men should consider getting a baseline PSA test around age 40, instead of the more usual 50, to use as a comparison for future changes.

PSA tests are used to screen men for prostate cancer, but they're imprecise. Too much PSA, or prostate-specific antigen, in a man's blood can indicate that he has either a benign enlarged prostate or cancer. Only a biopsy can tell the difference.

It's not even clear when is the best time to do a biopsy. Some men have cancer despite a "normal" PSA count of 4 or below. Yet routinely biopsying men with low PSA would worsen another problem, overdiagnosis. Many specialists say too many men today are undergoing side effect-prone treatment for tumors too small and slow-growing to ever threaten their lives.

Two years ago, Boston researchers reported that men whose PSA levels jumped more than 2 points the year before diagnosis were more likely to relapse and die despite prostate surgery. But those were men whose PSA levels were already fairly high.

Hopkins' Carter wondered if doctors could catch such men far sooner, when the cancer might be more treatable.

He turned to a study of aging that has been collecting and freezing blood samples from participants since 1958. The Hopkins team tracked PSA changes in that blood from 980 men, 20 of whom eventually died of prostate cancer and 104 of whom survived it.

How fast a man's PSA was rising a decade before his cancer was diagnosed — even before it reached that biopsy-triggering level of 4 — predicted his survival 25 years later, regardless of his ultimate cancer treatment, Carter concluded.

Those with a higher PSA velocity — the level rose more than a count of 0.35 a year — had a 54 percent survival rate, while those whose PSA rose more slowly had a 92 percent survival rate.

What does that mean for men today? That it's a good idea to order a biopsy for a man with a low but fast-rising PSA, Carter said. And men diagnosed with prostate cancer whose PSA is rising slowly may be ideal candidates for monitoring instead of surgery or other treatment, he added.

A study with just 20 deaths is far too small to prove the value of PSA velocity, cautioned Dr. Durado Brooks, a prostate specialist with the American Cancer Society.

Still, growing numbers of doctors are using the method already to help decide when to order a biopsy, and "I think the study does raise the question as to whether PSA velocity may at some point be a helpful factor in determining prognosis," he said.

The work is "another step on the road to more sophisticated" prostate cancer screening and treatment, Dr. Timothy Church of the University of Minnesota wrote in an editorial accompanying the work.

Some 234,000 U.S. men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer this year, and just over 27,000 of them will die, the cancer society estimates.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article quotes the lead author, who has very encouraging things to say about using PSA velocity to screen men for prostate cancer.  The author even goes so far as to encourage men have a baseline PSA test at age 40, which is not currently part of any guidelines.  The article also obtains independent input from a physician who cautions readers about the value of PSA velocity, providing balance to the lead author's comments.  The line "The study is far from proof that making health decisions based on the so-called PSA velocity can really save lives" also helps provide balance to the lead author's enthusiasm.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 4, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- People suffering from restless legs syndrome may find some relief by taking one of several drugs approved to treat the condition, a new review confirms.

The medications, which include Requip (ropinirole), levodopa, Neurontin (gabapentin) and Lyrica (pregabalin), appear to reduce symptoms of the syndrome in more than 60 percent of patients, researchers report. The first two drugs raise dopamine levels in the body, and the last two drugs reduce the amount of calcium reaching brain cells and trigger the production of other chemicals that help reduce pain. Dopamine is a brain chemical that regulates movement and mood.

"Physicians and patients now have better information on the effectiveness and harms of two types of drug treatments for patients with at least moderately severe restless legs symptoms in which to guide treatment choices," said review author Dr. Timothy Wilt, core investigator at the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Restless legs syndrome causes a person to feel a powerful urge to move his or her legs. The legs become uncomfortable when lying down or sitting, and the condition can disrupt sleep and take a toll on the quality of life, the researchers said.

One expert, Dr. Martin Niethammer, a neurologist at the Movement Disorders Center of North Shore-LIJ's Cushing Neuroscience Institute in Manhasset, N.Y., said this study is merely a review of the current treatments for restless legs syndrome.

"There is nothing new here at all," he said. "It doesn't add anything to the field."

This is just a compilation of evidence that follows guidelines that have been long established in both Europe and the United States, Niethammer said.

"These are the only treatments approved by the [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]," he added.

The report was published in the March 4 online issue of JAMA Internal Medicine.

For the analysis, Wilt's team reviewed 29 clinical trials. The researchers found that 61 percent of those taking dopamine agonists showed at least a 50 percent improvement in their symptoms, compared with 41 percent of those taking an inactive placebo.

In addition, those taking dopamine agonists slept better and scored higher on measures of quality of life. Dopamine agonists were originally developed to treat Parkinson's disease.

Side effects of dopamine agonists can include euphoria, hallucinations, weight loss, nausea, insomnia, tiredness or weakness, dizziness and drowsiness.

There are generic versions of Requip that cost far less, running between $11 and $22 a month. Insurance covers the treatment in most cases, so actual out-of-pocket costs will vary by insurance plan. The same is true for levodopa, Wilt said.

Neurontin and Lyrica also helped relieve symptoms in 61 percent of patients, compared with 37 percent of those taking a placebo, the researchers found.

The most common side effects of these drugs include fatigue, swelling in the legs, dizziness and weight gain.

Without insurance, Lyrica costs can run more than $100 a month, but again co-pays will vary by plan, Wilt said. The same is true for Neurontin, which can cost $117 to $135 a month without insurance.

Wilt noted there is no information on the effectiveness of treatments in pregnant women, young or old patients, those with milder symptoms or those with other serious medical conditions. "We urge caution in extending our conclusions to these individuals," he noted.

"Treatments for restless legs syndrome is now frequently advertised direct-to-consumer, and thus while this may enhance awareness it may result in patients seeking treatment for milder or other conditions not well-studied," he explained.

The harms of medications may outweigh benefits for these individuals, Wilt said. "Up to 25 to 50 percent with even moderate to severe and longstanding symptoms stop taking these medications after more than a year due to either side effects or lack of benefit," he noted.

Nonetheless, for people with moderate to severe restless legs syndrome symptoms, these medications provided important benefits, at least in the short term, Wilt said.

Patients should tell their doctors if they have bothersome sensations in their legs that include distressing, irresistible urge to move them that is relieved by rest, Wilt said.

"This may be due to restless legs syndrome or other conditions. An accurate diagnosis is important. Effective treatments for restless legs syndrome are available, and in patients with more severe symptoms may include medications," he said.

For more on restless legs syndrome, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes an outside expert who doesn’t appear to have any conflicts of interest related to this topic.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Much of the buzz over mobile health interventions seems to be about how we can use an ever-growing variety of shiny new smartphone apps and sensors to better manage our health.

But texting, that old-school technology, may deserve some of that spotlight, too.

Getting texts with motivating and informative messages led patients with coronary heart disease to make behavior changes like exercising more and smoking less, according to a study published Tuesday in JAMA, the journal of the American Medical Association. By the end of the six-month study, patients who had received the text messages had reduced their cholesterol, blood pressure and body mass index.

"I have to say, we were pretty surprised that it worked," says Clara Chow, lead author of the study and program director of community-based cardiac services at Westmead Hospital in Sydney, Australia.

And it worked to improve not just one risk factor for heart disease, but many. "These are the things that medications usually do, not text messages," says Chow, who is also an associate professor at Sydney Medical School at the University of Sydney.

In a randomized clinical trial, more than 700 patients with coronary heart disease were split into two groups: half received four text messages per week for six months plus usual care, while the other half received just usual care.

The texts that patients received were semi-personalized, based on background information about each person, such as smoking status and preferred name. For example, vegetarian participants wouldn't receive the text message about how grilling steak is healthier than deep-frying it.

Other texts might include something like, "Hi, Elizabeth. Have you gone for your walk today?" or "Have you taken your medications yet today? It's important to take them at the same time each day."

There's a lot of hype over mobile health interventions these days, Chow says. "Everyone thinks it has a lot of potential, but there's actually very little evidence."

While there are more than 100,000 health-related apps on the market, the evidence to date is lacking as to whether many of those apps are safe or effective, according to Zubin Eapen, a cardiologist and assistant professor of medicine at Duke University School of Medicine.

"We [as physicians] are always looking for evidence to make sure that we are recommending the right things for our patients, whether it's a drug, a device or a digital product, like an app," says Eapen, who is also medical director of the Duke Heart Failure Same-Day Access Clinic.

Eapen coauthored an editorial, which was published alongside Chow's study, with Eric Peterson, the Fred Cobb Distinguished Professor of Medicine in the division of cardiology at Duke and an associate editor of JAMA.

Not only does this research provide evidence that a text-based program can improve heart disease risk factors, but it also shows that a bunch of bells and whistles aren't required for successful health outcomes. A simple, low-cost program of text messaging can do the trick.

"I like to look for things that are able to be used in multiple corners of our world, from low-income settings to high-income settings," Chow says. "Everybody owns a mobile phone these days. You don't have to have a smartphone to text."

That means more access across more sectors of a population. While almost two-thirds of American adults own a smartphone, that number rises even higher when you're talking about plain old cell phones – a full nine out of 10 American adults own some kind of cell phone.

Globally, cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death. "If we are going to reach a global population, we need solutions that are both scalable and affordable," Eapen says. "And mobile health – and text messaging, maybe, in particular – represents both a scalable and affordable approach."

Making healthy changes in behavior can be tough, but for patients with heart disease, it can be vital.

Yet those daily decisions – whether to smoke that cigarette, eat that piece of cake or skip the gym – are often "far removed from the rewards or consequences," Eapen says. It can be hard to view those everyday decisions in light of more distant consequences, like having another heart attack or not living as long a life as desired. Encouraging text messages may help to inform those everyday decisions and keep a bigger goal in mind.

Chow and Eapen say the study has its limitations. It can't tell us whether text messaging could eventually lead to fewer subsequent heart attacks among the patients receiving those messages or whether the positive health outcomes would continue past the six-month study window. Yet patients in Chow's study resoundingly said that the text messaging helped them make the necessary changes – more than 90 percent of the participants found the program useful.

"People said things like, 'It wasn't actually what the messages said, it was that someone was there supporting me, thinking about me,' " Chow says.

And although Chow and her colleagues told study participants that they did not need to reply to the text messages, many of them still did. "Heaps of them replied to us," she says. "They would say, 'Thanks for the message. I've been on my walk, my blood pressure is better.' "
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes input from an outside expert who was not involved with the research.  The story clearly meets our bar here, although it would have been stronger if it had reached out to at least one more independent source — preferably one who hadn’t written an editorial that ran in conjunction with the paper in JAMA. Yes, the editorial was independent and provides some insightful commentary. But it also means we already knew where this source stood on the issue. Finding another reputable expert, who hadn’t already weighed in publicly on the work, would have been great.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - It may be possible to predict which women will develop a dangerous complication of pregnancy called pre-eclampsia weeks before they ever show the first symptoms, an international team of researchers reported Monday.

They found a series of 45 different compounds linked with metabolism that were different in the women destined to develop the condition, and said that could form the basis of a test.

Such a “metabolic fingerprint” test could save the lives of thousands of women, Philip Baker of the University of Alberta in Canada, who helped lead the study, said in a statement.

“If we can bring the rates of maternal deaths in undeveloped countries down to the rates in developed countries, by being able to determine which women are at the greatest risk for developing pre-eclampsia, then it has that potential to save thousands of lives,” Baker said.

There is currently no test to predict which women will develop pre-eclampsia, which is marked by high blood pressure and high protein levels in urine.

If mothers and their babies survive, the women later have a higher risk of high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke and diabetes. The babies are usually born prematurely and suffer complications all their lives.

The cost of treating mothers with pre-eclampsia is $45 billion a year in the United States, Europe, Asia, Australia and New Zealand, the researchers said.

In undeveloped countries, 75,000 women die from pre-eclampsia each year.

Writing in the journal Hypertension, the researchers said they did a simple study, testing the blood of 60 women who developed pre-eclampsia later in pregnancy and 60 women who did not. They ran the test at about 15 weeks gestation.

“We identified 40 organic molecules to be significantly elevated and 5 that were reduced in plasma at 14 to 16 weeks’ gestation,” they wrote.

From this series of compounds they narrowed down a list of 14 sugars, fats and amino acids that were different in the women who developed the condition.

It detected around 90 percent of the cases, with a false positive rate of about 24 percent, meaning 24 percent of the women flagged in the test as having a risk of pre-eclampsia would never actually develop it.

“A high caliber predictive test would allow women who are identified at high-risk for pre-eclampsia to seek obstetric care by specialists and to be monitored more vigilantly,” Eleni Tsigas, executive director of the Pre-eclampsia Foundation, said in a statement.

“It would also ensure that those women are educated about the warning signs of pre-eclampsia. There’s no reason why women should be caught unaware in the late stages of a pre-eclampsia
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article did include a comment from Eleni Tsigas, executive director of the Preeclampsia Foundation. A better source would have been another researcher, perhaps one of the many cited in the article. The article did not mention whether any of the researchers had conflicts of interest regarding the development of the diagnostic test. The study itself says the authors had no disclosures and reports the study to be entirely government funded. Given that at least one outside source was contacted and that there were no obvious conflicts to disclose, we give this one a pass.
 

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Doctors can use a patient’s abdominal CT scans to also check for signs of the bone-weakening disease osteoporosis, according to a new study.

The researchers, who published their findings in the Annals of Internal Medicine on Monday, compared patients’ CT scans to their dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), which is traditionally used to diagnose osteoporosis.

“What we found is that there is pretty good correlation,” said the study’s lead author Dr. Perry Pickhardt, professor of radiology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The idea, say the researchers, is doctors can use patients’ CT scans that are ordered for another reason - such as looking for tumors - to also check for signs of osteoporosis. That may spare the patients from additional testing and additional costs.

In an editorial accompanying the study, however, experts wrote that using CT scans to gauge bone density could lead to some people being incorrectly diagnosed, particularly if people at low risk are tested.

In this study, the average age was about 59 years old - six years younger than the age at which the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a government-backed panel, recommends all women begin being screened for osteoporosis. The disease affects over 12 million Americans over 50.

The panel also suggests younger women at an increased risk for bone fractures should be screened, but there’s no recommendation for men of any age.

Despite DXA scans being safe and cost effective, Pickhardt and his colleagues say the test is underused. CT scans, however, are considered overused - with more than 80 million performed in the U.S. during 2011.

For the new study, the researchers analyzed test results from 1,867 patients, who had both types of scans performed within six months of each other over a 10-year period, to see if their CT scans showed osteoporosis as well as the DXAs.

Overall, about 23 percent of the people were diagnosed with osteoporosis, about 45 percent were diagnosed with some bone-weakening and about 32 percent were healthy based on their DXAs.

The researchers then found that their ability to accurately diagnose those same patients with osteoporosis from a CT scan depended on what threshold for bone density they used.

Dr. Sumit Majumdar, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new study, said a lower threshold for bone density would catch most cases of osteoporosis and limit “incidentaloporosis” - incorrect osteoporosis diagnoses “discovered” while doctors were looking for something else.

At the lower threshold, the researchers found 9 percent of those diagnosed with osteoporosis were misdiagnosed.

Pickhardt said the screenings would have to target the right groups of people to prevent overdiagnosis.

“Obviously it’s something we need to worry about, but if you apply it to a population that’s suitable for diagnosis you wouldn’t run that risk,” he said.

Majumdar, a professor of medicine at the University of Alberta in Canada, said CT scans are better tests, but stomach scans don’t include the hip - like a DXA would.

A DXA can cost a couple hundred dollars, while a CT scan can cost about $500. Both involve radiation.

Dr. Beatrice Hull, from the Center for Osteoporosis and Bone Health at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, told Reuters Health that she’d want her patients to have a DXA scan even with a diagnosis from a CT scan.

“I don’t think at this point this one test is going to prevent further testing. I think it will identify patients who are at a higher risk and need more testing,” said Hull, who wasn’t involved with the new research.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The perspectives from the editorial writer and from an independent expert were important contributions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Giving babies and toddlers antibiotics when doctors are certain they have ear infections can help speed up their recovery, supporting current treatment guidelines for children between the ages of 6 months and 23 months.

However, antibiotics do come with significant side effects including diarrhea, rashes, yeast infections and vomiting. Overuse of drugs also contributes to antibiotic resistance, so careful selection of who should take antibiotics is necessary according to 2 studies published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine.

According to one of the studies, ear infection, or acute otitis media, is the most frequently diagnosed illness in children in the United States, and most children with these ear infections are routinely given antibiotics.

But just 2 months ago, a new study confirmed practice guidelines from 2004, which recommend that children older than 2 with a confirmed diagnosis of an acute ear infection do not need to be given antibiotics because the drugs do not significantly speed up recovery.

The foundation for the "watchful waiting" treatment recommendation instead of taking drugs is based on this and previous studies that did not have very many children under age 2 in the clinical trials. This made concluding that the same treatment works in the youngest age group very difficult.

These 2 new studies were designed to provide the research to fill the gap, and clarify treatment recommendations for babies and toddlers. The children in these latest trials had their ear infections confirmed by experts (otoscopists). Researchers found that the youngsters who received a placebo did not recover as quickly as those getting the amoxicillin-clavulanate, an antibiotic that has been shown to be effective for earaches.

However the differences were not huge. In the United States study, 80% of the children on antibiotics felt better on the seventh day of treatment; 74% of the children taking a placebo also felt better on the seventh day.

Dr. Jerome Klein, a pediatric infectious disease specialist from Boston University's Medical School, says in an accompanying editorial that these two studies resolve the controversy over giving antibiotics versus watchful waiting in kids with confirmed ear infections.

"More young children with a certain diagnosis of acute otitis media recover more quickly when they are treated with an appropriate antimicrobial agent," Klein wrote.

Dr. Richard Rosenfeld, who is a professor and chairman of otolaryngology at SUNY Downstate and Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn, New York, has been charged with reviewing the 2004 American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines for treating ear infections. He, too, has been eagerly awaiting the results of these 2 studies.

One of the strengths of both studies, Rosenfeld said, is that the researchers took the time to make a solid diagnosis. Only children who really had ear infections were included in the trials. But Rosenfeld doesn't see the results as black and white as Klein.

"Medicine is about gray zones and balancing the risks and benefits," Rosenfeld says. "Parents and doctors need to understand what the benefits and what the downside of treatments are."

"If you received a placebo and you have a 74% chance of having symptoms go away or improvement [of illness]" – compared with the 80% in the antibiotic group ... "as a parent, how impressed are you about a 6% difference?" In treatment outcomes for pain, there was no difference, he notes.

In both studies, children taking the real drugs had more side effects. The study authors caution about the overuse of these drugs and the risk of antibiotic resistance. The Finnish noted that limiting use of antibiotics may reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and increase the chance the future use of antibiotic will be effective.

Rosenfeld says it's never wrong to prescribe an antibiotic for a well-diagnosed ear infection. "If the child has high fever, severe ear pain, the child is really miserable, has a fever or draining from the ear or double ear infection and is under 2 years old, then prescribing antibiotic is probably the right thing to do."

But waiting to take the antibiotic isn't a bad idea either. He says he frequently writes a prescription for parents but tells them to hold off from filling it for 3 days. If the child still has symptoms 3 days later, then they should get the antibiotic and start giving it to their child. If you do that, 2 out of 3 parents don't fill out the prescription."

Which is why he says what to do is still not clear-cut. He also points out that if antibiotics don't relieve a child's pain, pain medications will.

Rosenfeld believes these latest studies reinforce an important message: "It's an opportunity for a conversation with your pediatrician." Parents need to weigh the benefits of what antibiotics can do in terms of killing the bacteria (if the ear infection is caused by a bacteria and not a virus) and the side effects their child may have to endure, as well as the possibility that exposing bacteria to antimicrobials may make the drugs less effective in the future.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The prominence of the independent voices in this story is a real strength of the coverage. It was nice to see lengthy comments from Dr. Richard Rosenfeld, who literally wrote the book (or at least edited it) on evidence-based treatment of ear infections. There’s also input from a doctor who is a stronger proponent of early antibiotic use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using a high sensitivity blood test [1], researchers have identified the optimal level of a protein called troponin that could rule out a diagnosis of heart attack for two-thirds of people attending the emergency department, according to new research published in The Lancet. Using this threshold in routine practice could potentially double the number of patients suitable for immediate discharge directly from the emergency department, say the authors.

"Until now there were no quick ways to rule out a heart attack within the emergency department," explains lead author Dr Anoop Shah from the University of Edinburgh in the UK. "We have identified a cardiac troponin concentration (less than 5 nanograms per deciliter; <5 ng/L) below which patients are at very low risk of heart attack either during the admission or in the ensuing 30 days. These patients are therefore potentially suitable for immediate and safe discharge from the emergency department. These findings could dramatically reduce unnecessary hospital admissions and provide substantial cost savings for healthcare providers."[2]

One of the most common causes of hospitalisation worldwide is acute chest pain. In the UK alone, chest pain is responsible for around 1 million visits to the emergency department every year. International guidelines recommend that individuals presenting with chest pain are admitted to hospital for testing for very high levels of troponin (above the 99th percentile)--a sign that a heart attack has occurred. Current approaches for assessing patients with suspected heart attacks either require admission into hospital or lengthy stays in the emergency department for repeat testing. Until now, whether new high-sensitivity cardiac troponin tests could identify very low-risk patients who may be suitable for immediate and safe discharge from the emergency department was unknown.

The test used in this study is more sensitive than the standard version and can detect far lower levels of troponin in the blood. Using this test, troponin levels were measured in over 6000 patients with chest pain admitted to four hospitals in Scotland and the USA. Dr Shah and colleagues prospectively evaluated the negative predictive value (the probability that patients were not at risk) of heart attack or subsequent death from a heart condition after 30 days for a range of troponin concentrations.

The researchers found that a troponin threshold of <5 ng/L at presentation identified around two-thirds (61%) of patients at very low risk of heart attack and may have been eligible for early, safe discharge--with a high negative predictive value of 99.6%. This high negative predictive value persisted irrespective of age, sex, cardiovascular risk factors, or prior cardiovascular disease. At one year, these patients had a three times lower risk of heart attack and cardiac death than those who had troponin levels 5 ng/L or higher.

According to Dr Shah, "Over the last two decades the number of hospital admissions due to chest pain has tripled. The overwhelming majority of these patients do not have a heart attack. This study shows that low plasma cardiac troponin concentrations at presentation identify up to two-thirds of patients who are at very low risk of heart attack and could be safely discharged from the Emergency Department. Use of this approach is likely to have major benefits for both patients and healthcare providers."[2]

Writing in a linked Comment, Louise Cullen and William Parsonage from the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Queensland, Australia, and Martin Than from Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand, say, "The ultimate validation for the safety and efficacy of discharging patients with cardiac troponin concentrations less than 5 ng/L will be the report of clinical outcomes after this threshold is implemented in routine clinical practice...Finally, what further assessment, if any, is needed for those patients identified as low risk and suitable for early discharge? Trials are needed to assess the safety and effectiveness of clinical pathways that involve no further testing for such patients."

This study was funded by the British Heart Foundation and Chief Scientists Office (Scotland).

[1] A troponin test measures the level of troponin proteins in the blood. These proteins are released when the heart muscle has been damaged, like during a heart attack. The more damage there is to the heart, the greater the amount of troponin there will be in the blood. Even a slight increase in the troponin level will often mean there has been some damage to the heart. Very high levels of troponin are a sign that a heart attack has occurred.

[2] Quotes direct from author and cannot be found in text of Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release duly notes funders.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most angioplasties not necessary, study finds

NEW ORLEANS — More than half a million people a year with chest pain are getting an unnecessary or premature procedure to unclog their arteries because drugs are just as effective, suggests a landmark study that challenges one of the most common practices in heart care.

The stunning results found angioplasty did not save lives or prevent heart attacks in non-emergency heart patients.

An even bigger surprise: Angioplasty gave only slight and temporary relief from chest pain, the main reason it is done.

"By five years, there was really no significant difference" in symptoms, said Dr. William Boden of Buffalo General Hospital in New York. "Few would have expected such results."

He led the study and gave results Monday at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology. They also were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and will be in the April 12 issue.

Angioplasty remains the top treatment for people having a heart attack or hospitalized with worsening symptoms. But most angioplasties are done on a non-emergency basis, to relieve chest pain caused by clogged arteries crimping the heart's blood supply.

Those patients now should try drugs first, experts say. If that does not help, they can consider angioplasty or bypass surgery, which unlike angioplasty, does save lives, prevent heart attacks and give lasting chest-pain relief.

In the study, only one-third of the people treated with drugs ultimately needed angioplasty or a bypass.

"You are not putting yourself at risk of death or heart attack if you defer," and considering the safety worries about heart stents used to keep arteries open after angioplasty, it may be wise to wait, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic heart specialist and president of the College of Cardiology.

Why did angioplasty not help more?

It fixes only one blockage at a time whereas drugs affect all the arteries, experts said. Also, the clogs treated with angioplasty are not the really dangerous kind.

"Even though it goes against intuition, the blockages that are severe that cause chest pain are less likely to be the source of a heart attack than segments in the artery that are not severely blocked," said Dr. David Maron, a Vanderbilt University cardiologist who helped lead the new study.

Drugs are better today than they used to be and do a surprisingly good job, said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

"It may not be as bad as we thought" to leave the artery alone, she said.

About 1.2 million angioplasties are done in the United States each year. Through a blood vessel in the groin, doctors snake a tube to a blocked heart artery. A tiny balloon is inflated to flatten the clog and a mesh scaffold stent is usually placed.

The procedure already has lost some popularity because of emerging evidence that popular drug-coated stents can raise the risk of blood clots months later. The new study shifts the argument from which type of stent to use to whether to do the procedure at all.

It involved 2,287 patients throughout the U.S. and Canada who had substantial blockages, typically in two arteries, but were medically stable. They had an average of 10 chest pain episodes a week — moderately severe. About 40 percent had a prior heart attack.

"We deliberately chose to enroll a sicker, more symptomatic group" to give angioplasty a good chance to prove itself, Boden said.

All were treated with medicines that improve chest pain and heart and artery health such as aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins, nitrates, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers. All also were counseled on healthy lifestyles — diet, exercise and smoking cessation. Half of the participants also were assigned to get angioplasty.

After an average of 4 1/2 years, the groups had similar rates of death and heart attack: 211 in the angioplasty group and 202 in the medication group — about 19 percent of each.

Neither treatment proved better for any subgroups like smokers, diabetics, or older or sicker people.

At the start of the study, 80 percent had chest pain. Three years into it, 72 percent of the angioplasty group was free of this symptom as was 67 percent of the drug group. That means you would have to give angioplasties to 20 people for every one whose chest pain was better after three years — an unacceptably high ratio, Nissen said.

After five years, 74 percent of the angioplasty group and 72 percent of the medication group were free of chest pain — "no significant difference," Boden said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included quotes from two of the authors of the study as well as the director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the president of the American College of Cardiology.
It might have been useful to readers to have a comment from a clinician in primary care.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 18, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Fibromyalgia sufferers may find relief from the chronic pain condition by doing tai chi, new research finds.

Researchers divided 66 people with fibromyalgia into two groups: one group did hour-long sessions of tai chi twice a week for 12 weeks; the other had a twice-weekly wellness education class followed by gentle stretching.

At the end of 12 weeks, the tai chi group reported improvements in their scores on questionnaires regarding both physical and mental fibromyalgia symptoms. That included decreased pain and increased ability to do daily tasks without pain; less fatigue, depression and anxiety; and an overall better quality of life. Patients also reported better sleep quality and improved physical conditioning.

The improvements were still evident at 24 weeks, according to the research reported in the Aug. 19 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

"It was incredible," said lead study author Dr. Chenchen Wang, an associate professor of medicine in the rheumatology department at Tufts Medical Center in Boston. "You could see them change every week. They became very happy. I felt very, very excited to be with them."

Fibromyalgia is characterized by widespread pain, fatigue, insomnia and multiple tender points. The syndrome can also cause psychological issues, including anxiety, depression, and memory and concentration problems, sometimes called the "fibromyalgia fog."

About 10 million Americans have fibromyalgia, and about 75 percent to 90 percent of them are women, according to estimates from the National Fibromyalgia Association.

Doctors will often suggest exercise, sleep hygiene techniques and medications to treat the condition, but often with limited success, said Dr. Gloria Yeh, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, who wrote an accompanying editorial in the journal.

Most patients, according to background information in the article, remain in pain years after the diagnosis, are aerobically unfit, have poor muscle strength and flexibility, and need medications to control symptoms.

While larger studies are needed to confirm the findings, tai chi looks promising as an alternative treatment, Yeh said.

"This could represent an ideal exercise for fibromyalgia sufferers. Since it is a low-impact, gentle, non-threatening, accessible activity, it may be a perfect exercise for debilitated patients with fibromyalgia who otherwise cannot or choose not to do other forms of exercise," Yeh said. "Also, since tai chi has a meditative component, it may also help to address the stress and anxiety that may be associated with the condition."

So what is it about tai chi that works?

There's no definitive answer to that just yet, Wang said. Tai chi is a mind-body exercise that originated as a martial art in China, utilizing slow, gentle movements to build strength and flexibility, as well as deep breathing and relaxation, to move qi, or vital energy, throughout the body.

Prior research has shown exercise can improve mood, Wang added. The controlled breathing and movements may promote "mental tranquility," according to the study, which could help with pain.

"The physical component of tai chi can improve aerobic capacity, strength and muscle function," Wang said. "But in my opinion, the most important part is mental. You see lots of patients improve their depression and become good friends with each other."

The National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine of the U.S. National Institutes of Health provided funding for the research.

The National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine has more on tai chi.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does cite the opinions of a researcher who wrote an accompanying article in the journal. More outside voices would have been a nice addition. This criterion is barely satisfactory. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS — Heart patients should be regularly screened for signs of depression, the American Heart Association recommended Monday.

Depression is about three times more common in heart attack survivors and those hospitalized with heart problems than the general population, according to the recommendations published in the journal Circulation. The authors said only about half of heart doctors say they treat depression in their patients — and not all those diagnosed with depression are treated.

“I think we could reduce considerable suffering and improve outcomes,” by screening, said Erika Froelicher, professor of nursing at the University of California, San Francisco. “I know we can do more.”

Although there’s no direct evidence that heart patients who are screened fare better, depression can result in poorer outcomes and a poorer quality of life, the panel said. Depressed patients may skip their medications, not change their diet or exercise or take part in rehabilitation programs, they said.

Anyone from cardiologists to nurses to primary care doctors can and should be involved in determining whether a patient is depressed, said Froelicher, who was co-chairwoman of the panel that wrote the recommendations.

The panel suggests that heart patients be screened by first asking two standard questions: In the past two weeks, have you had little interest or pleasure in doing things? Have you felt down, depressed or hopeless?

If the patient answers yes to one or both, a questionnaire is recommended to determine if the patient is depressed and the severity. If depression is indicated, the patient may need to see a professional qualified in treating depression, the panel said, adding that treatment options include antidepressants, seeing a psychotherapist and exercise.

“Some physicians are qualified to treat it — others may be more comfortable referring the problem to a qualified mental health professional,” Froelicher said.

Psychiatrist Michelle Riba said the statement’s emphasis on frequent screening is important.

“What you want to see in a particular patient is how they do over time,” said Riba, past president of the American Psychiatric Association, which has endorsed the heart association’s recommendations.

One doctor said screening isn’t enough; patients need close monitoring to make sure they get help.

“A lot of patients with depression don’t follow up on it,” said Dr. Mary Whooley, a professor of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, who was not on the panel.

Barbara Forman, 62, struggled with depression after her double bypass about five years ago. She said she spent most of her time at her Englewood, Ohio, home sitting in her chair, frequently crying for no reason. When she did get out, she was often winded, even from a walk up a sidewalk to deliver cupcakes to her grandchild’s classroom.

“I’m thinking, is this the way it’s going to be for the rest of my life? Since I’ve had a heart event, is my life over?” she said. “It also made me afraid to do things. I didn’t know how a heart attack felt. I would think, ‘Is this a heart attack?’”

A couple of months after she got home she called Mended Hearts, a group affiliated with the heart association that provides support to heart patients, and talked to someone who let her know depression was common in heart patients.

Her family doctor sent her to a psychologist, and after some initial reluctance, she started taking an antidepressant. That, along with starting a walking routine and volunteering with Mended Hearts and the heart association, improved her outlook.

“You can’t sit in your house and just vegetate,” she said. “Over the last 18 months to two years — It’s really gotten better.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple experts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug, apixaban (Eliquis), appears better than the old standby warfarin in preventing strokes in people with the abnormal heart rhythm called atrial fibrillation, a new study finds.

Over 2.6 million Americans are affected by atrial fibrillation, and many take warfarin (also known as Coumadin) to prevent dangerous clots that can cause a stroke. Warfarin is notoriously tricky to modulate, however, and needs to be closely monitored -- usually through monthly doctors' visits. If the drug's activity isn't checked regularly it can trigger severe bleeding episodes, the most serious of which can happen in the brain.

"Warfarin is labor-intensive to manage," said study researcher Dr. Jack Ansell, chairman of the department of medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Sometimes it impairs the patient's quality of life and the outcomes are very dependent on how well the drug dosing is managed," he added. "This [new] drug has a lot of advantages over warfarin."

With apixaban, patients can use a standard dose that doesn't need monitoring and adjusting, Ansell said. Also, unlike warfarin, apixaban has few interactions with other drugs or foods, he added.

The study was funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer, the makers of apixaban.

Apixaban is a so-called Xa inhibitor, a class of anticoagulants (anti-clotting drugs) that work by blocking factor X, a protein involved in blood clotting. Ansell expects drugs in this class will have a major effect on how atrial fibrillation is managed in the future.

Another similar drug, Pradaxa (dabigatran), has been on the market for about a year and many patients with atrial fibrillation have been switched or started on it, he said.

"Once [apixaban] is available it is going to be very difficult to avoid offering this drug to patients," he said.

The issue of cost remains a factor, however. While generic warfarin is just pennies a dose, any new brand-name drug is likely to be much more expensive. According to Laura Hortas, a spokeswoman for Bristol-Myers Squibb, because apixaban is still an experimental drug its price tag remains uncertain.

The new report was published online Aug. 28 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with its presentation at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Paris.

For the trial, more than 18,000 patients with atrial fibrillation and a heightened risk for stroke were randomly assigned to receive either apixaban or warfarin.

Over an average of 1.8 years of follow-up there were fewer strokes or clots among patients taking apixaban (1.27 percent a year), compared with patients taking warfarin (1.6 percent per year), the researchers found.

This means that apixaban prevented six patients from having a stroke, 15 patients from having a major bleeding event and eight patients from dying, the researchers said in a Duke University news release.

The major effect on stroke was preventing hemorrhagic stroke, which is caused by bleeding in the brain and is the most serious type of stroke. According to the researchers, apixaban reduced this risk by 50 percent, preventing four patients from having this type of stroke and two patients from having an ischemic stroke (cause by a vessel blockage) or stroke of uncertain origin.

As to apixaban's expected higher price tag, Ansell said that since the drug does not require monitoring and the incidence of stroke and major bleeding are less, savings in doctors' visits and stroke treatment should more than compensate.

The new trial comes on the heels of another study on apixaban that was stopped early due to safety concerns. In that trial, published in July in the New England Journal of Medicine, apixaban's use was associated with raised odds for bleeding -- without providing patients with any reduction in heart attack risk.

However, "in that case, apixaban was given to patients with coronary artery disease who were also taking two other blood thinners," Ansell noted. "The three of them together showed that the risk of bleeding was just too high and there was no real benefit in that population. But, that's an entirely different problem, compared with atrial fibrillation," he said.

Commenting on the latest study, Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles agreed that "atrial fibrillation substantially increases the risk of stroke and death."

Warfarin reduces the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, but it also boosts the odds of bleeding and is often difficult to manage, he said.

"Apixaban is now the first oral anticoagulant [blood thinner] to show a statistically significant improvement in survival over warfarin in atrial fibrillation patients," Fonarow said. "This represents a very important therapeutic advance in the care of patients with atrial fibrillation."

For more information on atrial fibrillation, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted a study researcher, a company spokesperson, and a cardiologist who did not appear to have ties to the study reported on.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If all goes well for award-winning Plainfield inventor Matt Reavill, his new device will help save lives, decrease health care costs — and employ disabled veterans to boot.

Reavill won a prestigious contest in London late last year called the OmniCompete Health Pitch Battlefield, whose independent judges said his invention is a simple way to catheterize the heart. It reduces risks to an "absolute minimum" by moving the catheter insertion to the arm, the judges said, replacing a complex wire-guided procedure through the neck, which is typically used to monitor the heart during a hospital stay for very ill patients.

His breakthrough was also chosen by hospital-based clinical experts to participate in the 2010 Innovation Celebration, a national program run by Premier, a hospital-owned group purchasing organization. Premier Chief Operating Officer Mike Alkire says the products selected have the potential to improve safety and quality while cutting the cost of health care.

Reavill plans to hire 13 to 20 disabled vets to get the production off the ground — with the goal of hiring up to 18,000 if the device goes national. He recently procured a bank loan agreement and is hoping the award recognition and hospitals' willingness to try the catheter will attract a venture capitalist.

Called the ReavillMED CV, the Food and Drug Administration-cleared device includes a catheter called a PICC line, IV tubing that sheathes it to provide sterility, and a transducer that can directly measure blood pressure to help determine needed fluid levels. The catheter is inserted into the arm and travels to the heart within 20 to 30 seconds via the bloodstream. Traditional heart catheterization through a vein in the neck can take 20 minutes or longer.

Reavill likes to say it's "stupidly simple" because the individual parts have been around for decades, but no one had thought of this particular configuration before.

"It's old technologies put together in a different way to enable established medical treatments to be done earlier," Reavill says.

It remains to be seen whether that saved time will result in saved lives. But because it's self-contained, the catheter theoretically should provide little margin for contamination that can lead to infection. It can be inserted in a nonsterile environment such as an emergency room.

In 1994, Reavill says, his father survived a complicated angioplasty with a high mortality rate, only to die three weeks later of a staph infection that was caused by a central line catheter inserted into his heart through a neck vein.

A venous heart catheter inserted through the neck, the traditional approach, requires painstaking preparation of the insertion area and a "pseudo-operative field," says Dr. Andrew Dennis, attending surgeon at Stroger Hospital's trauma and burn units and a clinical researcher.

Dennis believes the ReavillMED CV shows a "tremendous amount of promise," and he wants to test the first 50 catheters Reavill can provide. If the device lives up to expectations, the hospital will probably use it in patient resuscitation, Dennis said. He also plans to research whether quicker central venous catheterization improves patient resuscitation efforts.

Dennis adds that the catheter could prove useful in patients with sepsis, or blood poisoning, which strikes about 750,000 Americans every year. Of those, between 28 and 50 percent die, according to the National Institute of General Medical Sciences.

"Once a person presents with septic shock, the catheter is an early aid that can guide the way a patient is managed," Dennis says. "You get an objective number and it becomes less art, less gestalt and more evidence-based."

Southern Illinois Healthcare, a three-hospital system that is considering use of Reavill's catheter, has a team of specially trained nurses who install catheters in the neck, says Dr. James Miller, chief medical officer. The nurses have a success rate in the "high 90s," Miller says, but "very few" hospitals have devoted the time or resources to create the discipline.

Reavill says he may be proudest of his intention to hire disabled veterans in southern Illinois, a hard-hit region economically. He plans to bear the cost of any prostheses the veterans need to work on the catheters.

Reavill grew up on a pig farm in Robinson, in southeastern Illinois, and attended Southern Illinois University, which is supporting the development of the device.

"My wife's family is from southern Illinois, too, so it's home," Reavill says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story at least turns to two physicians who are considering use of the catheter at their hospitals.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration has approved a new treatment that could help millions of older adults who are nearly blinded by macular degeneration. It’s a miniature telescope implanted directly into the eye that magnifies images to more than twice their size.

Findings from the clinical trials show that the telescope does improve vision for the majority of patients. Still, there are some concerns about corneal damage, since the telescope is relatively large inside the eye. And the population who might benefit from the new device is somewhat limited. The treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery. And for those who catch the disease early on, there may be better options.

But for 80-year-old Marian Orr, the implanted telescope was just what she needed. Orr has a big family: five children, eight grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. That means lots of graduations, weddings and school events. In other words, lots to see. So when Orr's vision began to decline in her mid 70s, she got worried. Both her father and uncle went blind in their 60s, and she knew macular degeneration was often inherited.

Orr says her sight gradually diminished. It got to the point "where I couldn't see. If I looked at you straight on, I couldn't see your face, could only see your head," she says. "I couldn't see the eyes and the nose. I could just see the round head that was all, sort of like a halo was all over it."

This blurred vision is pretty typical of macular degeneration.

Orr couldn't see things in a store. Her daughter took her grocery shopping. Orr couldn't identify pots, pans and dishes in her kitchen. And the outdoors became an unfamiliar, startling place.

So when Orr's cousin read about an experimental treatment for macular degeneration, Orr quickly got in touch with one of the researchers, had some basic tests, and before she knew it, she was one of more than 200 patients to have an experimental miniature telescope implanted in her eye.

Dr. Kathryn A. Colby, ophthalmic surgeon at Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston and assistant professor of ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, calls the pea-sized technology a true "breakthrough" that could help millions of patients who, until now, have had no treatment options. Colby was one of the principal investigators in the clinical trials of the miniature telescopes. They were conducted at 28 leading ophthalmic centers and included 219 patients with end-stage, age-related macular degeneration. She was not Orr's doctor.

What happens with age-related macular degeneration is that the center of the retina deteriorates, and people gradually lose sight. Colby says if you think of the eye as an old-style camera with film, then the retina is the film. Over years of wear and tear, it degenerates and weakens and no longer transmits full images to the brain. That's why Orr saw blank spots where people's noses and eyes should be in their faces, sort of like "holes in the film," says Colby.

Colby says that by magnifying the image, the telescope allows the part of the vision that's missing to become smaller. And so the "blanks" in the image appear to fill up, presenting the individual with a nearly complete image.

But, like all telescopes, when vision is narrowly focused, the peripheral view gets lost. This is why the telescope is implanted in only one eye. The other eye is used for peripheral vision.

Colby says that's also why patients need to learn to use the implanted telescope eye for near activities. For example, if they're looking to see what time it is on a clock, they use the eye with the implanted telescope. But if they're scanning the room to see exactly where the clock is, they use the other eye, which also has end-stage macular degeneration.

After surgery, patients do a variety of eye exercises to train their eyes to work together. It wasn't hard for Orr, who was used to wearing contacts, one for distance and one for close-up. For her, the tiny new eye telescope has put the "bustle" back into her life.

"I'm very active in my church. And I am a lunch buddy at one of the schools nearby," she says. Orr has lunch every week with the children in the first and second grades. She reads a lot, even books with regular-sized print, which her daughter gives her. She can read the newspaper and watch TV. "I'm busy," she says. "That's for sure!"

Practically all the patients in the telescope study with Orr had their vision improve. And 75 percent of them, like Orr, had major improvement. But because the telescope is relatively large, patients risk damage to the cornea. In the study, 10 out of 219 patients had corneal problems. Five required a corneal transplant. As a result, the Food and Drug Administration plans to monitor safety for at least five years for the next set of patients who receive the telescope.

Despite its terrific potential, the new eye telescope isn't for everyone. Dr. George Williams is an ophthalmologist and retinal surgeon associated with the American Academy of Ophthalmology. He sees lots of patients who might qualify for the eye telescope.

But he also sees a lot of patients who cannot be candidates. For one, the treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery.

"In order to implant this device, we need to remove the natural lens, or the cataract, and then use a portion of the natural lens to position and support the telescope," says Williams.

Cataract surgery removes the natural lens and, in most cases, replaces it with an artificial lens, which means there is no foundation for the telescope.

And for patients who are in the early stages of macular degeneration, Williams says that medications approved just six years ago are effective and a lot less invasive than the telescope. The drugs are injected directly into the eye on a monthly basis. And with this treatment, doctors are able to prevent severe visual loss in over 90 percent of patients. In nearly half of all patients, visual improvement is significant.

So the take-home message: If you're over 60 and you begin to experience visual loss, get yourself to an eye specialist as soon as possible to see if you can be treated with medication to stabilize and even reverse the vision loss you've experienced. If that happens, Williams says, then patients may never get to the point where they need a telescope in their eye.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The bottom third of the story relies heavily, perhaps too much so, on Dr. George Williams, a retinal surgeon given the vague title of "associated with the American Academy of Ophthalmology." Those quibbles aside, Williams provides some great insight and counterbalancing information. It also explains that the other expert in the story, Dr. Kathryn A. Colby, was one of the principal investigators in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A comparison of 2 of the most common combination therapies for locally advanced prostate cancer show the more aggressive option is linked with a higher rate of survival

(Philadelphia) - High-risk prostate cancer, that which has continued to grow but not yet metastasized, is commonly treated with combination therapies. Each method has pros and cons, but there is little clarity whether one might be more effective than the other. For the first time, researchers have shown that more patients live longer if treated with the combination of prostate removal plus radiation therapy. The research was published September 25th in the journal Cancer.

"There's a lot of debate about whether to remove the whole prostate and follow up with radiation therapy. Or, as a second option, to spare the prostate and treat it using radiation therapy plus hormone-blocking therapy," said senior author Grace Lu-Yao, PhD, Associate Director of Population Science at the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center - Jefferson Health, one of only eight NCI-designated cancer centers nationwide with a prostate cancer program of excellence. "Our study suggests that removing the prostate followed by adjuvant radiotherapy is associated with greater overall survival in men with prostate cancer."

The risks of prostate removal, or prostatectomy, are well known and include higher chance of developing incontinence and erectile dysfunction. There are some risks associated with radiation treatment and hormone therapy, but they are less common, and are typically thought to have a lower impact on quality of life. "Prostatectomy is an unpopular treatment," said Lu-Yao. "Our study showed that only six percent of men with high-risk cancer were treated with it." It's not just the risk of side effects.For some men, especially those who are not fit enough for the surgery, prostatectomy is not an option. However, this may be an option for some patients to reconsider."

In the largest population-based retrospective study to date, Dr. Lu-Yao and colleagues examined the records of 13,856 men in the Medicare-SEER registry diagnosed with locally advanced prostate cancer -- cancer growth that had not yet metastasized to distant sites in the body. Dr. Lu-Yao and colleagues looked at the patients who were treated either with prostatectomy plus adjuvant radiation as one group, and compared them to another group who were treated with radiation therapy plus hormone-blocking therapy. They matched the comparison groups by age, race and co-morbidity to control for factors that may influence patient outcomes, and analyzed which group did better 10 to 15 years after their procedures.

They found that 10 years after treatment, 89 percent of the prostate removal plus radiation group was still alive. That compared with the 74 percent survival at ten years in the group that received only radiation plus hormone therapy, amounting to a 15 percent survival advantage in the group that was treated with prostate removal.

"For high-risk prostate patients we started the use of aggressive radiation therapy after surgery 20 years ago," said Adam Dicker, Senior Vice President and Chair of the Department of Enterprise Radiation Oncology at Jefferson Health, who was not involved in the study. "We recognized that it may have curative potential."

"However, the proportion of men undergoing prostatectomy plus radiation therapy decreased significantly over time and there were trade-offs for the survival advantages," said Dr. Lu-Yao. Men who received the combination of surgery and radiotherapy had higher rates of erectile dysfunction (28 percent vs 20 percent) and higher rates of urinary incontinence (49 percent vs 19 percent).

Another interesting finding from the research was that slightly more than half of men diagnosed with the disease did not receive combination therapies for their prostate cancer. "Two modes of treatment are recommended by both United States and European guidelines for cancer treatment. It was surprising to see only 29 percent of patients received the recommended combination therapies, and as many as 20 percent are not getting any treatment six months after their diagnosis," said Dr. Lu-Yao. "Our data can't tell us the reason for this deviation from guidelines and further studies are needed."

"One of the strengths of retrospective studies of patient data is that it reveals what happens in the real world, rather than the carefully controlled context of a clinical trial," said Dr. Lu-Yao. "Our data is revealing the real-world practice as well as some of the advantages and disadvantages of those medical preferences."

"This important study demonstrates that many men with high-risk prostate cancer derive a survival advantage through a multi-modality approach to their disease. Several large clinical trials are nearing completion that should validate these retrospective findings of the benefits of primary radical prostatectomy followed by additional therapies such as adjuvant radiation," said Leonard Gomella, Chair of the Department of Urology at Jefferson (Philadelphia University + Thomas Jefferson University), who was not involved in this research.

The study was funded by the New Jersey Health Foundation, the National Cancer Institute (P30 CA-072720 and CA-116399 and the Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey Biometrics Shared Resource. A complete list of potential conflict interest disclosures can be found in the manuscript.

Article reference: Thomas L. Jang, Neal Patel, Izak Faiena, Kushan Radadia, Dirk F. Moore, Sammy E. Elsamra, Eric A. Singer, Mark N. Stein, James A. Eastham, Peter T. Scardino, Yong Lin, Isaac Y. Kim, Grace L. Lu-Yao, "Comparative effectiveness of radical prostatectomy with adjuvant radiotherapy versus radiotherapy plus androgen deprivation therapy for men with advanced prostate cancer," Cancer, DOI: 10.1002/cncr.31726, 2018.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release stated that the study was funded by the New Jersey Health Foundation, the National Cancer Institute, and the Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey Biometrics Shared Resource.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists are finding more clues to help determine whether people with mild dementia symptoms are at risk for Alzheimer's.

A new study suggests that biomarkers found in cerebrospinal fluid (fluid that surrounds the spinal cord and brain and acts as a protective cushion) could predict who would develop Alzheimer's disease 90% of the time among patients with mild cognitive impairment, a condition characterized by measurable memory problems.

Researchers report these findings in the journal Archives of General Psychiatry.

This is the longest clinical follow-up ever of patients who begin with mild cognitive impairment, researchers reported. Patients were tracked from four to 12 years, with a median of 9.2 years. The research builds on a 2006 Lancet Neurology study that followed patients for a median of 5.2 years, beginning with a group of 137 volunteers with mild cognitive impairment.The new study is important because of the long follow-up period, according to Adam Brickman, assistant professor of neuropsychology at Columbia University School of Medicine, who was not involved in the research.

Knowing which patient with mild cognitive impairment patients may go on to develop Alzheimer's is vital information for researchers, who are looking for treatments for the fatal brain disease. The current thinking is that interventions will be most effective when given to a patient as early as possible, Brickman said. Clinical trials can better focus their efforts if patients are known to be in the early stages of Alzheimer's. Generally, about 30% to 60% of patients with mild cognitive impairment show evidence of underlying symptoms of Alzheimer's, so not everyone with this condition is a good candidate for an Alzheimer's trial.

Researchers focused on two biomarkers previously thought to be involved in Alzheimer's disease: a kind of protein called beta-amyloid, and another protein type called tau. Experts believe a decrease in beta-amyloid in the fluid of the spinal cord is associated with a toxic buildup of that protein in the brain, which causes the formation of plaques linked to Alzheimer's disease. Tau has been tied to neurofibrillary tangles in the brain; researchers find that an increase in tau in cerebrospinal fluid is associated with Alzheimer's also.

The results from the study suggest that beta-amyloid is a much earlier predictor of Alzheimer's disease than tau, which supports the hypothesis that beta-amyloid accumulation in the brain occurs first in the course of the disease.

Some of the participants, who were originally found to be stable with mild cognitive impairment after about five years, went on to develop Alzheimer's disease during the longer follow-up. That suggests that a five-year follow-up period is not long enough to determine how well biomarkers can predict which patients will develop Alzheimer's disease, researchers say.

The association between biomarkers in the fluid and Alzheimer's was also described in studies in December 2009 and August 2010, building on the idea that a spinal tap could be useful in predicting Alzheimer's.

When these sorts of studies get published, Brickman and other doctors get phone calls from aging adults wondering whether they should be getting spinal taps to assess their risk. But it's too early to use this as a diagnostic tool in clinical settings, says Brickman. Down the road, the "fantasy" is that asymptomatic people will be able to get a biomarker test to determine whether they'll one day get Alzheimer's, but that's not possible right now, he adds.

"What I tell people is: If they’re worried about their thinking abilities, that they should make an appointment with a neuropsychology or a neurologist to get an evaluation," Brinkman says. "The way we diagnose Alzheimer’s disease is by evaluating the behavior and the risk factor medical profile, not by looking at biological markers at this point."

As scientists gain more insight into predicting Alzheimer's, aging adults may struggle with the question of whether they want to know their risk, especially since there's still no cure. Some people want to enroll in clinical trials as soon as they start showing symptoms; others would rather be ignorant of their status since there is no cure. In looking for treatments, however, researchers depend on people's willingness to contribute to science.

The Alzheimer's Association runs a system called TrialMatch. Check it out if you're interested in finding a trial for yourself or someone you care about.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent expert’s comments added needed perspective to the findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"I am the mother to a beautiful 30-year-old woman, she was diagnosed with a meningioma tumor," said Glenda Wimberly.

When Rianta Wimberly started going blind from an inoperable brain tumor, her mother Glenda got on the Web, found a radiation treatment called proton beam therapy and sent a desperate email to doctors at Massachusetts General Hospital, CBS News' Dr. Emily Senay reports.

"She has lost her peripheral vision and is experiencing difficulty seeing," Glenda wrote.

Just weeks later, Rianta was getting the therapy and the tumor was shrinking.

"With four treatments left, I have 98 percent of my vision left," Rianta said.

And with no side effects. That's because proton beam radiation is highly targeted - delivering its dose only to the tumor and sparing the surrounding tissue, which is important for certain rare cancers.

"It's a real delight to be able to offer patients proton therapy you see that during the treatment they have less side effects," said Jay Loeffler, the chair of radiation oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center.

But proton beam therapy is at the heart of the debate over rising health-care costs. It's the most expensive device in medicine today.

The technology is two decades old, but Mass. General is one of five proton centers, and there are eight others in the works.

The massive facility at the University of Pennsylvania - soon to be the world's largest - will cost $140 million.

"This is three stories. This gantry that spins around the patient; this rotates completely around the patient," said Dr. James Metz of the University of Pennsylvania Abramson Cancer Center.

"Close to a million tons of equipment," Metz said.

"So this is the cyclotron itself, this is a 200-ton piece of machinery that accelerates the protons to 230 million electron volts," Metz said.

Huge magnets direct the beam of radiation the length of a football field into treatment rooms.

"Now we're leaving the cyclotron area and walking along the beam line," Metz said. "The beam will travel thru these magnets and that will steer the beam into the different rooms."

Radiation oncologist Dr. Richard Stock, of Mt. Sinai Hospital, says competitive pressure is driving the building boom.

"It's kind of a vicious cycle because if one center opens up, other centers and other hospitals surrounding it have to try to compete for patients," Stock said.

And while there's little disputing the value of proton beam for certain rare cancers, increasingly it is being used for more common cancers like prostate. At double the cost of standard treatments, many experts say it's being used without proof it's more effective.

"There is no good evidence, medical evidence that it is better than the current state of the art intensity modular radiation therapy," Stock said.

Is this a better treatment for adults than conventional?

"In my opinion it's a better treatment. the bigger issue though is, is the increased costs associated with protons worth it to society? in my opinion it's worth it if we can reduce the initial costs of building proton centers," Loeffler said.

But while the cost is extraordinary … so are the results for this family.

"This was my only option, thru unbreakable faith I'm here," Rianta said.

Glenda said: "She has unbreakable faith, I have unspeakable joy."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple experts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 12, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- School readiness isn't the only benefit young children can gain from Head Start. A new study finds that kids in the U.S. preschool program tend to have a healthier weight by kindergarten than similarly aged kids not in the program.

In their first year in Head Start, obese and overweight kids lost weight faster than two comparison groups of children who weren't in the program, researchers found. Similarly, underweight kids bulked up faster.

"Participating in Head Start may be an effective and broad-reaching strategy for preventing and treating obesity in United States preschoolers," said lead researcher Dr. Julie Lumeng, an associate professor at the University of Michigan Center for Human Growth and Development.

Federally funded Head Start, which is free for 3- to 5-year-olds living in poverty, helps children prepare for kindergarten. The program is designed to build stable family relationships, improve children's physical and emotional well-being and develop strong learning skills.

Health benefits, including weight loss, seem to be a byproduct of the program, said Dr. David Katz, director of the Yale University Prevention Research Center.

"This paper importantly suggests that some of the best strategies for controlling weight and promoting health may have little directly to do with either," said Katz, who wasn't involved in the study.

Head Start might provide a structured, supervised routine that's lacking in the home, Katz suggested. "Perhaps the program fosters better mental health in the children, which in turn leads to better eating," he said.

"Whatever the exact mechanisms, by fostering well-being in one way, we tend to foster it in others, even unintended," Katz said. "The essence of this study is the holistic nature of social, psychological and physical health."

Almost one-quarter of preschool-aged children in the United States are overweight or obese, and obesity rates within Head Start populations are higher than national estimates, the study authors noted. Because obesity in childhood tends to continue into adulthood, experts worry that these children are at risk of future health problems.

For the study, Lumeng's team collected data on more than 43,700 Michigan preschool-age children between 2005 and 2013. More than 19,000 were in Head Start. Information on the others -- 5,400 of whom were on Medicaid, the publicly financed insurance program for the poor -- came from two primary health care groups. Whether those children were in another preschool program wasn't stated.

At the study's start, about one-third of the Head Start kids were obese or overweight, compared to 27 percent of those on Medicaid and less than 20 percent of kids not on Medicaid.

"Even though children in the Head Start group began the observation period more obese, equally overweight, and moreunderweight than children in the comparison groups, at the end of the observation period the initially obese and overweight Head Start children were substantially less obese andoverweight than the children in the comparison groups," the authors wrote.

Lumeng said an emphasis on good nutrition and exercise may partly explain the perceived Head Start advantage.

"Head Start programs must adhere to specific dietary guidelines," she said. "The children may be served healthier meals at Head Start than other children."

In addition, Head Start requires a certain amount of active play each day, Lumeng said. "Thus, children attending Head Start may be getting more opportunities for physical activity than other children," she explained.

The daily routine might translate into less TV time and more regular sleep schedules, she said. "We know that better sleep is linked with less obesity," she added.

"It [also] may be that when kids go to Head Start, it reduces stress in the household and frees up time and resources at home to dedicate to healthier eating patterns," she noted.

The report was published Jan. 12 online in the journal Pediatrics.

For more on childhood obesity, visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story provides comments by a source who was not involved in the study, Dr. David Katz of Yale University, explaining the value of the Head Start Program.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Whether you call it water running, aqua jogging or hydrotherapy, you can’t beat a workout in water for an array of health benefits, many experts say. Everyone from pro athletes to stroke survivors are benefitting from aquatic exercise that combines walking or running against the natural resistance of the water to help build strength and endurance.

Running and walking in water is an excellent form of physical therapy for people rehabilitating from hip, knee and back injuries and surgeries. It’s also an easy-on-the joints form of exercise for seniors and others who suffer from arthritis, and a recent study shows it can speed recovery from stroke faster than using a traditional treadmill.

It’s just an all-around good aerobic conditioner for athletes, too, sports medicine expert Dr. Naresh Rao, told CBS News. Rao is the Olympic Team USA Water Polo Physician for the 2016 Summer Games.

“We’ve been using hydrotherapy to help decrease any sort of gravity that can affect joint function,” said Rao, who is also with the department of family medicine at Plainview Hospital in Plainview, New York. “I personally prescribe it for knee issues and low back issues.”

Hydrotherapy uses a water-friendly treadmill that can be placed in a pool. Another method involves a specially designed treadmill tank.

Matt Johnson, a physical therapist at St. Luke’s Hospital in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, told CBS News that the tank is basically a freestanding tub, about six feet long by three feet wide, with a motorized belt. The water height can be adjusted to the patient’s abilities. The buoyancy of the water helps someone who’s been injured to walk and run a little sooner than they’d be able to do on dry ground, he explained.

“In water, we can teach them sooner. They can really work on their gait, walk without pain, do exercises in water that you wouldn’t be able to do on land,” said Johnson.

He uses a HydroTrack Underwater Treadmill System – professional sports teams including the New York Yankees and the Miami Dolphins, have used it, too. The nice thing about it, said Johnson, is that people can step right into the tank at ground level and then the water fills up around them. It works like a lock on a canal, he said. So, even older patients with limited mobility and balance don’t have to negotiate getting down into a pool.

Johnson starts off recuperating athletes and patients in water somewhere between waist and chest height. The treadmill speed can be set anywhere from 0.3 to 7.1 miles per hour depending on how much resistance a person can handle.

“At waist height, it’s at about 50 percent of body weight. At chest height, it’s about 30 percent of body weight,” Johnson said, noting, for example, that a person with an injured knee who weighs 100 pounds who is running in waist-high water would only feel like 50 pounds on the bad knee.

“Taking some of that pressure off the knee helps them tolerate that knee injury longer,” said Johnson.

A recent study in the American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation showed that water workouts might benefit stroke survivors. Researchers asked 21 patients who’d had a stroke within the past two months to undergo two treadmill exercise tests – one submerged in water and one on a regular treadmill. They gradually increased walking speed and slope over time until the patients couldn’t go any further. Walking on the underwater treadmill produced better measures when it came to maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max), a reflection of heart and lung function during exercise, and metabolic equivalents, a measure of energy use.

“The study proposes a different, very innovative approach” to rehabilitation after stroke, said Dr. Gisele Wolf-Klein, director of geriatric education at Northwell Health in Great Neck, New York.

Wolfe-Klein told CBS News she has tried water workouts and said you don’t even feel like you break a sweat even if your heart rate is up. “It’s a very pleasant way of achieving exactly what you’re trying to do – allowing a cardio-respiratory response,” Wolfe-Klein told CBS News.

She noted that medicine’s veterinary counterparts have been using water therapy for years with injured racehorses.

Budd Coates, training director at Runner’s World magazine, said runners don’t just plunge into water​ therapy when they’re injured; it’s a great conditioning method for healthy athletes, too. Some recreational swimming pools and homeowners with backyard pools have manual treadmills that are water-safe and can be plunked right in the water.

An alternative to a water treadmill: Some pool companies will install a water flow system you can work out against.

“It creates a water force and helps keep you jogging in place,” said Coates.

For those without access to a water treadmill, you can purchase a foam vest specifically designed for water jogging or use foam barbells to help keep you afloat. Some pools may loan them out, too.

Or, Coates suggested, just try it freeform with waist- or chest-high water to start. If you have trouble getting in out of a recreational pool, look for one that has a slanting beach-style entry into the water, or one with a robotic chair lift. Ask a pool lifeguard or certified swim instructor to help you.

If running’s not your thing, but the water looks inviting, Coates said there are also spin bikes that can be used underwater.

Coates said the beauty of water running (or even walking) is that it’s great for any age and any level of ability, from elderly stroke survivors to Olympic athletes.

Galen Rupp, the 2016 Rio Olympics​ men’s marathon bronze medalist, relies on it as part of his training.

“He and some of the other guys on the Nike team, it’s well known they take advantage of the anti-gravity treadmill and the aqua track,” Coates said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes four experts, making this a strong point. It would have been helpful for one of these experts to point out that there is very little evidence supporting water-based PT compared to standard PT.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chelation therapy is a risky procedure approved to treat rare, life-threatening cases of heavy metal poisoning. A taxpayer-funded study tested whether it could reduce heart attacks

A heart disease study presented Sunday is being called a $32 million waste of time — and even a danger to public health — by some of the country's leading health experts.

The taxpayer-funded study tested whether a controversial alternative therapy, called chelation, could reduce heart attacks and other cardiovascular problems in people who had already survived a heart attack.

Chelation therapy, which can remove metals from the blood, is a risky procedure approved to treat rare, life-threatening cases of heavy metal poisoning. Tens of thousands of patients a year undergo the procedure "off-label," however, paying around $5,000 out-of-pocket, based on the claims of doctors who say it can cure everything from Alzheimer's to autism.

National Institutes of Health officials say they launched the study because there has never been any evidence that the practice is effective or safe.

In a presentation Sunday, doctors said the trial found a small overall benefit to chelation, mainly because it prevented heart problems in people with diabetes.

Elliott Antman, chair of the American Heart Association's Scientific Sessions program committee, praised NIH for doing the study.

"Kudos for funding a trial that says, 'OK, if people are lining up to have this done, let's let it undergo rigorous clinical trials,'" Antman said in an interview before the results were unveiled.

In a statement after the study was presented, Antman, a cardiologist at Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital and professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, added, "Intriguing as the results are, they are unexpected and should not be interpreted as an indication to adopt chelation therapy into clinical practice."

Yet some doctors say the study was far from rigorously performed, and so badly run that its marginally positive results are meaningless.

Cardiologist Steven Nissen of the Cleveland Clinic, one of the USA's most respected heart experts, says he's concerned the study will encourage more patients to get off-label chelation instead of taking proven medications or making lifestyle changes that clearly have been shown to reduce heart disease.

"This study has the potential to be extremely dangerous," Nissen says. Chelation "should not be administered to any patients for the indication of heart disease. ... There are a lot of people, including me, who believe this was a poor use of taxpayer dollars."

At least 30 patients have died from off-label chelation therapy since the 1970s, including an autistic 5-year-old Pennsylvania boy, according to a 2008 report in The Medscape Journal of Medicine.

Even the study's lead author says the research should not be used to recommend chelation therapy, and he acknowledges that its findings could have been due to chance.

"A definitive answer on chelation therapy will take much additional research," Gervasio Lamas, chief of the Columbia University division of cardiology at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach, Fla., said in a statement. "The most exciting part of this study is that there may be an unexpected signal of benefit. We need to understand whether the signal is true, or whether it occurred by chance."

The trial, known as the Trial to Assess Chelation Therapy, or TACT, has been dogged by accusations of safety and ethical problems from its beginnings 10 years ago.

The study was temporarily halted in 2008 because of concerns over ethics and patient safety. An investigation by the federal Office for Human Research Subject Protections, which is charged with protecting patients, found that patients may not have been properly informed of chelation's risks.

In response to such concerns, researchers revised their consent forms — the documents that explain a study's risks and benefits to patients — which had failed to mention the risk of death in chelation therapy.

Federal officials also ordered researchers to notify patients that the drug they were receiving had never been approved for lead poisoning, as implied in the consent form, and that the Food and Drug Administration had taken the study drug off of its list of approved medications.

Stephen Kopecky, a Mayo Clinic cardiologist who participated in the trial, says he's also concerned about the reliability of its findings.

The overall benefits were very small, with 26.5% of those randomly assigned to chelation experiencing a cardiovascular problem, compared with 30% of those randomly assigned to a placebo infusion. Even more concerning, that benefit passed the bar for statistical significance — the standard for judging whether a result is real or a fluke — by only 0.001.

Further analysis showed the benefits were limited to those with diabetes, rather than for patients overall.

Under the best of circumstances, that's not a strong result, says anesthesiologist Kimball Atwood of Newton-Wellesley Hospital in Massachusetts, who has followed the study from its beginning.

This study's findings are even more questionable, however, Kopecky says, because patients who got chelation had lower bad cholesterol levels than the placebo group at the start of the trial. That could explain most of their reduced risk for a second heart attack, says Kopecky, president of the American Society for Preventive Cardiology.

In addition, 30% of patients stopped getting their assigned treatments, and 17% withdrew their consent, preventing doctors from including their data or even contacting them to see if they were still alive, Kopecky says.

That large of a dropout rate — which is normally no more than about 3% — could skew the study's findings, Kopecky says.

"That's a big concern any time a study shows a benefit on something that's not highly regulated by the FDA," Kopecky says.

Kopecky also acknowledges that there's no known biological basis for why removing metals from the blood would help heart disease. "That is a million-dollar question," he said.

More than half the trial sites were led by doctors who practice chelation, says Paul Armstrong, a professor of cardiology at the University of Alberta, chosen to discuss the study on a panel at the heart meeting. That could lead to a bias in favor of chelation, Atwood says.

"All of these factors call into question the results," says Michael Carome, deputy director of the advocacy group Public Citizen's Health Research Group.

NIH officials say the trial was worthwhile. Gary Gibbons, director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, says the study was a "breakthrough" not for proving that chelation works, but for "establishing that this chelation therapy regimen can be administered in a safe manner in the context of a clinical trial."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Plenty of independent sources contribute to this piece. If there’s one thing we question, it’s the description of possible bias among the investigators. The story quotes a source who says that “more than half the trial sites were led by doctors who practice chelation,” which “could lead to a bias in favor of chelation.” That may well be true, but aren’t a lot of trials led by physicians and surgeons who use the treatment that they’re supposed to be studying–whether it’s a drug or surgical procedure? We agree that this is a form of bias, but it’s one that’s endemic to medical research. It feels like a double standard to flag the study for this particular shortcoming.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every year, many U.S. women get the grim news that they have breast cancer. In 2013 alone, according to the American Cancer Society, more than 230,000 were given that diagnosis. Each one very likely came as a devastating blow, both to the patient and to her family.

But what if some of these cases are preventable? What if there was a medication that could at least reduce a woman’s risk of developing breast cancer?

The Breast Cancer Prevention Trial published results in 1998 indicating that women who took one of those drugs, tamoxifen, were half as likely to develop breast cancer as similar women who did not take the drug.

Other medications, including raloxifene and a class of drugs called aromatese inhibitors, do much the same thing, though the Food and Drug Administration has not yet approved aromatese inhibitors for this use. Studies estimate that more than 2 million American women at high risk for breast cancer could benefit from taking a preventive drug.

But few women are opting for this protection, which goes by the name chemoprevention. A 2010 study found “exceptionally low” rates of usage.

In part this may be because many doctors are not even discussing this option with their patients. A small 2014 study in the Journal of Women’s Health found that only 13 percent of internal medicine, family medicine and gynecology physicians reported having recommended or prescribed these medications to women who might benefit from them.

The “low uptake of these medications is a missed opportunity,” says Heidi Nelson, a professor of medical informatics and clinical epidemiology at the Oregon Health & Science University in Portland. “Many high-risk women . . . could reduce their risks for invasive cancer by approximately 30 to 50 percent.” On the other hand, these drugs don’t suit everyone, and they are not without risks of their own. Because some of the side effects are serious — such as blood clots in the legs and in the lungs, and, in the case of tamoxifen, uterine cancer — only women who are deemed to be at high risk for the disease should consider them. But there are conflicting views on who meets that “high risk” definition

Chemoprevention should not be confused with chemotherapy. Although both involve taking drugs, chemoprevention medications are taken with the goal of avoiding breast cancer altogether and the subsequent need for chemotherapy later.

And they work on the body differently. Chemotherapy kills off cells, healthy ones as well as cancercous ones. The chemoprevention drugs, by contrast, work by blocking estrogen, a hormone known to promote the growth of cancer cells in breast tissue. Chemoprevention drugs are called SERMs, or selective estrogen receptor modulators, and two have been approved specifically for breast cancer prevention: tamoxifen, which was developed to treat breast cancer after its onset and only later was found to have a preventive benefit, and raloxifene, which was designed to treat osteoporosis.

A 2013 study in the Lancet analyzed data for more than 80,000 women taking tamoxifen or other SERM drugs. The researchers found an overall 38 percent reduction in new cases of breast cancer 10 years after women took these drugs compared with women who took a placebo. The effect was even larger during the first five years of the study.

Investigators working for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent group of scientists and clinicians funded by the government, echoed these results. After looking at multiple trials of tamoxifen and raloxifene, the task force noted that these drugs reduced new cases of breast cancer significantly: from 23 cases per 1,000 women in the control groups to 16 cases per 1,000 women in the treatment groups.

Nelson, one of the lead authors of the analysis, is “confident” that these results show a true benefit. Others are more cautious.

Kenneth Lin, a family physician at Georgetown University who worked on developing the task force’s SERM guidelines, notes that while SERMs may have reduced new cases, they “have not been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality in any study or meta-analysis.” One possible explanation, he says, is that “these drugs are effective at preventing nonlethal cancers rather than the more serious ones.”

Not used enough?

Given that these drugs seem to offer some protection, why are they not in widespread use? Serious side effects is one reason. Beyond blood clots and uterine cancer, other known reactions to the drugs include strokes, cataracts, bone pain, hot flashes, nausea and vaginal dryness.

For some women, the risk of such side effects may be worth taking, depending on their particular odds of developing breast cancer. Those odds can be figured by using a commonly used calculator, often called the Gail model, that estimates a woman’s chances of having breast cancer in a five-year period and over a lifetime.

But this is where it gets more complicated. While many experts agree that women at high risk should consider the medications, they do not agree on what Gail score should trigger that consideration.

The studies that served as the basis for the FDA approval of the drugs, along with recently released guidelines from the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), set the threshold at a five-year Gail score of 1.67 percent.

The Preventive Services Task Force, however, recommended a threshold of 3 percent. At that point, the panel said, women “are likely to have more benefit than harm from using tamoxifen or raloxifene.”

ASCO’s lower cutoff worries some experts. “At the 1.67 percent high-risk threshold,” Georgetown’s Lin says, “every woman age 62 and older would be [considered] high-risk.” That might lead to a situation in which millions of women would be encouraged, unnecessarily,to consider this therapy, along with its potential harmful effects.

Kala Visvanathan, the lead author of the ASCO recommendations and a faculty member at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, said the cutoffs provide only a rough estimate of risk.

It is important to realize, she adds, that “as the risk increases, the benefits tend to be greater. This is an evolving field, and our goal is to better discern who is at high and low risk of breast cancer and develop a greater range of prevention strategies.”

An individual risk analysis should prompt conversation between doctor and patient about the potential benefits and the risk of the therapy.

Both the ASCO and the task force guidelines recommend such a conversation. “The discussion should include the specific risks and benefits associated with each chemopreventive agent,” according to ASCO.

The task force similarly recommends that “clinicians engage in a shared, informed decision making” with women and said that clinicians “should offer to prescribe” these drugs. Many risk factors increase a woman’s chances of having side effects. These factors include older age, obesity, having a history of a blood clot, history of any cancer, immobility, history of certain autoimmune conditions, history of using estrogen or oral contraceptives and history of some form of heart disease.

Insured women with a high risk for breast cancer and a low risk for side effects who try this therapy will not incur out-of-pocket costs, because this treatment was included in the Affordable Care Act as mandated, no-charge preventive care.

So what should a woman do?

Most important, become familiar with your family history, know your risk factors and discuss them with your primary-care physician. Age and family history cannot be controlled, but lifestyle changes — including eating a healthful diet, exercising, not smoking and not overconsuming alcohol — are eminently doable and can reduce your risk. These basic tenets of leading a healthy lifestyle have been shown to be important factors in breast cancer prevention.

Visvanathan and her colleagues are hopeful that more women will be aware of this option.

“A discussion on the use of preventive agents needs to become part of routine care in women at high risk,” she says. “We should begin to implement preventive strategies based on what we already know.”

Mishori is an associate professor of family medicine at the Georgetown University School of Medicine and director of the Health & Media fellowship. Seliby is a family physician and the Health & Media fellow at Georgetown University School of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story makes good use of actual interviews with more than one source. The perspective these experts provide is crucial.
Since the story emphasizes patient decision-making surrounding preventative drug treatment, it would have been useful to include the voices of some actual patients who did and did not opt for drug treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
'Play This Video Game And Call Me In The Morning'

I'm driving through a frozen world, where the roads are paved in ice. As I swerve left to avoid a miniature iceberg, a red fish flashes at the top of my screen. I'm supposed to tap all the red fish that pop up, but not the green fish or the blue. And I have to do this without crashing the car.

An unidentifiable, omnipresent game-meister says: "Doing one thing at a time is easy, but doing them both at the same time is where the magic happens!"

As I get better at the game, my brain is being trained to ignore distractions and stay focused — or, at least, that's the hypothesis of the neuroscientists who designed it.

The brain networks that control multitasking overlap with networks that control working memory and attention span. So some scientists believe that by playing this game — Project Evo — you can improve a range of cognitive skills and, by extension, relieve a range of symptoms associated with cognitive disorders.

"We've been through eight or nine completed clinical trials, in all cognitive disorders: ADHD, autism, depression," says Matt Omernick, executive creative director at Akili, the Northern California startup that's developing the game.

Omernick worked at Lucas Arts for years, making Star Wars games, where players attack their enemies with light sabers. Now, he's working on Project Evo. It's a total switch in mission, from dreaming up best-sellers for the commercial market to designing games to treat mental health conditions.

"The qualities of a good video game, things that hook you, what makes the brain — snap — engage and go, could be a perfect vessel for actually delivering medicine," he says.

In fact, the creators believe their game will be so effective it might one day reduce or replace the drugs kids take for ADHD. But this kind of goal requires a totally different business model; before they can deliver their game to players, they first have to go through the Food and Drug Administration — the FDA.

"The first time those three letters were uttered in a group setting, everyone's like, 'Oooo, that's scary, do we want to do that?' " Omernick recalls.

Silicon Valley companies routinely avoid government regulation if at all possible; the process for FDA approval can be slow and expensive.

"If it says 'FDA approval needed' in the business plan, I myself scream in fear and run away," says Tim Chang, managing director at Mayfield Fund, a venture capital firm. He has never backed a company that wanted to go through the FDA.

Most startups can bring a new video game to market in six months. Going through the FDA approval process for medical devices could take three or four years — and cost millions of dollars.

"That's what's been scary about going the regulatory path," Chang says. "You're waiting and waiting and waiting for FDA approval, going through all these different clinical tests, and you could run out of money easily before you get through that."

The worst fear is that the technology will become outdated by the time the FDA process is complete. Tech companies are constantly redesigning their software to keep up with competition and consumer habits. Chang says in four years a game could be obsolete.

"It's really out of sync with the way we think of product iteration," he says. "We're more on the order of days and real-time changes, where you're pushing out app updates every week."

On the other hand, Chang admits that going the regulatory route could really pay off. If the FDA gives its stamp of approval, doctors could prescribe the game. And that opens the door for insurance companies to pay for it.

"Then you're going into the land of the big, big budgets," Chang says.

Within in the health care field, some executives believe the commercial successes of online games like Angry Birds and Candy Crush could translate into the medical world. They see the potential of these games to not only make money — but to save money, too.

"When you look at the percentage of individuals that are playing video games [59 percent] and overlay that with the percentage of individuals that have chronic conditions or need some assistance from the medical perspective [45 percent], the relationship is pretty strong," says Willis Gee, director of information technology strategy and innovation at health insurer Cigna.

On one level, it's about competition. The Affordable Care Act has made it a lot easier for people to switch health plans. Cigna has to find ways to stand out.

"People want to do things that are fun," says Gee. "So, we have to be there with them."

It might seem like a strange vision for an industry known best for issuing denial letters. But Gee believes reimbursing patients to play games could cut other health costs — by promoting exercise and preventing disease, for example, or even reducing the amount of expensive drugs people take.

"As an industry, we're going to have to reorient ourselves around what it is we're really trying to do," he says. "And if, at the end of the day, the goal is about improving health, then we may need to revisit the way we are quantifying outcomes."

Drug companies are keeping an eye on these games, too. Pfizer partnered with the Project Evo team to see if the game could help improve the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. The drug manufacturer believes it could alleviate some of the problems with drug trials — helping to make them faster, cheaper and more efficient.

Right now, screening for Alzheimer's is subjective. Patients and families fill out forms on mood and attention. The results are often inaccurate. Some of the people recruited for drug trials end up not having Alzheimer's at all. Dr. Michael Ehlers, Pfizer's chief scientific officer for neuroscience, says Project Evo could help them identify better candidates more quickly.

"I'd like to think we could cut down standard clinical trials, in size and length of time, by half or more," he says.

In terms of the game replacing drugs someday, though, Ehlers isn't so sure. He has a different analogy.

"It's just essentially a digital version of otherwise typical kinds of psychological and cognitive behavioral therapy," he says.

But, Ehlers still thinks game designers should go through the same FDA tests and trials as drug manufacturers.

"Quite important is that we hold them to the same standard of evidence that they actually work," he says.

Here, Ehlers touches on a broader controversy around games like Project Evo. There are several scientists who say this field is so new that it's lacking in good evidence that brain changes actually occur.

Randall Engle of the Georgia Institute of Technology believes giving the game FDA approval could hinder good science.

"Because it's a proprietary thing at that point — and that's a problem. If it becomes proprietary, the only people who can do unfettered research on it are the people who own the procedure," he says.

But, then again, that's exactly how it works with drugs.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This is a key strength of the story. Several different experts and viewpoints are presented, so that readers are shown a range of opinions and perspectives. The affiliations of key sources are identified, so that readers can see how their interests might influence their outlook.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - People struggling with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) might feel better with antidepressants or psychotherapy, a recent study suggests.

People with IBS typically suffer from chronic abdominal pain, gas, diarrhea and constipation. While some people improve with customized diets that avoid certain foods that trigger symptoms, this approach doesn’t help everyone and some emerging research suggests that the condition may also be influenced by processes in the brain.

For the current analysis, researchers examined data from 53 trials that compared the effects of antidepressants or psychotherapy, either alone or in combination, versus placebo treatments or “usual management” in people with IBS.

Rates of “no relief” were highest with placebo treatments. People were 34 percent less likely to have no relief from antidepressants and 31 percent less likely to get no relief from psychotherapy, the study found.

“One component of IBS is increased sensitivity to the functions of the bowels; simply summarized, this means either the nerves taking messages from the bowel to the brain are more sensitive or that the brain is more attentive or reacts in a more emotional manner to the normal messages arising in the bowel, or both,” said Dr. Michael Camilleri, a researcher at the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science in Rochester, Minnesota, who wasn’t involved in the current study.

“Since there are really no medications to reduce the nerve sensitivity, some doctors give medications that modulate the function of the brain in the hope that this approach will reduce the ability to sense or emotionally react to the signals or messages arriving from the bowels,” Camilleri said by email.

Psychiatric conditions including depression, anxiety, and somatisation - physical symptoms thought to have psychological origins - are common among people with IBS, researchers note in the American Journal of Gastroenterology.

Although the use of antidepressants is common among IBS patients, psychotherapy is not, the study authors note.

One limitation of the current study is that the smaller studies used in the analysis had a wide variety of designs and methods for testing the success of treatment, researchers note. Another drawback is that these studies weren’t designed to prove how antidepressants or psychotherapy might directly improve IBS symptoms.

Still, a psychological evaluation may make sense for IBS patients because it’s possible their symptoms might be a byproduct of untreated depression, said Dr. Agnieszka Kulak-Bejda, a psychiatry researcher at the Medical University of Białystok in Poland who wasn’t involved in the study.

Antidepressants may work better for certain types of IBS, and the study findings also suggest that the type of medication may matter, Kulak-Bejda said by email.

A family of medicines known as tricyclic antidepressants were more effective at relieving global symptoms of IBS, the analysis found. But another family of medicines known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) was better than a placebo for easing symptoms like pain and bloating and improving quality of life.

“The decision to use antidepressants as a form of therapy should be taken individually,” Kulak-Bejda said. “The decision should be made after considering all the pros and cons.”

Lead author Dr. Alexander Ford of the University of Leeds in the U.K. didn’t respond to requests for comment.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story incorporates input from two third-party experts. The story does not speak to potential conflicts of interest, which is a shortcoming. We found no potential conflicts to report, but think it is worth making that clear in a story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The breast cancer trial, the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene, or STAR, has been a focus of intense debate. While both drugs reduced cases of breast cancer by about half from what would have been expected for the women in the study, raloxifene caused fewer cases of blood clots, cataracts and uterine cancers, making it initially appear the winner.

But raloxifene's edge in blood-clot and uterine-cancer avoidance was not statistically significant, and tamoxifen proved better at reducing the rate of noninvasive breast cancer. So, in response to the cancer institute's announcement two months ago, some experts quickly declared that raloxifene was not clearly superior, leaving women in a quandary.

Tamoxifen, a generic drug, is already approved for reducing the risk of breast cancer. Raloxifene, sold by Eli Lilly & Company under the name Evista, is now approved only to prevent bone-thinning.

The new information presented here and published in the medical journal included a detailed analysis of the side effects of the drugs and the results of a survey of about 10 percent of the 19,747 women in the trial concerning their physical and mental well-being.

There was no overall difference between the drugs in the women's self-rated physical health, mental health or depression. But hot flashes, vaginal bleeding, bladder control problems and leg cramps were more common in the women who took tamoxifen, while pain during sexual intercourse and joint pain were more common in the raloxifene group.

The new data are not likely to settle the debate about which drug is better. "Although media coverage of the early release of data from the STAR trial suggests a clear 'winner' in raloxifene, the data from clinical endpoints and patient-reported symptoms suggest a less clear conclusion," Dr. William J. Gradishar and David Cella of Northwestern University wrote in an editorial in the medical journal.

Dr. Patricia A. Ganz of the University of California, Los Angeles, who presented the quality-of-life data here, said decisions should be made based on each woman's circumstances. If a woman is worried about uterine cancer, she might use raloxifene, Dr. Ganz said. If an active sex life is important to her, a woman might prefer tamoxifen.

But Dr. Ganz said that side effects of both drugs were generally mild and that it was important that women at high risk of breast cancer take one of them.

Relatively few women at high risk of breast cancer take tamoxifen, and some patient advocates question whether they should, saying many women are exposed to side effects for each case of cancer prevented.

The editorial in the journal said the new data "still may not be enough to convince primary care physicians to be more aggressive than they have been to date in breast cancer chemoprevention."

As for the data on vaginal and vulvar cancer prevention, they came from combining data from three trials used to test the ability of the vaccine, Gardasil, made by Merck & Company, to prevent cervical cancer. Vaginal and vulvar cancers are usually caused by the human papillomavirus, which also causes cervical cancer.

Among 18,172 women, ages 15 to 26, there were 5 cases of precancerous vaginal and vulvar lesions in the women who got the vaccine, compared with 27 in those who got a placebo, after about 18 months. That made the vaccine 81 percent effective, said Dr. Jorma Paavonen of the University of Helsinki, the lead author.

When the researchers looked only at lesions caused by the particular viral strains in the vaccine, they found no cases in the vaccinated group and 24 in the placebo group.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story cites information from both the editorial that accompanied these studies as well as the researcher who presented the results at a professional meeting. It might have been helpful to note that neither the authors of the editorial nor the presenter appear to have any financial relationship with either drug manufacturer; this information was available in the published articles. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Waning eyesight may hasten the pace of cognitive decline in older people, suggests a U.S. study.

The results suggest that vision fixes, like a new eyeglass prescription or surgery to remove cataracts, can go a long way toward helping older people stay mentally sharp, said lead author D. Diane Zheng of the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

“Taking care of your vision is important in order to maintain good cognitive function,” she said in a telephone interview.

Poor eyesight and weakening mental function are common in older people and related to one another, but the question of whether vision influences cognition, or vice versa, has not been clear, the study team writes in JAMA Ophthalmology.

To investigate, Zheng’s team followed 2,520 adults for eight years, testing their vision and cognitive status every other year.

Over the course of the study, average visual decline was roughly equivalent to losing the ability to read one line of an eye chart. People who had worse vision at the beginning of the study had worse scores on the cognitive exam as well. A person’s vision at their previous check-up was related to their mental function at the following check-up. While mental function at one check-up was also related to vision at the following exam, the effect of vision on subsequent mental function was significantly stronger.

While the mechanism behind the vision-cognition relationship isn’t well understood, Zheng said, worsening vision can discourage people from brain-stimulating activities like doing crosswords and engaging with other people.

She recommended that older adults get regular eye checkups, and have any vision symptoms checked out and treated promptly.

“This study provides additional evidence that would suggest that people who can keep their vision healthy as they age might also be protecting their cognitive health,” said Dr. Heather E. Whitson of Duke University School of Medicine and Durham VA Medical Center, who wasn’t involved in the research.

“If you’re aging without good vision, not only are you giving your brain less stimulation, you might be altering your brain at a structural level,” she said in a phone interview.

The good news, Whitson added, is that poor vision is one of the few risk factors for cognitive decline that is potentially modifiable. Even incurable causes of age-related vision loss such as glaucoma and age-related macular degeneration “are highly treatable, so we can reduce the amount of vision loss that people suffer from if they’re detected early.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The study was funded by the National Eye Institute and the Jane Kroger Fund. It would have been beneficial to include the funding sources in the story. However, omitting the name of a government or non-profit funder does not merit a Not Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Swedish teenagers who consumed more folic acid got better school grades, a small study published in the journal Pediatrics has found.

But don’t run out and stock up on the B vitamin with the rest of your school supplies just yet, one expert warns.

“There is very little deficiency of folic acid in North America,” Deborah O’Connor, a nutrition researcher who was not involved in the study, told Reuters Health. “If you’re already sufficient, there is not a lot of evidence that taking more supplements will help.”

She said the teens in the study might have been deficient in folic acid, with levels a few times lower than what’s typically seen in North American kids.

Because a lack of the nutrient during pregnancy can cause severe birth defects in babies, certain foods are fortified with folic acid, also called folate, in North America. Most of the population is thought to get adequate amounts for that reason.

During the study, Sweden did not fortify foods, nor did kids use a lot of supplements. Folic acid is naturally present in green, leafy vegetables and legumes.

The new study is among the first to examine whether folate is tied to school achievements, according to Dr. Torbjorn Nilsson of Orebro University Hospital and his colleagues.

The researchers looked at 386 15-year-olds who were finishing up ninth grade. When all their grades from ten core classes were added up, there was a clear difference between teens who got the most and the least folic acid in their diets.

Teens in the top third of folic acid intake — more than 253 micrograms per day for girls and 335 for boys — scored grades of 139 out of 200, on average. Those in the bottom third — less than 173 micrograms folic acid per day for girls and 227 for boys — had an average score of only 120.

The differences remained even after the researchers accounted for gender, smoking, the mothers’ education and which schools the kids went to.

O’Connor, of the University of Toronto and the Hospital for Sick Children in Ontario, Canada, called the findings “pretty significant.”

Still, she said, you can’t be sure if the kids who performed better had a better diet in general or if some other hidden factor could explain the results.

“It’s not a randomized controlled trial, so you always wonder, are there other things going on that you weren’t able to control for?” she said. “Like most studies, it probably raises more questions than it answers.”

In the U.S., kids aged 9 to 13 should get a total of 300 micrograms of folate a day from food and supplements according to the Institute of Medicine’s “Dietary Reference Intakes.” Kids 14 and older and adults are urged to get 400 micrograms a day and pregnant women should get 600 micrograms.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included quotes from independent sources who helped provide context and perspective on the study and its results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women can delay having their first Pap test for cervical cancer until they turn 21 and many can wait longer to go back for follow-up screenings, according to new guidelines released Friday by a major medical group.

The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommended the change after concluding that more frequent testing did not catch significantly more cancers and often resulted in girls and young women experiencing unnecessary stress, anxiety and sometimes harmful treatments because of suspicious growths that would not cause problems.

"We really felt that the downsides of more frequent screening outweighed any benefits," said Alan G. Waxman, a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of New Mexico who led the revision of the guidelines. "More testing is not always more intelligent testing."

The change comes amid sharp controversy over new recommendations from a federal task force that women wait until age 50 before they begin having routine mammograms and that women age 50 to 74 scale back to getting the exams routinely every two years.

Officials said the release of two sets of guidelines in the same week was coincidental, but the new cervical cancer screening recommendations could fuel the firestorm over mammograms, an issue that has become embroiled in the debate over health-care reform. The Obama administration distanced itself from the breast exam guidelines announced Monday by a federal task force, saying the panel does not set government policy or determine what services are covered by the government.

White House aides said the political team leading the fight to pass health-care reform first heard about the upcoming report -- which the panel approved in March -- in the past two weeks, and viewed it as one of many potential headaches that opponents could use to attack the reform efforts.

"There's something about health reform and guidelines that makes people think they're telling women to do less screening to save money," said Cindy Pearson of the National Women's Health Network, a Washington-based advocacy group. "But we don't have any concerns that women are being asked to give up something that is helpful. These recommendations are sound," she said.

Several experts said a backlash against those guidelines could be less likely because of a variety of factors: There is greater scientific agreement about the risks and benefits of cervical cancer testing than mammography, which involves a less common and less politically charged disease; the changes in the recommendations are less dramatic; and the guidelines were issued by a private medical group and not a government-appointed task force, they said.

"I can certainly understand why people are concerned about linking these -- it's clear we're going to have to carve billions out of the health-care system," said Thomas Herzog, chairman of gynecologic oncology at Columbia University New York Presbyterian Hospital, speaking on behalf of ACOG. "Where's the money going to come from? But in this case, if anything, we're taking money out of our own pockets."

The American Cancer Society, which has led the opposition to the mammography guidelines issued by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, was involved in the discussions leading up to the Pap test guidelines and will consider them in reevaluating its own recommendations, an official said.

"We are persuaded that the guidelines are really consistent with the evidence," said Robert Smith, the society's director of cancer screening.

The National Cervical Cancer Coalition, a patient advocacy group, endorsed the recommendations.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Sourcing is excellent. Sources include: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The new study only included national data through 2005, the most recent year they were available, but, said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate and colorectal cancers for the American Cancer Society, “there is no reason to believe it has changed significantly since 2005.” Doctors said there are several reasons screening seems to continue indefinitely as men age. They range from patient demands to malpractice fears to financial incentives and doctors’ own lack of understanding of the risks and benefits of screening.

“There are a lot of pressures,“ said Dr. Gerald L. Andriole, a urologic surgeon at Washington University. “It is not all pure data that is promoting aggressive screening.” Dr. Andriole is directing a National Cancer Institute study of 76,000 men that failed to find a screening benefit after 10 years. The men were aged 55 to 74 when the study began. P.S.A. screening is controversial at any age. Screening proponents say the cancer institute study was flawed and point to a European study of 162,000 men aged 55 to 69 that showed a 20 percent drop in the prostate cancer death rate with screening.

Screening critics say the European study was flawed and add that there is a logical reason it has been hard to show a screening benefit.

They note that prostate cancer is a common cancer, found in most men’s prostates on autopsy, although often the men had no idea they had it. The cancer can be lethal, but it usually grows so slowly that men die with it, not because of it.

For most men, screening only has harms because it leads to biopsies and treatments with unpleasant side effects. And, they say, it might not help cure many deadly prostate cancers because those cancers may have already spread outside the prostate, microscopically seeding other organs, long before a P.S.A. test indicates a possible problem.

A positive P.S.A. test usually leads to a biopsy and then, if cancer is found, to a decision about whether to treat it. Nearly all men opt for treatment, which includes surgery to remove the prostate or radiation to destroy the cancer. Side effects can include impotence and incontinence.

Even younger men should weigh the harms of screening, says Dr. Lisa Schwartz of Dartmouth Medical School. “You also have the potential to wreck their lives,” she said.

One reason treatment is the most common choice is that it is hard to know if a cancer is lethal. Pathologists can distinguish between cancers that look particularly aggressive and those that do not, but there is a real possibility that even if tissue obtained at a biopsy has only less aggressive tumor cells, more aggressive cells might still be lurking in the prostate.

But even with this uncertainty, prostate cancer specialists say, most men who are treated would not have died of prostate cancer, and that is especially true for elderly men, in particular those who are frail and have a limited life expectancy. Yet changing medical practice can be difficult.

“Anytime a practice becomes ingrained, it is difficult to eradicate,” says Dr. Brooks. “It is harder to get rid of an aberrant behavior than to adopt a new one.”

Dr. Andriole said the very concept of not screening is difficult.

“It is the hardest thing in the world not to look for a cancer and not to treat it,” he says. And doctors, he added, have many inducements to screen. They often are afraid they could be sued if they do not screen and a man is found to have a lethal cancer. And there are financial incentives.

“Urologists make money by finding ways to biopsy men and administer treatments,” Dr. Andriole said. Screening, he added, “is promoted by hospitals and industry.” And, he added, “many patients demand it.”

Dr. Brooks of the cancer society says he travels the country and talks to primary care doctors about screening, and has learned that many have misconceptions about the test’s benefits.

“They often don’t appreciate the downside of screening,” Dr. Brooks said, “and they don’t appreciate the delay in benefit.” In addition, Dr. Brooks said, primary care doctors often “overestimate the likelihood that early detection of prostate cancer will lead to survival benefits.”

Added to that, Dr. Brooks said, is the length of time it takes to discuss the pros and cons of screening with patients. Often it is easier to just order the test.

Dr. Bruce Roth, a professor of medicine at Washington University in St. Louis, said that ideally, a doctor should take a man’s overall health into account and not just go by age in ordering P.S.A. tests. But if a man has been screened year after year, it can be hard to suggest he stop because he may not live much longer.

Some men say the cautions just do not apply to them.

J. Allen Wheeler, who is 82 and lives in Portland, Ore., said he had his most recent P.S.A. test in January. His doctor orders it routinely, he says, adding, “In all honestly, it’s part of my physical.” His doctor “just does it — that’s the understanding between us.”

Mr. Wheeler, who says his health is “fairly good,” said he could not foresee a time when he would stop having the test. He would like to know if he has cancer, he says, although he may decide not to be treated.

A 75-year-old Connecticut man said he had the test because he was healthy and wanted to stay that way.

“I think I am going to live to be 100,” he said, asking that his name be withheld to protect his privacy. A recent P.S.A. test found a small cancer, and he does not want to take a chance that it will grow slowly and not cause him problems.

“I am thinking seriously of having the whole thing taken out,” he says. “Hasta la vista.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Numerous independent sources without ties to the study reported on were quoted as part of this story.
One thing that does concern us is the way the piece ended.  The story profiled two men – and both choose to be screened.One recently found a small cancer, and is thinking of “having the whole thing taken out.”  Why was there no balancing profile of a man who chooses not to be screened?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 25, 2018 -- Clot removal may be beneficial up to 24 hours following stroke in carefully selected patients, but every hour delayed after symptoms begin may be associated with more disability, according to preliminary research presented at the American Stroke Association's International Stroke Conference 2018, a world premier meeting dedicated to the science and treatment of cerebrovascular disease for researchers and clinicians.

The international DAWN trial previously demonstrated that patients with a small area of irreversible brain damage and a large area of brain at jeopardy of being lost if the clot remains are more likely to recover with minimal disability if the clot is removed up to 24 hours after symptoms begin or were noticed. It is already well-established that the benefit of clot removal declines each hour during the first 6 hours after symptoms are detected.

In the current analysis of treatment between 6 and 24 hours after symptoms were observed, or after the person was last seen to be well, researchers found:
• each 1-hour delay reduces the chance of recovery with minimal or no disability by 11 percent; and
• treatment remains beneficial through 24 hours, with patients who had their clots removed being 35.5 percent more likely to have minimal or no disability 90 days later, but the overall effect of treatment declines with time.

The current results demonstrate the importance of prompt imaging and treatment of patients with clot-caused stroke, even in those who wake up having experienced a stroke or who for other reasons are not identified in the first few hours after the onset of symptoms.
• Available downloadable B-roll, animation and images to this news tip are on the right column of the tip link https:/
• For more news at AHA International Stroke Conference 2018, follow us on Twitter @HeartNews #ISC18.

Statements and conclusions of study authors that are presented at American Heart Association scientific meetings are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect association policy or position. The association makes no representation or warranty as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations are available at http://www. .

The American Stroke Association is devoted to saving people from stroke -- the No. 2 cause of death in the world and a leading cause of serious disability. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat stroke. The Dallas-based association officially launched in 1998 as a division of the American Heart Association. To learn more or to get involved, call 1-888-4STROKE or visit StrokeAssociation.org. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions that the DAWN trial was funded by Stryker Neuroendovascular. What it did not mention is that Stryker is a company that produces medical devices, and their device for clot removal was the only one used in the trial. Presumably, the good results from this trial will lead to an uptick in their product sales. Indeed, the news release from Stryker contains a lot more information about the specific product compared to this news release.
While many journalists reading the release will understand who Stryker is and why this represents a conflict of interest, consumers reading a reposted version of the release may not have that context. For their benefit, it would be better to spell things out directly.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have stopped a study of a new lung cancer drug, saying it’s so effective they want to offer it to all the patients in the trial.

The drug, Keytruda, is the same drug that former president Jimmy Carter says helped stall advanced melanoma that had spread to his brain.

Keytruda was being tested for the first time in 305 lung cancer patients who had not been treated at all yet. The researchers wanted to see how it worked against the standard chemotherapy cocktails.

It worked at least as well if not better than the chemo, so the researchers have stopped the study to give everyone a chance to take Keytruda, Merck, the company that makes the drug, said.

It helped patients live longer overall and helped them live longer without their tumors growing or spreading, Merck said.

The details are not available yet. “We look forward to sharing these data with the medical community and with regulatory authorities around the world,” said Dr. Roger Perlmutter, president, of Merck Research Laboratories.

Independent committees look at the details of the patients and how well they are doing in drug trials like these. It was one of these independent committees that recommended stopping the trial based on what they saw but that doesn't necessarily mean they shared the details with the company or anyone else.

"I suspect the findings were significant enough that this will be a practice-changing finding," Dr. Pasi Janne, lung cancer specialist at Harvard Medical School and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, told NBC News.

Cancer research goes forward in slow steps. In tests of new drugs, patients always get either the very best therapy already available, or the new drug. Often they get both. Usually, cancer drugs are only tested at first in patients who have tried everything else available and their cancer has come back, anyway.

So it’s an important break for a company if its drug is the first one a patient gets and it works better than the so-called standard of care.

The company now can ask the Food and Drug Administration if it will approve Keytruda to use as the first treatment a lung cancer patient tries.

The FDA has given speedy approval to several new drugs in a class called checkpoint inhibitors, including Keytruda.

They treat cancer by stopping tumor cells from cloaking themselves against the normal, healthy immune system response.

They work on the principle that it's not where cancer starts that matters, but the genetic mutation that causes the cancer. So a lung tumor in one patient may look like the melanoma in another.

Keytruda — known generically as pembrolizumab — targets the activity of genes called PD-1 (anti-programmed-death-receptor-1) and PD-L1. The interaction between the two genes lets some tumors escape detection and destruction by immune system cells.

PD-1 stops immune cells from attacking normal healthy cells by mistake. Tumor cells make PD-L1 turn on PD-1 when immune cells approach.

This trial only included patients whose tumors cells made a lot of PD-L1. That is only a portion of people with lung cancer - 25 percent in one recent trial.

A rival drug, Bristol-Myers Squibb’s Opdivo, works in a similar way to Keytruda and it has slightly different approval from the FDA for how it should be used.

Related: Keytruda Keeps Some Patients Alive For Three Years

"Immunotherapy is a whole new way of treating cancer, including lung cancer," said Janne, who was not involved in the study. "Having seen patients benefit who failed existing therapies, now doing well on these new therapies, is fantastic."

Keytruda, approved October last year for lung cancer and in 2014 for melanoma, is pricey – costing about $150,000 a year for a course of treatment. It’s approved for use with a specific test for PD-L1 activity.

The new drugs are less toxic and more precise than standard chemotherapy. But they are not free of side-effects. Some are severe and can damage the lung, colon, liver, kidneys, hormone-producing glands and the brain, the FDA says.

Lung cancer is the top cancer killer in the U.S. It’s diagnosed in more than 220,000 people a year and it killed nearly 160,000 people last year, according to the National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There are multiple independent sources quoted in the story.
However, all of the quotes in this story sound like this: “I suspect the findings were significant enough that this will be a practice-changing finding.” If there were numbers being released to back up a claim like that, we would be more comfortable with these kinds of quotes. Without more evidence, though, it gives readers the impression that the drug will have a massive impact.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATLANTA--A novel class of antimicrobials that inhibits the function of a key disease-causing component of bacteria could be effective in fighting methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), one of the major drug-resistant bacterial pathogens, according to researchers at Georgia State University.

Their study showed that small molecule analogs that target the functions of SecA, a central part of the general bacterial secretion system required for viability and virulence, have potent antimicrobial activities, reduce the secretion of toxins and can overcome the effect of efflux pumps, which are responsible for multi-drug resistance.

Their findings indicate that targeting SecA is an attractive antimicrobial strategy against MRSA and may be several times more effective than the antibiotics now available for treating the infection.

MRSA causes serious hospital and community-acquired infections. Healthcare-associated MRSA infections are typically linked to invasive procedures or devices, such as surgeries, intravenous tubing or artificial joints. Community-acquired MRSA often begins as a skin boil and is spread by skin-to-skin contact. Individuals at risk include competitive wrestlers, child care workers and those living in crowded conditions.

"We've found that SecA inhibitors are broad-spectrum antimicrobials and are very effective against strains of bacteria that are resistant to existing antibiotics," said Binghe Wang, Regents' Professor of Chemistry at Georgia State, Georgia Research Alliance Eminent Scholar in Drug Discovery and Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholar. He co-led the study with Phang C. Tai, Regents' Professor of Biology at Georgia State, who is an expert on the functions of SecA in bacteria. Their findings were published in the journal Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry in November.

Because of the widespread resistance of bacteria to antibiotics on the market, there is an urgent need for the development of new antimicrobials. MRSA infection is caused by a type of Staphylococcus bacteria that has become resistant to many antibiotics used to treat ordinary staph infections, according to the Mayo Clinic.

In previous work, the researchers developed novel small molecule SecA inhibitors active against the bacteria strains Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis by dissecting a SecA inhibitor called Rose Bengal (RB).

In this study, they evaluated two potent RB analogs for their activity against MRSA strains. The RB analogs inhibited the ATPase activities of two SecA isoforms identified in S. aureus, SaSecA1 and SaSecA2, as well as the SaSecA1-dependent protein-conducting channel. The inhibitors also reduced the secretion of three toxins from S. aureus and stopped three MRSA strains of bacteria from reproducing.

The best inhibitor in this group, SCA-50, showed strong activity against MRSA Mu50 strain and an inhibitory effect on MRSA Mu50 that was two-to-60 times more potent than all commonly used antibiotics, including vancomycin, the last resort option for treating MRSA-related infections.

In a study recently published online in the journal ChemMedChem, the researchers synthesized and evaluated another new class of triazole-pyrimidine analogs as SecA inhibitors. This study also confirmed that SecA inhibitors have the potential for being broad-spectrum antimicrobials, can directly block virulence factor production and can null the effect of efflux pumps.

Collaborators for the paper published in Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry include Hsiuchin Yang, Hao Zhang, Krishna Damera, Ying-Hsin Hsieh, Arpana Sagwal Chaudhary, Jianmei Cui and Jinshan Jin of Georgia State.

The study is funded by the National Institutes of Health and Georgia State's Center for Biotechnology and Drug Design and Molecular Basis of Diseases Program.

The ChemMedChem study is available at http://dx. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes the study’s funding sources are the National Institutes of Health and Georgia State’s Center for Biotechnology and Drug Design and Molecular Basis of Diseases Program.
No conflicts of interest are disclosed in the release or published study results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists at the University of York have found a way of distinguishing between fatal prostate cancer and manageable cancer, which could reduce unnecessary surgeries and radiotherapy.

A recent study showed that more than 25 men were being unnecessarily treated with surgery or radiotherapy, for every single life saved. It is believed that success rates could be hindered as a result of treating all prostate cancers in the same way.

A team at the University of York and the University of British Columbia, Canada, however, have designed a test that can pick out life-threatening prostate cancers, with up to 92% accuracy.

Professor Norman Maitland, from the University of York's Department of Biology, said: "Unnecessary prostate treatment has both physical consequences for patients and their families, but is also a substantial financial burden on the NHS, where each operation will cost around £10,000.

"Cancers that are contained in the prostate, however, have the potential to be 'actively monitored' which is not only cheaper, but has far fewer negative side-effects in patients with non-life threatening cancer."

It is now understood that to find the different levels of cancer, scientists have to identify genes that have been altered in different cancer types. The team analysed more than 500 cancer tissue samples and compared them with non-cancer tissue to search for patterns of a chemical group that is added to part of the DNA molecule, altering gene expression.

A person's age, what they eat and how they sleep, for example, impacts on chemical alterations to genes and which ones are turned on and off. This is part of the normal functioning of the human body and can tell individuals apart, but the process can sometimes go wrong, resulting in various diseases.

Professor Maitland said: "In some diseases, such as cancer, genes can be switched to an opposite state, causing major health issues and threat to life.

"The challenge in prostate cancer is how to look at all of these patterns within a cell, but hone in on the gene activity that suggests cancer, and not only this, what type of cancer - dangerous or manageable?

"To put it another way: how to do we distinguish the tiger cancer cells from the pussycat cancer cells, when there are millions of patterns of chemical alterations going on, many of which will be perfectly healthy?"

The team needed to eliminate the 'noise' of the genetic patterns that make individuals unique, to leave them with the patterns that indicate cancer. They were able to do this using a computer algorithm, which left the team with 17 possible genetic markers for prostate cancer.

Dr Davide Pellacani, who began these studies in York, before moving to the University of British Columbia, said: "Using this computer analysis, not only could we see which tissue samples had cancer and which didn't, but also which cancers were dangerous and which ones less so.

"Out of almost a million markers studied, we were able to use our new tools to single out differences in cancer potency."

To take this method out of the laboratory, the team are now investigating a further trial with new cancer samples, and hope to involve a commercial partner to allow this to be used for patients being treated in the NHS.

The research, published in the British Journal of Cancer, was funded by The Freemasons of the Province of Yorkshire (North and East Ridings) and The Masonic Samaritan Fund. Yorkshire Cancer Research; Prostate Cancer UK; The British Columbia Cancer Agency Strategic Priorities Fund.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: All funding sources were listed at the bottom of the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 27, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Middle-aged and elderly adults who regularly eat foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids may slow the mental decline that leads to dementia, according to a new study.

Researchers found that people with the highest blood levels of these essential fatty acidsfound in fish such as salmon and tunawere more likely to perform well on tests of mental functioning and to experience less age-related brain shrinkage.

"We feel fatty-acid consumption exerts a beneficial effect on brain aging by promoting vascular health," said the study's lead author, Dr. Zaldy Tan, associate professor at the Easton Center for Alzheimer's Disease Research and the division of geriatrics at the University of California, Los Angeles. This might include reducing blood pressure and inflammation, he added.

Previous research linked dementia risk with the amount of omega-3 fatty acids in blood plasma, which reflects how much people had eaten in the past few days. But in the current work, researchers could estimate the amount of omega-3s that participants had consumed in the past several months by looking at how much had built up in their red blood cells.

"This represents their average intake of fatty acids, not just a snapshot," Tan said.

The study, published in the Feb. 28 issue of the journal Neurology, did not prove that omega-3 fatty acids prevent mental decline, merely that there may be an association between consumption of fatty acids and brain health.

For the study, researchers measured the red blood cell level of fatty acids in 1,575 dementia-free people whose average age was 67. About three months later, participants underwent mental-functioning tests and MRI scans that examined brain size and blood supply in the brain.

The participants were in the Framingham Offspring Study, which is predominately white. Whether the association would apply to other ethnic and racial groups needs to be explored, the authors said.

The researchers found that those with the lowest levels of omega-3s had worse scores on tests of visual memory, attention and abstract thinking than people who ranked in the top 75 percent for fatty-acid levels.

Adults in the bottom 25 percent also tended to have smaller brain volume overall. The decrease in brain volume was enough to make their brains appear two years older than those of people in the top three-quarters for fatty-acid levels.

Brain scans also showed signs of less blood supply in the brains of people with the lowest omega-3 levels. This suggests they may play a role in promoting general vascular, or blood vessel, health in the brain, similar to how they are thought to help heart health, rather than acting on just one brain area, Tan said.

The researchers took into account various health and lifestyle factors, including age, education and body mass index, to explore whether other differences among the people with low levels of omega-3s could help explain their more rapid brain aging.

But after controlling for those risk factors, "the difference [in brain aging] is still there so we conclude that omega-3 fatty acids likely explain them," Tan said.

Tan added, however, that it remains possible that factors they did not control for, such as fruit and vegetable consumption, are really responsible for the brain benefits. Another possibility is that the slight mental decline that the people in the older brain group were experiencing caused them to eat less healthy omega-3-rich foods, instead of vice versa.

"This is a strengthening of the argument that people with less [omega-3 fatty acids] have higher risk of dementia," said Dr. Nikolaos Scarmeas, associate professor of clinical neurology at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City.

But questions remain over whether fatty-acid levels really influence changes in brain size, Scarmeas added. A clinical trial comparing high and low intake of omega-3s in relation to brain imaging would help answer those questions, he said.

In the meantime, fish is "a good prescription for other things and we have a hint it might be helpful for the brain," Scarmeas said.

That the current study reported a difference in brain health between people with omega-3 fatty-acid levels in the bottom 25 percent and top 75 percent suggests that there is a threshold level of consumption to attain brain gains.

A previous study in which participants filled out food surveys found decreased risk of vascular brain problems among those who ate at least three servings of fish a week.

Find out more about brain health at the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes an independent expert, and there were no conflicts that should have been identified.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, April 14, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- A method designed to target, freeze and destroy a tumor's cellular function seems effective in combating lung tumors, a small ongoing study finds.

At least in the short-run -- meaning three months after the procedure -- the intervention known as "cryoablation" appeared to kill all targeted tumors that had spread to the lung from elsewhere, preliminary results suggest.

However, some patients developed new tumors in that time period, the researchers noted.

The study authors cautioned that while the initial findings are encouraging, the treatment should not be seen as a cure for this type of metastatic (spreading) lung disease. Rather, they said that for certain patients who may not be eligible for more standard surgical approaches, the therapy has potential as an alternative means for offering an improved quality of life for a longer period of time.

"'Promising' is the perfect way to describe our findings," said study lead author Dr. David Woodrum, an interventional radiologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. "But whether or not this minimally invasive approach would ultimately become a primary method of treatment in the future will depend on the long-term results of this trial, which is still under way. At this point I would say that cryoablation has the most applicability as a kind of last-ditch treatment for patients who are not good surgical candidates for a variety of reasons."

Woodrum and his colleagues are scheduled to discuss their findings Sunday in New Orleans at the annual meeting of the Society of Interventional Radiology. Funding for their work was provided by Galil Medical, a medical device manufacturer based in Arden Hills, Minn.

Because this study was presented at a medical meeting, the conclusions should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute points out that while cryoablation (also known as cryosurgery) is a well-known practice, researchers are still in the process of assessing its long-term benefits.

The procedure is performed by an interventional radiologist on patients coping with metastasized lung tumors, the researchers noted. Using CT-imaging equipment, the physician inserts a small needle-like instrument directly into the tumor to deliver the freezing power (at temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius) of liquid nitrogen to cancer cells, while sparing healthy surrounding tissue.

To date, the team behind the new study has used the procedure to tackle a total of 36 tumors in 22 American and French patients --13 men and nine women -- whose average age was 60. Fifteen patients had just one tumor, while the rest had two or more. None of the patients was deemed eligible for standard surgical interventions.

The targeted tumors were less than 3.5 centimeters (about 1.4 inches), which Woodrum described as being "small to medium in size."

The procedure was performed under either general anesthesia or conscious sedation, and lasted anywhere from 45 minutes to nearly three hours. Typically, patients were able to return home the following day.

The result: Among the 15 patients seen roughly three months post-procedure, tumor control was found to be 100 percent, although six patients were found to have developed new lung tumors in the interim.

Among five patients seen six months after the procedure, tumor control continued to be 100 percent.

The authors noted that side effects were minimal, typically involving air or fluid around the lungs after the procedure, and in all cases were resolved quickly.

The team concluded that cryoablation appears to be both safe and effective, at least in the short-term. But they acknowledged that more research needs to be done to track the treatment's impact over the long haul.

"It would be overreaching to say that we're curing cancer with this," Woodrum said. "But this is one of many therapy options that is looking to turn cancer into a chronic fight, and to give patients for whom the choices are limited a chance at a good quality of life with minimal treatment complications."

For his part, Dr. David Carbone, a professor and director of the James Thoracic Center at the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, said that the findings regarding cryoablation are "not incredibly novel," given that the procedure has been around for years.

"And I would say that there are multiple different technologies for doing this kind of very localized approach," he added. He mentioned stereotactic radiosurgery -- which targets the tumor with high-power X-rays -- as another way to go.

"While I've done cryoablation myself in the past, it's not what I typically do," Carbone noted. "Stereotactic is noninvasive and doesn't require general anesthesia, so that's what I'd tend to do, although certainly what approach is ideal will depend on a particular patient's situation and symptoms. But there's no situation in which cryoablation would be the only theoretical option."

For more about cryoablation, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The one “independent” expert quoted provided another valid perspective, although it seems that we may simply have dueling physician preferences at play here – the study authors possibly preferring cryoablation and the other expert quoted preferring stereotactic radiosurgery.  And not enough evidence was provided to help readers/patients decipher where the weight of the evidence aligns.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In UCLA-led study, new treatment is more effective in people receiving immunotherapy for the first time

A UCLA-led study has found that a treatment that uses a bacteria-like agent in combination with an immunotherapy drug could help some people with advanced melanoma, an aggressive form of skin cancer, live longer.

The research showed that using the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab and the experimental agent SD-101, a sequence of nucleic acids that mimics a bacterial infection, altered the microenvironment around the tumor in a way that enabled the immune system to more effectively attack the cancer. The research was an early-stage study, conducted to test the side effects and best dosage of a potential new combined therapy, and the findings were published today in the journal Cancer Discovery.

Pembrolizumab, which is marketed under the brand name Keytruda, works by blocking a protein called PD-1, which interferes with immune system function. Blocking PD-1 with pembrolizumab enables the immune system cells to better attack the cancer. While pembrolizumab has been a significant advancement for treating people with a variety of advanced or metastatic cancers, a majority of metastatic melanoma tumors are still resistant to the drug.

"We have found that the reason patients with metastatic melanoma do not initially respond to immunotherapy with an anti-PD-1 is that their immune system was not ready," said Dr. Antoni Ribas, the study's lead author, a professor of medicine at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA and director of the UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center Tumor Immunology Program. "So we thought, 'What if we change that by injecting the therapy drug into the metastatic lesions and change the microenvironment of the cancer?'

"It's like having a pile of wood but not having a match to light it. With this new approach, SD-101 is the match that starts the fire."

The researchers found that SD-101 not only directs T cells to cancer cells, but it also makes the microenvironment more hospitable for the T cells, so that they can better kill the cancer cells.

All 22 people in the study had an advanced stage of inoperable or metastatic melanoma. Nine were receiving an immunotherapy treatment for the first time as part of the study. Seven of those nine had a positive response to the drug combination, including two for whom the tumors disappeared completely.

The other 13 people in the study had previously received a type of immunotherapy before the study. Of them, two had a partial response, meaning parts of the tumors shrank, but the tumors did not go away completely. Five more showed some reduction in the tumors, but the other participants did respond to the therapy.

The results of the study suggest that the combination of pembrolizumab and SD-101 could provide an alternative treatment for people with melanoma whose tumors have not responded or would be unlikely to respond to other therapies.

"For all patients with advanced cancer, immunotherapy using PD-1 inhibitors has really changed the face of cancer treatment. Unfortunately, this therapy still only works in a subset of patients," said Dr. Deborah Wong, assistant clinical professor of medicine at the Geffen School of Medicine and an oncologist at the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, who was also an author of the paper.

"This particular combination has been especially gratifying because not only does the SD-101 therapy drug induce tumor shrinkage at the actual site where it's injected, but it's working in conjunction with pembrolizumab to shrink tumors outside of the ones we're directly injecting."

The study highlights the need for more research into combination therapies like this one, because many people with cancer do not respond to immunotherapy or experience a reoccurrence of their tumors after treatment.

"We are really starting to understand the science of how immunotherapies work in patients," said Ribas, who is also the director of the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy Center at UCLA. "By understanding that, we can find more ways to make that therapy more active. One way is by combining the therapy with another agent that can overcome the resistance that some cancers have to these therapies."

The study was funded by Dynavax Technologies Corp., which provided SD-101. Merck & Co. provided pembrolizumab. Ribas' research is funded by the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy and the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This information is included in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHAMPAIGN, Ill. - A new surgical tool that uses light to make sure surgeons removing cancerous tumors "got it all" was found to correlate well with traditional pathologists' diagnoses in a clinical study, showing that the tool could soon enable reliable, real-time guidance for surgeons.

The interdisciplinary research team led by Stephen Boppart, a University of Illinois professor of electrical and computer engineering and of bioengineering, performed the study on 35 patients with breast cancers at the Carle Foundation Hospital in Urbana, Illinois. The results appear in the journal Cancer Research.

One difficult but crucial determination for surgeons and tissue pathologists is figuring out where a tumor ends. A solid tumor may be easily identifiable, but the tissue around the main body of the tumor, known as the margin, may contain cancerous cells as well. Because of this, excess tissue surrounding the tumor is typically removed, but the question lingers of whether any cancer cells remain to re-emerge later as tumors.

"In almost all solid-tumor surgeries, there's a question of margins," said Dr. Boppart, who also is a medical doctor. "Typically, surgeons will remove the tissue mass that contains the tumor and will send it to the lab. The pathologist will process, section and stain the tissue, then examine the thin sections on microscope slides. They look at the structure of the cells and other features of the tissue. The diagnosis is made based on subjective interpretation and often other pathologists are consulted. This is what we call the gold standard for diagnosis."

The new device is a hand-held probe based on a technology called optical coherence tomography (OCT) that uses light to image tissue in real time. Cancer cells and normal tissue scatter light differently because they have different microstructural and molecular features, Boppart said, so OCT gives physicians a way to quantitatively measure the cellular feature of a tumor. Surgeons can pass the OCT wand over a section of tissue and see a video on a screen, with no special chemical stains or lengthy tissue processing required.

"In many cases, you can't tell the difference between cancer cells and normal tissue with the naked eye, but with OCT they're very different," said Boppart, who also is affiliated with the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology at the U. of I.

In the clinical study, surgeons treated patients according to the standard surgical procedure, but OCT data were collected from the margin of the tumor cavity and the margin of the removed tissue mass during surgery so that the results could be compared later. The study found that the OCT device analysis identified the differences between normal and cancerous tissue with 92 percent sensitivity and 92 percent specificity. They also found that the way that OCT spotted cancer in the removed tissue was closely correlated with the results from the postoperative pathology reports, which often came days later.

"For the first time, this study demonstrates the use of OCT for imaging tumor margins within the tumor cavity, in the patient, during surgery," Boppart said. "It is likely better to check to see if any residual tumor cells might be left behind, rather than checking the tissue mass that was taken out. Then, the surgeon can intervene immediately."

The researchers will continue clinical studies with the OCT device, looking at other types of solid-state tumors. Diagnostic Photonics, a start-up company Boppart co-founded that also collaborated on the study, is commercializing the OCT probe technology for broader use.

"Ultimately, new technological innovations like this in medicine and surgery are going to improve our health care and save lives. That's when this work will be most rewarding," Boppart said.

The National Institutes of Health supported this work.

The paper "Real-time imaging of the resection bed using a handheld probe to reduce incidence of microscopic positive margins in cancer surgery" is available online at http://cancerres. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release discloses financial and commercialization interests of the principal investigator.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Feb. 11, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Just in time for Valentine's Day comes word that eating dark chocolate appears to lower your risk of stroke or lessen the likelihood of death after a stroke.

But the findings, based on a review of existing research, aren't conclusive, and they don't prove that chocolate is good for your heart. And dietitians say too much chocolate can be harmful.

Still, two of the three studies analyzed in the review provide yet another suggestion that health benefits lurk in chocolate, dark chocolate in particular, said review co-author Dr. Gustavo Saposnik.

If choosing among white chocolate, milk chocolate or dark chocolate, "I'd definitely go with the dark chocolate," said Saposnik, director of the Stroke Research Unit at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto.

The review authors, who found three studies on chocolate consumption and stroke between 2001 and 2009, are scheduled to report their findings at the American Academy of Neurology's annual meeting in Toronto in April.

One study found no significant association between chocolate consumption and risk of stroke or death from stroke. But another found that the stroke rate was 22 percent lower in people who ate chocolate once a week, and a third reported that death from stroke was 46 percent lower in those who ate 50 grams of chocolate once a week.

The health benefit may come from antioxidants called flavonoids that are present in chocolate, Saposnik said. Antioxidants are thought to prevent cell damage.

In years past, "the message was that chocolate consumption might be associated with higher LDL [bad] cholesterol or perhaps higher incidence of cardiovascular disease," he said. "Today, we know that all chocolates are not the same."

So, should you and your sweetheart add dark chocolate to your diet? "I'm not sure we can provide any recommendation at this time," Saposnik said.

For one thing, it's possible that some factor other than chocolate could be helping lower the risk of stroke. Those who eat more chocolate could be wealthier and have better access to health care, for instance, or go to the gym more often.

Saposnik said more studies will help clarify the association between chocolate and stroke risk.

For now, said registered dietitian Katie Clark, "caution should be taken not to promote chocolate as a health food," even though it's fine in moderation.

Chocolate is a major source of saturated fat, which raises bad cholesterol and boosts heart disease risk, said Clark, an assistant clinical professor at the University of California at San Francisco.

But Keith-Thomas Ayoob, an associate professor at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City who studies nutrition, said chocolate does have its benefits. "Several studies indicate that even a little chocolate can help reduce blood pressure and increase blood flow through the arteries. Both are good for heart health," he said. "It's nice to know that chocolate isn't bad for you, assuming you eat modest amounts and don't become overweight by overeating it."

The National Stroke Association has more on stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  A dietitian and a nutrition researcher – both apparently unaffiliated with the research – were quoted. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Any woman who is struggling with infertility will tell you that one of the worst parts of going through in vitro fertilization (IVF) are the daily hormone injections. And for some women, those injections could even be downright dangerous.

Although IVF is still considered the gold standard, there’s an infertility treatment available that is offering hope — in vitro maturation (IVM). IVM has the potential to improve the chances for women to have babies without a long course of hormones.

What is IVM?

 IVM is an experimental fertility treatment that collects and matures a woman’s eggs in a lab. Although the treatment is used in conjunction with IVF, the initial process isn’t the same.

With IVF, a woman must undergo between 8 to 11 nights of ovary-stimulating hormone injections before her eggs can be retrieved. With IVM, women undergo a shorter course— between 3 and 6 days— of hormones known as a “priming phase.”

Once the eggs are retrieved, they’re matured in a laboratory for approximately three days, fertilized and then implanted. They can also be frozen as eggs or embryos to be implanted later.

Clinics that specialize in IVM require a doctor who has expertise in retrieving small eggs and a lab with embryologists who have the skills to look for them, said Dr. Janelle Luk, medical director of Neway Fertility in New York City.

Who is IVM helpful for?

Although IVF is considered the standard of care, experts say some women may benefit from IVM.

For starters, since there is less time involved with IVM, women who are undergoing chemotherapy, radiation or plan to have surgery may be good candidates.

IVM may also help women who have a contraindication to the increased levels of estradiol, a form of estrogen, which elevates as the follicles develop and mature. These would include women with an estrogen-sensitive cancer or a history of blood clots.

IVM can also help women who are adverse to injections or who have failed IVF, Luk said.

Women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) or who are at increased risk for ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS)— which affects between 3 and 6 percent of women who go through IVF— may also benefit from IVM. OHSS can usually be managed on an outpatient basis but severe OHSS may lead to blood clots, even death, said Dr. Shefali Shastri, a board-certified reproductive endocrinologist and OB/GYN at Reproductive Medicine Associates of New Jersey in Somerset and Short Hills.

What are the limitations of IVM? 

A study in the journal Facts, Views and Vision found that IVM achieved up to a 35 percent clinical pregnancy rate in young women, which is comparable to IVF.

Yet most studies have found that IVF is superior to IVM.

Although there are different protocols for IVF, and there aren’t any randomized controlled trials that have compared IVF and IVM side by side, studies that look at standard IVF cycles show a significantly higher pregnancy rate than IVM, Shastri said.

Plus, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) committee opinion on IVM states that implantation rates for IVM—between 5.5 and 21.6 percent— are a more reliable indicator of IVM success and are lower than expected for women of the same age who use IVF. They also note that the technology hasn’t been widely used and that there are no studies looking at the outcomes of birth defects or developmental delays.

Since IVM results in lower fertilization rates, protocols that use IVM are more likely to also use intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), in which one sperm is injected into one egg. Although ICSI is safe and effective, the bigger concern is if a patient going through IVM doesn’t use ICSI, Shastri said.

While IVM is cheaper initially because there are fewer hormones to take, it may be more costly if several rounds are required.

Although IVM may eventually become more common, IVF still remains the standard of care and the most effective way for women to get pregnant.

“With medicine, you always want to optimize a patient’s outcome,” Shastri said. “Ultimately, you want to do the best for the patient so my preference would not be IVM.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article does quote two sources who were apparently interviewed, although both are principals in reproductive medicine clinics selling their services.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers analyzed 259 men with prostate cancer. Among the group of participants, 482 tumor, benign and germline samples were looked at. The researchers analyzed the samples and looked for genetic differences that made it so the researchers could categorize the study participants into groups regarding targeted treatments specific to their prostate cancer.

What they found was more than minimal differences among the tumors. They concluded that five different types of prostate cancer were found based on 100 genes. These genes demonstrated the risk of the disease progression, which was more accurate than the currently used Gleason score test and PSA test.

Prior research had shown six of the genes were linked to prostate cancer, however researchers noted in the published study that it turns out the other 94 genes had not been associated with prostate cancer until now.

"If five types of the disease exist, how does this change popular medical opinion on prostate cancer screening? This may mean that each type of the disease needs its own approach to screening, diagnosis, treatment and even recurrence," noted Dr. Samadi.

While the findings need further research, larger clinical trials could give better information on individualized treatment for each prostate cancer type. This could lead to a better quality of life and more effective treatment based on which prostate cancer a man is diagnosed with.
• Prostate cancer is one of the leading causes of death among men.
• Other than skin cancer, prostate cancer is the most common cancer in American men.
• About 1 in 7 men will get prostate cancer in their lifetime.
• Prostate cancer mainly occurs in older men; about 6 in 10 cases are diagnosed in men aged 65 or older. It is much rarer for men younger than 40 years old to develop prostate cancer.
• The average age of diagnosis is about 66 years old.
• In 2015, it is estimated that there will be more than 27,500 deaths from prostate cancer.

The researchers said the analysis in their study is better at forecasting how prostate cancer will advance compared to the current diagnostic tests being used for prostate cancer such as the prostate specific antigen test and the Gleason score.

"These findings could lead to more optimized diagnostic testing on all aspects of the prostate cancer diagnosis process and brings full circle the coming approach to cancer being an individual disease based very much on the patient's individual genetic profile," said Dr. Samadi.

Get more of Dr. Samadi's take on this study and its effect on the field of Prostate Cancer on Fox News Sunday Housecall.

Patients newly diagnosed with prostate cancer can contact world renowned prostate cancer surgeon and urologic oncologist, Dr. David Samadi, for a consultation or second opinion. For men with a family history of the disease, contact Dr. Samadi to learn more about your risk factors and to get a baseline PSA blood test.

Visit ProstateCancer911.com and call 212.365.5000 to set up your consultation.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This release isn’t hiding any conflicts since it is openly sponsored and released by the prostate cancer specialist named. However, it almost appears as though the author hijacked a recent study about prostate cancer genetics in order to sell the physician’s services to concerned patients. Details about the study itself are minimal.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A nationally representative analytic sample suggests that the consumption of fresh pears should be encouraged as part of an overall healthy diet

PORTLAND, Ore. - Dec. 8, 2015 - It's National Pear Month and the perfect time to enjoy juicy, sweet pears. If that isn't reason enough to fill your shopping basket, there's another reason to add this fruit to your grocery list. A new study, 'Fresh Pear Consumption is Associated with Better Nutrient Intake, Diet Quality, and Weight Parameters in Adults: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2001-2010,' published in Nutrition and Food Science, revealed new information regarding the health benefits of pear consumption.1 Of particular interest given the high rates of obesity in the United States, the study found that adult pear consumers had a lower body weight than non-pear consumers and they were 35 percent less likely to be obese.

The epidemiologic study, led by Carol O'Neil of the Louisiana State University Agricultural Center, used a nationally representative analytic sample to examine the association of fresh pear consumption with nutrient intake, nutrient adequacy, diet quality, and cardiovascular risk factors in adults.

"The association between pears and lower body weight is very exciting," said Dr. Carol O'Neil. "We believe fiber intake may have driven the lower body weights that were seen in this study because there was no difference in energy intake or level of physical activity found between the fresh pear consumers and non-consumers."

In addition to discovering a correlation between fresh pear consumers and lower body weight, the study found that pear consumption was associated with higher diet quality (as defined by the Healthy Eating Index). Moreover, the consumption of one medium fresh pear per day had a positive effect on nutrient intake since consumers had higher usual intakes of dietary fiber, vitamin C, magnesium, copper, and potassium, and higher mean intakes of total sugars; consumers of fresh pears also had lower intakes of total, monounsaturated fatty acids, saturated fatty acids, and added sugars.

Pears are an excellent source of fiber and a good source of vitamin C. One medium pear provides about 24 percent of daily fiber needs for only 100 calories. They are sodium-free, cholesterol-free, fat-free and contain 190 mg of potassium. The USDA Dietary Guidelines for Americans state that people who eat more fruit as part of an overall healthy diet are likely to reduce their risk of some chronic diseases, although little is published on the health outcomes associated with individual fruits, including pears.

The USA Pear Bureau continues to collaborate with researchers to commission additional studies that show the relationship between pears and positive health outcomes. Visit http://www. for additional pear research, nutrition resources and recipes.

The Pear Bureau Northwest was established in 1931 as a nonprofit marketing organization to promote the fresh pears grown in Oregon and Washington. Today, the United States is the third largest pear-producing country in the world, and Oregon and Washington comprise the nation's largest pear growing region with 1,600 growers producing 84% of all fresh pears grown in the United States. Pears grown in these two Pacific Northwest states are distributed under the "USA Pears" brand. Pears are an excellent source of fiber (24% DV) and a good source of vitamin C (10% DV) for only 100 calories per medium sized pear. Sweet and juicy with no fat, no sodium, and no cholesterol, pears are a perfect choice for a snack as well as for any course of any meal of the day. For more information, visit http://www. , http://www. , and follow @USApears on Twitter.

1. O'Neil CE, Nicklas TA, Fulgoni VL (2015) Fresh Pear Consumption is Associated with Better Nutrient Intake, Diet Quality, and Weight Parameters in Adults: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2001-2010. J Nutr Food Sci 5: 377. doi:10.4172/2155-9600.1000377
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release is transparent in acknowledging that the Pear Bureau is the source of its pear promotion and the “commissioning” of studies, in this case at the Louisiana State University Agricultural Center.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lauren Pestikas sits as she receives an infusion of the drug ketamine during a 45-minute session at an outpatient clinic in Chicago on July 25, 2018. Pestikas struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before starting ketamine treatments earlier in the year. (AP Photo/Teresa Crawford)

CHICAGO (AP) — It was launched decades ago as an anesthetic for animals and people, became a potent battlefield pain reliever in Vietnam and morphed into the trippy club drug Special K.

Now the chameleon drug ketamine is finding new life as an unapproved treatment for depression and suicidal behavior. Clinics have opened around the United States promising instant relief with their “unique” doses of ketamine in IVs, sprays or pills. And desperate patients are shelling out thousands of dollars for treatment often not covered by health insurance, with scant evidence on long-term benefits and risks.

Chicago preschool teacher Lauren Pestikas long struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before trying ketamine earlier this year.

The price tag so far is about $3,000, but “it’s worth every dime and penny,” said the 36-year-old.

Pestikas said she feels much better for a few weeks after each treatment, but the effects wear off and she scrambles to find a way to pay for another one.

For now, ketamine has not received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treating depression, though doctors can use it for that purpose.

Ketamine has been around since the 1960s and is widely used as an anesthesia drug during surgery because it doesn’t suppress breathing. Compared to opioids such as morphine, ketamine isn’t as addictive and doesn’t cause breathing problems. And some studies have shown that ketamine can ease symptoms within hours for the toughest cases.

Its potential effects on depression were discovered in animal experiments in the late 1980s and early 1990s showing that glutamate, a brain chemical messenger, might play a role in depression, and that drugs including ketamine that target the glutamate pathway might work as antidepressants.

Conventional antidepressants like Prozac target serotonin, a different chemical messenger, and typically take weeks to months to kick in — a lag that can cause severely depressed patients to sink deeper into despair.

Ketamine’s potential for almost immediate if temporary relief is what makes it so exciting, said Dr. Jennifer Vande Voort, a Mayo Clinic psychiatrist who has used ketamine to treat depression patients since February.

“We don’t have a lot of things that provide that kind of effect. What I worry about is that it gets so hyped up,” she said.

The strongest studies suggest it’s most useful and generally safe in providing short-term help for patients who have not benefited from antidepressants. That amounts to about one-third of the roughly 300 million people with depression worldwide.

“It truly has revolutionized the field,” changing scientists’ views on how depression affects the brain and showing that rapid relief is possible, said Yale University psychiatrist Dr. Gerard Sanacora, who has done research for or consulted with companies seeking to develop ketamine-based drugs.

But to become standard depression treatment, he said, much more needs to be known.

Last year, Sanacora co-authored an American Psychiatric Association task force review of ketamine treatment for mood disorders that noted the benefits but said “major gaps” remain in knowledge about long-term effectiveness and safety. Most studies have been small, done in research settings and not in the real world.

When delivered through an IV, ketamine can cause a rapid increase in heart rate and blood pressure that could be dangerous for some patients. Ketamine also can cause hallucinations that some patients find scary.

“There are some very real concerns,” Sanacora said. “We do know this drug can be abused, so we have to be very careful about how this is developed.”

Dr. Rahul Khare, an emergency medicine specialist in Chicago, first learned about ketamine’s other potential benefits a decade ago from a depressed and anxious patient he was preparing to sedate to fix a repeat dislocated shoulder.

“He said, ‘Doc, give me what I got last time. For about three weeks after I got it I felt so much better,’” Khare recalled.

Khare became intrigued and earlier this year began offering ketamine for severe depression at an outpatient clinic he opened a few years ago. He also joined the American Society for Ketamine Physicians, formed a year ago representing about 140 U.S. doctors, nurses, psychologists and others using ketamine for depression or other nonapproved uses.

There are about 150 U.S. ketamine clinics, compared with about 20 three years ago, said society co-founder Dr. Megan Oxley.

Khare said the burgeoning field “is like a new frontier” where doctors gather at meetings and compare notes. He has treated about 50 patients with depression including Pestikas. They’re typically desperate for relief after failing to respond to other antidepressants. Some have lost jobs and relationships because of severe depression, and most find that ketamine allows them to function, Khare said.

Typical treatment at his clinic involves six 45-minute sessions over about two weeks, costing $550 each. Some insurers will pay about half of that, covering Khare’s office visit cost. Patients can receive “booster” treatments. They must sign a four-page consent form that says benefits may not be long-lasting, lists potential side effects, and in bold letters states that the treatment is not government-approved.

At a recent session, Pestikas’s seventh, she leaned back on a reclining white examining-room chair as a nurse hooked her up to a heart and blood pressure monitor. She grimaced as a needle was slipped into the top of her left palm. Khare reached up with a syringe to inject a small dose of ketamine into an IV bag hanging above the chair, then dimmed the lights, pulled the window curtains and asked if she had questions and was feeling OK.

Pestikas listened to music on her iPhone and watched psychedelic videos. She said it was like “a controlled acid trip” with pleasant hallucinations. The trip ends soon after the IV is removed, but Pestikas said she feels calm and relaxed the rest of the day, and that the mood boost can last weeks.

Studies suggest that a single IV dose of ketamine far smaller than used for sedation or partying can help many patients gain relief within about four hours and lasting nearly a week or so.

Exactly how ketamine works is unclear, but one idea is that by elevating glutamate levels, ketamine helps nerve cells re-establish connections that were disabled by depression, said ketamine expert Dr. Carlos Zarate, chief of experimental therapies at the National Institute of Mental Health.

A small Stanford University study published in August suggested that ketamine may help relieve depression by activating the brain’s opioid receptors.

Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Allergan are among drug companies developing ketamine-like drugs for depression. Janssen leads the effort with its nasal spray esketamine. The company filed a new drug application in September.

Meanwhile, dozens of studies are underway seeking to answer some of the unknowns about ketamine including whether repeat IV treatments work better for depression and if there’s a way to zero in on which patients are most likely to benefit.

Until there are answers, Zarate of the mental health institute said ketamine should be a last-resort treatment for depression after other methods have failed.

The Associated Press Health & Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story used a range of sources. It noted that one source, Yale University psychiatrist Gerard Sanacora, PHD, MD, has worked for companies seeking to develop ketamine-based drugs.
One quibble: The story devoted substantial ink to positive anecdotes. Was the reporter able to find patients with negative experiences involving ketamine? That would be interesting to know.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Blood test may identify gestational diabetes risk in first trimester

NIH analysis suggests early screening could allow for lifestyle changes before condition develops.

A blood test conducted as early as the 10th week of pregnancy may help identify women at risk for gestational diabetes, a pregnancy-related condition that poses potentially serious health risks for mothers and infants, according to researchers at the National Institutes of Health and other institutions. The study appears in Scientific Reports.

Gestational diabetes occurs only in pregnancy and results when the level of blood sugar, or glucose, rises too high. Gestational diabetes increases the mother’s chances for high blood pressure disorders of pregnancy and the need for cesarean delivery, and the risk for cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes later in life. For infants, gestational diabetes increases the risk for large birth size. Unless they have a known risk factor, such as obesity, women typically are screened for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.

In the current study, researchers evaluated whether the HbA1c test (also called the A1C test), commonly used to diagnose type 2 diabetes, could identify signs of gestational diabetes in the first trimester of pregnancy. The test approximates the average blood glucose levels over the previous 2 or 3 months, based on the amount of glucose that has accumulated on the surface of red blood cells. According to the authors, comparatively few studies have examined whether the HbA1c test could help identify the risk for gestational diabetes, and these studies have been limited to women already at high risk for the condition. The test is not currently recommended to diagnose gestational diabetes at any point in pregnancy.

The researchers analyzed records from the NICHD Fetal Growth Study, a large observational study that recruited more than 2,000 low-risk pregnant women from 12 U.S. clinical sites between 2009 and 2013. The researchers compared HbA1c test results from 107 women who later developed gestational diabetes to test results from 214 women who did not develop the condition. Most of the women had tests at four intervals during pregnancy: early (weeks 8-13), middle (weeks 16-22 and 24-29) and late (weeks 34-37).

Women who went on to develop gestational diabetes had higher HbA1c levels (an average of 5.3 percent), compared to those without gestational diabetes (an average HbA1c level of 5.1 percent). Each .1 percent increase in HbA1c above 5.1 percent in early pregnancy was associated with a 22-percent higher risk for gestational diabetes.

In middle pregnancy, HbA1c levels declined for both groups. However, HbA1c levels increased in the final third of pregnancy, which is consistent with the decrease in sensitivity to insulin that often occurs during this time period.

“Our results suggest that the HbA1C test potentially could help identify women at risk for gestational diabetes early in pregnancy, when lifestyle changes may be more effective in reducing their risk,” said the study’s senior author, Cuilin Zhang, Ph.D., of the Epidemiology Branch at NIH’s Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

Exercise and a healthy diet may lower blood glucose levels during pregnancy. If these measures are not successful, physicians may prescribe insulin to bring blood glucose under control.

The authors noted that further studies are needed to confirm whether measuring HbA1c levels in early pregnancy could determine a woman’s later risk for gestational diabetes. Similarly, research is needed to determine whether lowering HbA1c with lifestyle changes, either in early pregnancy or before pregnancy, could reduce the risk for the condition.

About the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD): NICHD conducts and supports research in the United States and throughout the world on fetal, infant and child development; maternal, child and family health; reproductive biology and population issues; and medical rehabilitation. For more information, visit https://www.nichd.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Although not explicit, it seems clear the research was funded by NIH.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Tammy Wade knew she had to try something else to lose weight when she stepped on the scale and saw the number: 203 pounds.

Wade, 50, of McCalla, Ala., is only 5 feet 3 inches tall. She had tried everything. Nothing worked.

"I had problems with my feet and ankles, and they were saying I was borderline diabetic," Wade says. "I'm like, well, I gotta do something, you know. So, I needed, really did need to lose the weight."

So Wade volunteered to help test Qnexa, an experimental drug pending before the Food and Drug Administration. She quickly noticed a big difference.

"I didn't feel ravenous, and I didn't want to snack all day long," she says.

Over the next year, Qnexa helped Wade slowly drop about 40 pounds, and keep it off for another year. "It makes you feel so much better," Wade says. "Your back don't hurt, your feet don't hurt."

But the FDA rejected Qnexa in 2010 because of concerns about side effects, especially possible heart problems and birth defects.

Qnexa's rejection came amid a flurry of failed attempts by drug companies to win approvals of new weight-loss drugs. The setbacks put a spotlight on how the FDA handles these drugs.

Even though obesity is at epidemic levels, the FDA hasn't approved any new weight-loss medicines since 1999.

"We have two-thirds of all Americans who are overweight or obese, and the costs are nearing $150 billion a year," says Christine Ferguson, a health policy professor at George Washington University. "The sheer magnitude of the problem really requires us to address it more aggressively and thoughtfully than we have."

Ferguson has been helping to organize a series of meetings involving public health experts, anti-obesity advocates, government officials and others to try to figure out what the FDA should do.

"We actually have this huge gap," says Joe Nadglowski of the Obesity Action Coalition, who has been participating in the meetings. "We go from Weight Watchers to bariatric surgery. And the fact that there isn't ... medical treatments for obesity, including pharmaceuticals, really is a challenge, considering how big the problem is in this country."

Part of what's going on is that the FDA has gotten a lot more cautious about approving new drugs in general after some serious drug-safety problems, such as heart problems linked to the painkiller Vioxx.

The FDA has been especially tough on weight-loss drugs because of previous problems with those drugs, such as the diet drug cocktail fen-phen.

"There's been a long history with obesity drugs that we've had to take off the market. You recall the fen-phen episode where a significant number of people got heart-valve defects," says Janet Woodcock, a top FDA official.

Woodcock argues that the agency has to be extra-careful with weight-loss drugs, because chances are it won't just be obese people taking them.

"When you're talking about a drug where it could go into literally tens of millions of Americans, there has to be attention to safety," Woodcock says.

What might look like a rare problem now could turn into another public health disaster, she says.

But some say the agency's aversion to accepting any risks is outdated. They say the FDA wrongly still tends to view weight-loss drugs as diet pills — something frivolous and used primarily for cosmetic purposes.

"We are not talking about medications to help someone lose five pounds to fit into their prom dress or wedding dress. We're talking about medications to help those who are struggling with the health impact of obesity," Nadglowski says.

So Nadglowski and others are pushing the FDA to take into consideration whether the risks of new drugs may be outweighed by their benefits beyond weight loss, such as reducing the risk for heart disease, diabetes and other complications of obesity.

Woodcock says officials realize they may have to think about things differently.

As the FDA works through this, many are watching how the agency handles Qnexa. An FDA advisory panel is scheduled to review Qnexa again on Feb. 22.

Barbara Troupin of Vivus, the company that is developing Qnexa, says the drug appears to do a lot more than just help people lose weight.

"We see decreases in blood pressure. We see decreased rates of progression to diabetes. We see improvements in sleep apnea. We see improvements in quality of life. Pretty much all of our data shows significant benefits," she says.

Vivus hopes the FDA will agree that those benefits will outweigh some of the risks, including the concerns about birth defects. The company is submitting new data it says show that the risk is lower than had been feared. Vivus also has a plan to minimize the chances that pregnant women will take it.

Some see Qnexa as a test of the FDA trying to recalibrate how it weighs risks and benefits for weight-loss drugs.

For her part, Wade just wants to be able to start taking it again. She's gained back half of the weight she lost.

"I need to lose 20 more pounds again," she says. "And I need the help."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent sources were cited.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) How much -- or how little -- you eat could influence how long you live.

The idea of caloric control improving your health, and therefore your lifespan, is nothing new, but researchers are now hoping to accurately determine the type of diet that could make you live longer.

One team at the University of Southern California ( USC) are reducing the calorie count as low as it can go, using specific foods to trick the human body into thinking it's fasting -- a process called fasting mimicry.

"Diet can have a remarkable effect on you," says Valter Longo, Professor of Gerontology at USC Davis, who has been long been researching the mechanisms behind human aging and has recently turned his attention to fasting.

"It can reprogram your body and put it on a path to live longer," says Longo.

Fasting has been performed by communities and cultures for millennia and Longo's team are curious about the advantages.

Their idea follows on from the long running trend of caloric restriction, mostly known through diets such as the 5-2 diet and intermittent fasting. Longo tested the impact of fasting for five consecutive days every month, believing that when the body thinks it's in a state of fasting, it shuts down and goes into standby mode.

"As cells are killed and the body goes into standby, your stem cells switch on," says Longo. Once switched on, the stem cells can regenerate the lost cells and organ mass -- leaving you shiny and new.

When cells in the body age, their ratios change and Longo believes the body's reaction -- and repair methods -- to fasting help restore them to when you were younger. "You're killing the bad cells and regenerating with cells that are more functional."

People consumed approximately 1000 calories on day one and 725 calories for the remaining four days, but these numbers alone didn't determine the benefit.

"It's not just about reducing calories", says Longo. His diet is designed to include specific percentages of protein, fat and carbohydrates, for maximum effect. The food items used, however, were specific to the trial and if translated to the public would involve designing meals made up of the right combination of nutrients.

After three months, the benefits were a reduction in body weight as well as certain risk factors for cardiovascular disease. There was also an increase in certain stem cells in the body.

"The diet is turning on the body's ability to renew itself," says Longo.

The team have since calculated that following the diet every three months could provide enough of an impact as effects are thought to last up to six months.

How does it work?

"When you fast, you lower protein and certain amino acids and you control pathways [in the body]," says Longo. The pathways he refers to are known as TOR, PKA and IGF pathways, which when controlled can switch on certain reactions inside the body causing immune cells to die and organs to shrink.

This activation, or reduction, of pathways is why the components of the diet, such a proteins, must also be controlled. "You won't activate the correct pathways," says Longo.

"When you make IGF less active, it reduces risk factors linked to diabetes and cardiovascular disease," says Miguel Toribio-Mateas, Chairman of the British Association for Applied Nutrition and Nutritional Therapy.

According to Toribio-Mateas, the results confirm earlier theories that "some hormone-like growth factors that are required during development to grow, then become promoting agents of aging after development and sexual maturity have been reached". He also believes the benefits are down to improved efficiency on a cellular level.

"Cells have a list of things to do every day,...like getting rid of toxins" says Toribio-Mateas. If their workload is then disrupted by the need to store excess calories, certain products can accumulate. "Regulating calories can have a very positive effect," he says. To him, diet underpins longevity.

Unlike the 5-2 diet, which requires two days of low calories at any point in the week, Longo's diet involves fasting for five consecutive days, which requires much more willpower.

"Five days is safe: going on for longer is difficult to do outside of a clinic," says Longo.

More work needs to be done to fine tune the diet and determine meals that meet the criteria. Longo has since founded his own nutrition company. L-Nutra, to sell products that serve this purpose, which may be seen as a conflict of interest. He states that profits are going back into funding further research by his team.

"The results of the study are encouraging and warrant more research in this area," says Toribio-Mateas.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Whoo boy. We’re giving this a satisfactory rating since the story does let us know there is a potential conflict of interest–one of the researchers plans to sell nutrition products promoting this type of dieting. However, we wish this fact would have raised more red flags for CNN, and led to a more critical analysis of the piece.
A second source quoted in the story — nutritionist Miguel Toribio-Mateas — espouses some unorthodox views on his website, including that one can  “grow younger from inside by providing the necessary building blocks that enable cellular processes to keep us looking and feeling our best as we age.”
While we question the source’s expertise, we think the story meets the standard for a Satisfactory rating. But readers should be wary of the guidance being provided, which doesn’t seem to be based on particularly strong evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FDA said it is reviewing a handful of reports involving mood changes, suicidal behavior and suicide in patients who have taken the popular allergy and asthma drug.

Merck has updated the drug's labeling four times in the past year to include information on a range of reported side effects: tremors, anxiousness, depression and suicidal behavior.

FDA said it asked the company to dig deeper into its data on Singulair for evidence of possible links to suicide. The agency said it has not established a "causal relationship" between Merck's drug and suicidal behavior. An agency spokeswoman said the review was prompted by three to four suicide reports it received since last October.

CBS News correspondent Kelly Wallace reports Kate Miller's 15-year-old son Cody killed himself just 17 days after starting the drug.

"It was the end of our world and we didn't know why, because this child was a perfectly normal healthy child, Never had a problem," Miller says.

His mom now believes that Singulair cost him his life.

It could take up to nine months before agency scientists can draw any conclusions, FDA said in a posting to its Web site.

The agency recently began notifying the public earlier about possible safety issues. The policy change came after the FDA was criticized for acting too slowly on information about the risks of Merck's painkiller Vioxx and, GlaxoSmithKline PLC's diabetes pill Avandia.

Merck officials stressed that the FDA's inquiry is based on reports, not clinical studies - which are the standard tool for evaluating drug safety. The company said none of the 11,000 patients enrolled in 40 Singulair trials has committed suicide.

"We have no indication that anything about the mechanism of Singulair is consistent with these events," said George Philip, director of research and product development. "But because suicide is a life-threatening event we thought it was important to provide this information in the product label."

Merck said it recently added reports of suicide to Singulair's label, which already listed suicidal thinking and behavior as reported side effects.

Merck says the information is on the company's Web site, though one must go to the fourth page of a product labeling file to find it.

Dr. Mary Ann Michelis told CBS News she received calls from concerned patients Thursday. She's now writing letters to every patient who takes Singulair, urging them not to over-react.

Michelis said, "They should not stop taking their medication unless they are experiencing a major change in their moods."

In clinical trials of asthma patients, the most common side effects were headache, flu, abdominal pain and cough.

With sales of $4.3 billion last year, Singulair is used by millions of patients in the U.S, according to Merck. First approved in 1998, it is part of a class of asthma and allergy drugs that includes AstraZeneca's Accolate and Critical Therapeutics's Zyflo.

FDA said it is also reviewing reports of side effects with those drugs. Their labeling does not contain language about suicide.

Shares of Merck & Co. Inc. fell 16 cents to $44.54 in late trading.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The segment draws on data from pre-approval and post-marketing trials, an interview with the family of a teenager who committed suicide after taking Singulair, and an interview with a clinical specialist in asthma and allergies.
It also reports its own observation that information about the side effects is buried on the drugmaker’s website.
 
  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 15, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An apple a day won't necessarily keep the doctor away, but three kiwis just might help, at least according to a small study that showed that the brown, fuzzy fruit may lower blood pressure levels.

Men and women with mildly high blood pressure who ate three kiwi fruits a day for eight weeks had systolic blood pressure levels that were 3.6 millimeters of mercury lower than those of volunteers who ate an apple a day. Systolic blood pressure is the upper number in a blood pressure measurement.

Kiwis may be small, but they pack a lot of nutrition in their green flesh. They are rich in lutein, a potent antioxidant, and this may be what is responsible for their blood pressure-lowering powers, said researchers who were led by Mette Svendsen of Oslo University Hospital in Norway. The study was to be presented Tuesday at the American Heart Association's annual meeting in Orlando, Fla.

Cardiologists were quick to caution that there is no single magic food or ingredient that is the key to heart health, but they all agreed that kiwi may have a place in the five daily servings of fruit and vegetables that are currently recommended as part of a heart-healthy diet.

The new study included 50 men and 68 women with an average age of 55 who were randomly assigned to eat three kiwis or one apple a day for eight weeks. Participants had blood pressure levels in the mildly elevated range of 128/85 when the study began. A blood pressure reading that is less than 120/80 is considered ideal. They changed nothing in their diet other than adding the fruit. Researchers measured blood pressure via 24-hour ambulatory monitoring, which is thought to be more precise than measuring it during a single point in time.

"Three kiwi a day improved 24-hour blood pressure more than an apple a day," the researchers concluded.

So, is kiwi the new "wonder" fruit?

"There is biological plausibility, but I would not go and grab three kiwis a day," said Dr. Nehal Mehta, a preventive cardiologist at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. "They are not easy to find or one of those fruits that people readily grab."

Moderation is the key with kiwis or any food, he said. "Three kiwis a day or 21 kiwis a week does not seem like moderation, and I would caution against eating that much," he said.

The new study may just "put kiwis on the map," he said. "When we say 'eat more fresh fruit,' we stick to the tried-and-true or anything that is handheld and peeled, but these findings suggest that a kiwi can be part of a heart-healthy diet," he said.

In addition, the study looked at the whole fruit, not individual nutrients. Don't start popping lutein in supplement form based on these results, he noted.

Dr. Suzanne Steinbaum, a preventive cardiologist with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, agreed. "Kiwi is not the wonder fruit, but certainly adding kiwi to your diet can help decrease mildly high blood pressure levels."

Dr. Elliott M. Antman, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said that while promising, the new study is small. "Don't count on this to be the complete answer to high blood pressure," he said. Whatever you do, "do not stop taking your blood pressure medications without talking to your doctor," he added.

Because this study was presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Dash diet is often recommended to lower blood pressure levels.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent sources were quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A commonly used drug could dramatically increase survival rates for men who have to fight prostate cancer twice.

The drug, a type of androgen-depleting therapy, is a frontline treatment for men who opt not to have surgery for the cancer. But the new finding indicates it could also be a valuable add-on treatment to surgery if the cancer returns.

Androgens, including testosterone, are thought to contribute to the growth and development of prostate cancer. Among men whose cancer showed signs of coming back after their prostate was surgically removed, adding a drug that blocks androgen receptors to radiation treatments halved their death rate from prostate cancer over the subsequent 12 years.

The findings should trickle down to clinical settings “pretty quickly,” said Dr. William Shipley, chair of the genitourinary oncology unit at Massachusetts General Hospital and one of the researchers behind the study, which was published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Prostate cancer recurrence happens in about 30 percent of patients after surgery. In these cases, radiation therapy is usually used.

The specific ADT drug used in the study, bicalutamide, has since been largely replaced by another kind of drug that decreases the amount of testosterone the body produces. The effect of the newer-generation medications, gonadotropin-releasing hormones, is similar to bicalutamide, according to other trials.

AstraZeneca, which is one of the makers of bicalutamide, was a sponsor of the study, and one of Shipley’s coauthors has received honoraria and grants from the company.

Because prostate cancer can progress relatively slowly, the study — which ran from 1998 to 2003 — needed an extended follow-up period to be sure of the effects, Shipley said. The men in the trial received the ADT drugs for two years.

The study represents an important, if incremental, step for clinicians, noted Dr. William See, chair of the urology department at the Medical College of Wisconsin, who wasn’t involved in the study. “It really builds on some prior data and combines prior findings to ask and answer a new question that is quite relevant for men affected by prostate cancer.”

Some patients benefitted from adding the drugs more than others. The results were especially dramatic for men who had prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels above .07 ng/ml when they started the trial. (While that is a relatively low level for most men, PSA levels should be close to zero after a prostatectomy.) Men with medium-grade tumors and those who may not have had their entire cancer removed during surgery also survived significantly longer if they received the drug.

However, See and Shipley both noted that looking at those subsets of patients was not what the study was initially designed to do, which limits the statistical power of those conclusions. More research will be needed to confirm which men benefit most from taking the drug.

“You don’t want to treat a patient if he doesn’t need to be treated,” Shipley said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent source was included. And this STAT story noted an important detail that the NYTimes missed: how AstraZeneca — a maker of a hormone-blocking drug for men — was a study sponsor.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Women undergoing surgery for endometrial cancer can confidently opt for a minimally invasive hysterectomy performed by a skilled surgeon — with or without a robot’s help — suggests a new review of surgical outcomes.

The researchers found that the two advanced minimally invasive techniques led to similar results, and both appeared to be generally superior to the traditional open procedure.

“With minimally invasive surgery by an experienced surgeon’s hands, the incisions are smaller, pain and suffering is less, visualization is better, and recovery is faster than with open surgery,” Dr. Ceana Nezhat of the Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta who was not involved in the review, told Reuters Health.

“Robotics makes it easier for surgeons to transition from open to minimally invasive procedures,” he added.

More than 40,000 women are diagnosed with endometrial cancer in the U.S. every year. Treatment usually involves surgical removal of the uterus, known as hysterectomy. At the same time, lymph nodes are often removed to determine the stage of the cancer and whether further treatment is necessary.

The research team from the Florida Hospital Cancer Institute, in Orlando, reviewed eight prior studies, including nearly 1,600 patients who underwent either an open, closed or robot-assisted hysterectomy and lymph node removal.

In the open surgery, a relatively large incision is made in the abdominal wall. The closed procedure, known as laparoscopy, requires a much smaller cut, through which small instruments and a video camera are inserted. However, this minimally invasive approach also calls for significant training on the part of the surgeon to overcome challenges such as the counterintuitive movements involved in working from images on a TV monitor.

Robotic-assisted surgery is similar to laparoscopy, only the instruments and cameras are integrated into robotic arms, which the surgeon operates through a control console. The robotic equipment provides better three-dimensional vision, increased range of motion and intuitive, downscaled movements, while adding a few thousand more dollars to the procedure’s price tag, the authors note.

“Also with the computer-enhanced robotic technology, no matter how much coffee you drink in the morning, your movements don’t have tremors,” said Nezhat.

Based on their review, the researchers found that minimally invasive surgeries done with a human hand and instruments or with robotic assistance equipment took around the same time and resulted in similarly long stays in the hospital. However, about half as much blood was lost when robots were enlisted than with standard laparoscopy.

Both minimally invasive techniques resulted in longer-duration operations than open surgery. But both also led to shorter hospital stays and, in the case of robotic surgery, less blood-loss.

Further, the average number of lymph nodes removed was about the same in the robotic and open procedures, suggesting that both approaches result in about equal surgeon accuracy in staging endometrial cancer.

No differences between the three methods were seen in the numbers of complications, report the researchers in the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology.

“The robot will not really decrease human errors but it will make the surgery easier,” Dr. Tommaso Falcone of the Cleveland Clinic, in Ohio, who was also not involved in the study, told Reuters Health in an e-mail.

“Robotics increases the chance that a hysterectomy can be done by laparoscopy,” he added. “However, if the surgeon is skilled enough to do the hysterectomy without the robot by laparoscopy then the outcomes will be similar.”

Nezhat further noted that while robotic assistance can be a good “enabler” for a minimally invasive approach, surgeons should have at least the basic knowledge of regular laparoscopy too, as there may be times when the robotic equipment doesn’t work.

The reviewers point out that some of the differences found, such as the longer operation times for robotic-assisted surgery, may be due to surgeons’ inexperience with the new tool and could improve over time.

On the other hand, the newness of the technology could have deterred surgeons from using it for difficult cases, potentially biasing the results in a positive way for the robotic technique.

Robotic surgery equipment only received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval in 2005. More research is needed to be able to compare long-term outcomes, wrote the researchers.

Nezhat advises women to look for a surgeon experienced in doing minimally invasive surgery. If a robot is to be enlisted, he recommends asking how the procedure would be performed if the robot is not available or if it doesn’t work.

“Robotic-assisted surgery is in its infancy, and it definitely has a future,” said Nezhat. “Its benefits should offset its higher costs.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted two physicians who were not involved in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 21, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- New guidelines issued by three leading cancer organizations suggest that more breast cancer patients should consider radiation therapy after a mastectomy.

Overall, the guidelines say there's enough evidence to show radiation treatment after a mastectomy decreases the risk of breast cancer recurrence, and that even women with smaller tumors and three or fewer lymph nodes involved can benefit from the therapy.

"The new guidelines say there is clear evidence that the benefit of [post-mastectomy radiation therapy] extends to women with limited lymph node involvement," said Dr. Stephen Edge. He is vice president for health care outcomes and policy at Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo, N.Y. Edge was co-chair of the panel that developed the new guidelines.

"The guideline is timely," said Dr. Janna Andrews, an attending physician in radiation medicine at Norwell Health Cancer Institute, in Lake Success, N.Y. "The field of post-mastectomy radiation is changing. It's always up for discussion now as to who needs [post-mastectomy radiation therapy]."

The new guidelines help clarify what used to be a gray area, Andrews explained. "In the past, if a woman had a small tumor, less than 5 centimeters, and not more than three or four positive lymph nodes, many doctors would say she does not need [post-mastectomy radiation therapy]," she said.

The guidelines don't offer a single formula for which patients need radiation therapy, Edge noted. But they do focus on the group of women for whom there is the most debate about the value of radiation.

"There is a great deal of controversy about whether women with one, two or three lymph nodes [with cancer] have sufficient risk to warrant radiation," he said. "For women with four or more lymph nodes involved, everyone would recommend radiation."

The guidelines also strongly support input from all specialists who treat breast cancer in making the decision about radiation treatment. That typically includes the surgeon, radiation physician and an oncologist.

Doctors need to weigh the risks and benefits, Edge added. Side effects can include redness of the skin, swelling and skin breakdown severe enough to compromise future breast reconstruction, he explained.

Edge said that doctors need to consider patients individually. For instance, he explained, ''a woman 65 who has microscopic involvement in a single lymph node and an estrogen-receptor positive cancer would be very different from a 38-year-old who has three lymph nodes involved and so-called triple-negative breast cancer." The younger woman, he said, would typically be advised to get radiation.

The older woman, because her risk is lower, should have a discussion with her doctor to decide if the benefit outweighs the risk, Edge noted.

Andrews said that one take-home message for patients is to expect the surgeon to have consulted with the radiation oncologist and others on her team. If a woman's doctor tells her she does not need radiation after a mastectomy, the woman should be told why and she should ask if the radiation oncologist weighed in on the decision.

Edge was a panel representative from the American Society of Clinical Oncology, which created the guidelines along with the American Society for Radiation Oncology and the Society of Surgical Oncology.

All three groups published the guidelines online this week in their respective journals: the Journal of Clinical Oncology, Practical Radiation Oncology and the Annals of Surgical Oncology.

To learn more about radiation in breast cancer treatment, visit BreastCancer.org.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story cites two experts: One who was involved in crafting the guidelines, and one who was not. More input from independent sources would have made the story stronger, but this is sufficient to merit a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People who took a newer type of pain pill over a three-year period were less likely to develop polyps that could lead to colorectal cancer — but at the expense of a higher risk of heart problems, new study findings report.

And when participants stopped taking the pain pill Celebrex (celecoxib) out of concerns over side effects, they eventually developed more polyps than people who had remained on an inactive, or placebo, drug throughout the study.

So should people concerned about their risk of colorectal cancer consider Celebrex?

“The findings in this study don’t necessarily make that decision any easier,” said Dr. Andrew Chan of Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, who did not participate in the research.

The study, published in the American Journal of Gastroenterology, received financial support from Pfizer, which sells Celebrex.

This is not the first study to suggest Celebrex and similar drugs — known as COX-2 inhibitors - may reduce the risk of developing colon cancer, he said, but people need to balance that potential benefit with the higher risk of cardiovascular complications.

As a result, he said he suspects most people would choose to rely on regular colonoscopies to catch the disease in its early stages, rather than take a potentially risky drug for years.

But to people who have no underlying cardiovascular problems and a particularly high risk of colon cancer - they were diagnosed with it before perhaps, or have a strong family history - regular screening may not be enough, Chan noted.

“So for those patients, they might consider taking a drug like this,” he said.

Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in men and women, and strikes 1.2 million people each year.

Other research has provided signs that COX-2 inhibitors, which block the COX-2 enzyme that causes inflammation, could also prevent colorectal cancer, as well as lung cancer in heavy smokers.

However, most COX-2 inhibitors ran into safety issues a few years after their approval, and now only Celebrex remains on the U.S. market. At a cost of several dollars per day, depending on dosage, it is much more expensive than older pain relievers such as ibuprofen.

During the study, Dr. Nadir Arber of Tel Aviv University and his colleagues reviewed data collected from 1,561 people with a history of colorectal cancer. More than half had received Celebrex for approximately 3 years, before concerns over the increased risk of cardiovascular problems caused researchers to discontinue the study.

The scientists then followed the people willing to continue the research for another 2 years, noting who developed new polyps, including advanced polyps with features that suggest they’re more likely to become cancerous. Approximately half of the people who started the study agreed to continue.

Not surprisingly, Celebrex users were more likely to develop cardiovascular problems, including a 66 percent higher risk of serious cardiac disorders. But over the total 5-year period, people who took Celebrex were also less likely to develop new and advanced polyps than people who took a placebo.

Specifically, new polyps were found in 58 percent of people on placebo, and only 51 percent on Celebrex.

However, during the 5th year of the study alone, after the trial had been over for 2 years, 27 percent of Celebrex users developed new polyps, versus only 16 percent of people who had been on placebo - translating to a 66 percent higher risk among those who previously took Celebrex. Those who had been on Celebrex were also more likely to develop advanced polyps during that final year.

This rebound in risk actually makes biological sense, Chan told Reuters Health. If COX-2 inhibitors protect against colon cancer by blocking an enzyme pathway, when that blockage is released, the disease could occur “potentially at higher levels than had you never been on the drug in the first place,” he said.

Still, the results are “very promising,” Arber told Reuters Health by e-mail, adding he is now working to identify people who could benefit from the drug without experiencing the side effects.

Only half of the people who originally agreed to participate in the study remained after 5 years, and it’s unclear how this might affect the results, noted Chan, whose own research suggests aspirin could prevent deaths from colorectal cancer.

However, for a study that lasts this long, “those are acceptable numbers,” noted Arber.

If patients asked him whether they should take celecoxib to prevent colorectal cancer, Arber would tell them “no,” he added. “They should speak with their doctor.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that the study was funded by Pfizer, maker of Celebrex, and includes commentary from an independent expert who didn’t participate in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 17, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- People who have narrowed carotid arteries in the neck and show no symptoms may be at risk for stroke and not know it, but a simple ultrasound test can identify the problem, a new study suggests.

This condition, known as asymptomatic carotid stenosis, is caused by plaque build-up in the arteries that carry blood from the heart to the brain. This can cause less blood to reach the brain and, in rare cases, may also trigger a stroke if plaque breaks off and becomes lodged in the small vessels in the brain.

"Only a small minority of patients with carotid stenosis will suffer a stroke," said lead researcher Dr. Raffi Topakian, from the Academic Teaching Hospital Wagner-Jauregg in Linz, Austria.

The problem is identifying the patients at the highest risk for stroke, he said. Most patients with carotid stenosis can be managed with medications such as cholesterol-lowering drugs, blood pressure-lowering drugs and blood thinners such as aspirin, he added.

But those at highest risk may need a surgical procedure called an endarterectomy, which clears the carotid arteries of plaque.

"We found with two ultrasound methods we could differentiate the patients who are at very low risk of suffering a stroke -- lower than 1 percent per year -- from patients at high risk of stroke -- higher than 8 percent per year," Topakian said.

The patients who are at high risk are candidates for surgery, he said. Endarterectomy is not recommended for most people with carotid stenosis since the problem can be managed with drugs and there are risks, including stroke, with the procedure, Topakian said.

Those who would benefit from the ultrasound test are people with known carotid stenosis who are fit for surgery, Topakian said. "If they are too sick or frail for surgery, it makes no sense to do the ultrasound," he said.

In addition, people at high risk for stroke are also candidates for ultrasound, Topakian said. This would include people with high cholesterol, high blood pressure or heart disease, he said. "This test could be a good tool to identify the right patients for surgery," Topakian said.

Of course, anyone with symptomatic carotid stenosis is a candidate for immediate surgery, Topakian said. Warning signs include transient ischemic attacks (TIAS), or mini-strokes, which cause no permanent damage but are often followed by a stroke within a few days.

The report was published in the Aug. 17 online edition of Neurology.

For the study, a research team led by Topakian followed 435 people with asymptomatic carotid stenosis for two years.

Each participant had an ultrasound to see if there were signs that a stroke might occur. These included tiny blood clots, which pass into the brain, and a type of plaque called echolucent plaque, which is fattier than other plaque and linked with an increased risk for stroke.

Among those in the study, 38 percent had the fattier-than-normal plaque, 17 percent had signs of blood clots and 27 percent had both the fattier plaque and blood clots, the researchers found.

In addition, over the two years of the study, 10 people had TIAs.

Moreover, people with the fattier plaque were more than six times more likely to have a stroke than those people without the plaque, and those with the fattier plaque and clots had a risk that was 10 times higher, Topakian's team found.

Nonetheless, some experts said that research suggests that patients with no symptoms are better off without the surgery.

Dr. Lars Marquardt,a professor of surgery at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg in Germany and co-author of an accompanying journal editorial, said surgery for people with asymptomatic carotid steno sis is done too frequently.

Marquardt noted that the risks associated with the surgery are a lot higher than leaving the stenosis as it is and starting aggressive medical treatment.

"Patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis don't get the surgical procedure early enough, and patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis have too many surgical interventions," Marquardt said.

When treating asymptomatic carotid stenosis, Marquardt doesn't think the case has been made for distinguishing between high- and low-risk patients. Right now, the work done by Topakian's group is still "experimental," he said.

Another expert, Dr. Larry B. Goldstein, director of the Duke University Stroke Center, said that "what remains uncertain is whether surgical intervention would result in an overall improvement in stroke-free survival."

"It is also unclear how optimal medical management [lifestyle changes in addition to anti-platelet medication and statins] would affect overall stroke and cardiovascular risk, and stroke-free survival," he said.

Both the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and the American Heart Association currently recommend against general population screening for asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis, Goldstein noted.

For more information on stroke, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Quotes from two individuals who were not involved in the study reported on were included in this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 7, 2009 (HealthDay News) -- Diabetes, heart attacks and other cardiovascular problems appear to be more common in men with prostate cancer who are treated with androgen deprivation therapy, which reduces or eliminates the male sex hormones that can promote cancer growth, a new study has found.

The finding indicates that androgen therapy is overused because its benefits have not been shown to outweigh its dangers in many cases, said Dr. Nancy L. Keating, associate professor of medicine and public health at Harvard Medical School and lead author of a report on the study published online Dec. 7 in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

"There are areas where hormone deprivation therapy has been shown to have a clear benefit," Keating said. "We're not suggesting that men who need hormone deprivation therapy should not have it. But lots of men get the therapy where it has not been shown to have a benefit."

One example is so-called PSA-recurrent cancer. Hormone deprivation therapy is started, Keating said, when levels of cancer-associated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) increase after surgery or radiation therapy, but there are no other indicators of danger.

"There has never been a trial showing an overall benefit in such cases," she said. "When you can have potentially serious adverse effects, you want to show caution."

Similarly, Keating said, no trial has shown an overall benefit for androgen deprivation therapy in cases where "watchful waiting" is chosen rather than radiation therapy or surgery for prostate cancer, Keating said.

"One third of men over 65 who don't have surgery or radiation get this therapy," she said. "Yet its effects have never been studied in a controlled trial."

Previous studies have shown potential dangers related to androgen deprivation therapy in older men, Keating said. The study she led looked at its effects on about 37,000 men treated for prostate cancer at Veterans Affairs hospitals.

Surgical removal of the testes was associated with a 40 percent increased risk for heart disease and a more than doubled risk for heart attack. Use of multiple hormone-blocking agents was associated with a 27 percent increased risk for heart disease.

The greatest risk was found for drugs that target gonadotropin-releasing hormone: 159.4 cases of diabetes per 1,000 person-years, compared with 87.5 for men who did not have androgen deprivation therapy, as well as a 35 percent increased risk for sudden cardiac death, a comparable increase in heart attack risk and a 22 percent increased risk for stroke.

Observational studies, which include all people with a condition, can never conclusively prove cause and effect, Keating acknowledged, because "the thing we can't account for is whether people who are on a treatment are different from those who aren't." But detailed evidence about the potential dangers of androgen deprivation therapy has not emerged from the more rigorous controlled trials that have been done "because they have looked only at cardiovascular deaths, and most patients who have heart attacks do not die of those heart attacks," she said.

Dr. Peter Albertsen, a professor and chief of urology at the University of Connecticut Health Center, said that "the point of this paper is to help physicians understand that long-term use of this therapy carries consequences." Albertsen wrote an accompanying editorial in the journal.

Anti-hormone therapy was developed to treat the pain and other problems of advanced prostate cancer, Albertsen said, and so it was generally used for only three to five years.

"Now, many more men are being started on androgen deprivation therapy long before there are any symptoms of prostate cancer so they may be on it for up to 15 years," he said. "We are beginning to realize that there can be significant problems in terms of cardiovascular risk. So the lesson is that if you start the therapy early, you should be sure that there is increased survival because there is a downside."

Dr. Eric A. Klein, chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Glickman Urological and Kidney Institute, said that the study "is confirmatory of a lot of other, smaller studies.

"There is a growing realization that we cannot use androgen deprivation therapy in a haphazard fashion," Klein said. "It does save lives or delay progression for men with metastatic prostate cancer so the trade-offs there are reasonable. But in many other cases, the downside probably exceeds the benefit."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  Comments from two clinicians who were not directly associated with the study reported on were included in this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DUARTE, Calif. -- A City of Hope-led study found that the use of low-dose aspirin (81mg) reduces the risk of breast cancer in women who are part of the California's Teacher's Study. This study -- which is the first to suggest that the reduction in risk occurs for low-dose aspirin -- was proposed by City of Hope's Leslie Bernstein, Ph.D., professor and director of the Division of Biomarkers of Early Detection and Prevention, and published online in the journal, Breast Cancer Research.

Bernstein and her colleagues saw an overall 16 percent lower risk of breast cancer in women who reported using low-dose aspirin at least three times per week. Such regular use of low-dose aspirin reduced the risk by 20 percent of estrogen or progesterone receptor positive, HER2 negative breast cancer, which is the most common breast cancer subtype.

"The study found an interesting protective association between low-dose aspirin and breast cancer," said lead author Christina A. Clarke, Ph.D., M.P.H., from the Cancer Prevention Institute of California. "We did not by and large find associations with the other pain medications like ibuprofen and acetaminophen. We also did not find associations with regular aspirin since this type of medication is taken sporadically for headaches or other pain, and not daily for prevention of cardiovascular disease."

This study differed from other studies that have looked at aspirin and cancer risk because it focused on the dose levels of the aspirin women had taken and tracked the frequency of the use of low-dose aspirin as opposed to regular aspirin. It was also able to look in detail at subtypes of breast cancer.

"We already knew that aspirin is a weak aromatase inhibitor and we treat women with breast cancer with stronger aromatase inhibitors since they reduce the amount of estrogen postmenopausal women have circulating in their blood," said Bernstein. "We thought that if aspirin can inhibit aromatase, it ought to reduce the likelihood that breast cancer would develop and it could also be an effective way to improve breast cancer patients' prognosis once they no longer take the more potent aromatase inhibitors." Bernstein added, "Aspirin also reduces inflammation, which may be another mechanism by which aspirin taken regularly can lower risk of breast cancer developing or recurring."

As part of the study, researchers analyzed data recorded in questionnaires submitted by 57,164 women in the California's Teacher's Study. In 2005, participants answered questions regarding family history of cancer and other conditions, use of aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), menstrual and reproductive history, use of hormones, weight and height, living environment, diet, alcohol use and physical activity. In the ensuing years before 2013, 1,457 of these participants developed invasive breast cancer.

The team of researchers chose to focus on low-dose "baby" aspirin, because not only is it inexpensive and readily available as potential means of prevention, but because there are already a lot of people already taking it for prevention of other diseases such as heart disease and even colon cancer.

Now that we have some data separating low-dose from higher-dose aspirin, more detailed research can be undertaken to understand the full value of low-dose aspirin for breast cancer prevention," said Clarke."

Other collaborating authors include Alison J. Canchola, M.S., and Lisa M. Moy, M.P.H., from the Cancer Prevention Institute of California, and Susan L. Neuhausen, Ph.D., The Morris & Horowitz Families Professor in Cancer Etiology & Outcomes Research, Nadia T. Chung, M.P.H., and James V. Lacey Jr., Ph.D., M.P.H., from City of Hope.

Research reported in Breast Cancer Research was supported through grants from the National Cancer Institute and the California Breast Cancer Research Fund under grant numbers: R01 CA77398 and 97-10500. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

City of Hope is an independent research and treatment center for cancer, diabetes and other life-threatening diseases. Designated as one of only 47 comprehensive cancer centers, the highest recognition bestowed by the National Cancer Institute, City of Hope is also a founding member of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, with research and treatment protocols that advance care throughout the world. City of Hope is located in Duarte, California, just northeast of Los Angeles, with community clinics throughout Southern California. It is ranked as one of "America's Best Hospitals" in cancer by U.S. News & World Report. Founded in 1913, City of Hope is a pioneer in the fields of bone marrow transplantation, diabetes and numerous breakthrough cancer drugs based on technology developed at the institution.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly identifies the sources of funding. It does not address conflicts of interest, but there do not appear to be any relevant conflicts of interest. Still, the release would have been stronger if it had stated that explicitly.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Does swapping out all of your saturated fat with unsaturated fat lead to a longer life?

A new study suggests the answer may be no.

Eat less saturated fat for better heart health: that’s been the conventional wisdom based on decades of scientific study. Consumers have been advised to swap saturated (animal) fats — found in foods like whole milk, cheese, butter, and fatty cuts of beef and pork — for unsaturated vegetables oils.

The new report, which analyzed 40-year-old data from the Minnesota Coronary Experiment, found no association between lower cholesterol levels and longer life, suggesting that reducing the amount of saturated fat in the diet isn’t enough to reduce risk of death from heart disease.

A group of more than 9,000 people were divided into two groups; one group swapped out the dietary saturated fat for unsaturated vegetable fats in the form of corn oil and corn-oil margarine, and the other group continued with their standard daily saturated fat intake.

While the diet rich in vegetable oil did lower cholesterol levels over the 4-5 year study period, compared to a control group (who continued to eat saturated fat daily), the researchers found no change in the rate of death from heart-related ailments.

The original MCE study was conducted between 1968 and 1973 at seven different long-term care facilities. Researchers from the National Institutes of Health and University of North Carolina obtained data from 2,355 of these participants — information which apparently had not been analyzed — and discovered that giving up saturated fats didn’t protect against heart disease.

It’s unclear whether the corn oil or corn oil margarine consumed by the participants contained artery-clogging trans fats or hydrogenated vegetable oils that are now associated with heart disease, or whether the patients had a history of heart disease or genetic risk. All that is known is the participants had a normal cholesterol levels and normal blood pressure.

But even when their cholesterol levels were lowered by the switch from saturated fats, there was no longevity benefit. In fact, the study found that the lower the cholesterol, the greater the risk of death. But that’s a misleading association because a variety of illnesses can also cause drop in cholesterol, which is unrelated to diet.

“What's important here is for us to understand what we know and what we don't know, and the conventional wisdom, the evidence that saturated fat and cholesterol in the diet are the main drivers of heart disease is not supported by the study,” says cardiologist Dr. Steve Nissen, chair of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic.

While this study suggests that cholesterol levels alone are not associated with longevity, it is important to emphasize that many studies show the benefit of statin medications to lower blood cholesterol, that are highly associated with a reduced risk of death. Whether statins have additional properties to reduce risk, in addition to lowering serum cholesterol remain under study.

How does this translate to what we eat every day?

Current worldwide guidelines remain the same, and are modeled after Mediterranean-style eating: a variety of fruits, vegetables, whole grains and fish.

Saturated fats can remain a part of a healthy diet, in limited amounts – but there are two easy ways to help:
• Saturated fats should make up 10 percent of total caloric intake daily. For someone eating 2,000 calories, that’s about 200 calories, or 20 grams of saturated fat
• 1/3 of the total fat consumed daily allocated for saturated fat; if consuming 60 grams of fat daily, no more than 20 grams should come from saturated fat.

While the study has many limitations because it doesn’t take into account genetic or lifestyle factors that are proven important in both heart disease risk and longevity, it suggests that blood cholesterol levels are only one factor.

Madelyn Fernstrom, Ph.D is NBC News Health and Nutrition Editor. Follow her on Twitter @drfernstrom.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There don’t appear to be any conflicts of interest, and the story includes an independent source.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 14, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Not only do cooler heads prevail, they might also sleep better, according to researchers who say they have developed a cooling cap that, when worn during sleeptime, may help treat insomnia.

Previous research has shown that the brains of people with insomnia are "hyperaroused" and have a higher brain metabolism in the frontal lobes, which helps explain why they have trouble drifting off to sleep and staying asleep, said study co-author Dr. Daniel Buysse, a professor of psychiatry and clinical and translational science at University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

To help the brain cool down, researchers outfitted 12 primary insomnia patients with a temperature-controlled cap that has cool water flowing through it and recruited 12 healthy controls matched for age and gender. ("Primary insomnia" means that medical problems, medicines, or other substances have been ruled out as a cause of sleep difficulties. The more common type of insomnia is "secondary insomnia," in which medical issues or medications contribute.)

Of the patients with insomnia, the average age was 45 and nine were women. Participants slept for two nights in a sleep lab with no cap; two nights with the cap set at a "neutral" temperature (about 86 degrees Fahrenheit); two nights at a moderately cool temperature (72 degrees Fahrenheit); and two nights with the coolest temperature (57 degrees Fahrenheit).

While the participants slept, researchers monitored their brain electrical activity, eye movements (to determine if someone was in REM, or rapid eye movement sleep) and jaw muscle tone (during REM, the muscles go slack due to 'sleep paralysis').

In this preliminary study, about three-quarters of those with insomnia said the cap helped them sleep better when the water temperature was about 57 degrees Fahrenheit.

At higher temperatures -- 72 and 86 degrees -- patients reported no benefit, according to the study presented Monday at SLEEP 2011, the Associated Professional Sleep Societies meeting in Minneapolis.

While wearing the cooling cap, it took insomnia patients an average of 13 minutes to fall asleep and they spent 89 percent of their time in bed actually sleeping, about the same as controls who didn't have insomnia (the latter group averaged 16 minutes to fall asleep and 89 percent of the time in bed sleeping) .

The cooling cap was, however, associated with an increased amount of slow-wave sleep -- or the deepest, restorative portion of sleep, the researchers reported.

"What we wanted to find out was: 'Would cooling the surface of the brain of insomnia patients result in lower metabolism and improved sleep? The basic answer in this preliminary study, is yes, it seems to work, and it works in two ways," said Buysse. "It does reduce brain metabolism in the frontal lobes, and it improves sleep."

Dr. William Kohler, medical director of the Florida Sleep Institute, said the concept was exciting and worth further research in larger studies that include body temperature measurements and brain imaging tests.

"The theoretical concept is correct, in that we do know from many previous studies that as the body core temperature cools, our sleep improves, and with warming of the core temperature, we have more restless sleep," Kohler said.

Chronic insomnia -- which the American Academy of Sleep Medicine attributes to about one out of every 10 Americans -- can be difficult to treat. Medications can help, although many people complain of side effects, Kohler said. The most effective treatment is cognitive behavior therapy, which involves changes such as avoiding cigarettes, alcohol and caffeine before bed, and getting plenty of bright light in the morning but turning off the TV, computer and dimming the lights during a wind-down period, among other techniques for improving "sleep hygiene."

"It's in the brain where the chemical changes are occurring that lead to sleep," he said.

The cap is not yet available to consumers, although the lead researcher, Dr. Eric Nofzinger, has plans to bring it to market, Buysse said.

Because this study was extremely small and presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal and confirmed in larger studies.

Buysee said there shouldn't be any safety issues. If people get too cold, they would likely just wake up and take the cap off, he said.

The U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute has more on insomnia.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent sleep researcher was quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON, DC (Oct. 2, 2017) -- An intensive text messaging program provides some pregnant women help in fighting the urge to light up a smoke, according to a study out today.

"Our findings show that a text messaging program helped some groups of pregnant women quit smoking during pregnancy," says lead author Lorien C. Abroms, ScD, MA, an associate professor of prevention and community health at Milken Institute School of Public Health (Milken Institute SPH) at the George Washington University. "The study's findings suggest a potential new quitting strategy, especially for those later in their pregnancies and older pregnant women."

The researchers recruited pregnant women who were already enrolled in an established text messaging program called Text4baby. Text4baby has been found to have a positive health impact on alcohol consumption during pregnancy--but not smoking. Abroms and her team wanted to find out if a more intensive mobile phone program called Quit4baby would be more effective. To find out, the team recruited nearly 500 pregnant women, who smoked an average of 7 cigarettes per day and wanted more help to quit.

Quit4baby is targeted to smoking cessation and sends more text messages--between 1 and 8 per day aimed at bolstering a pregnant woman's resolve to quit. The messages help educate the women about the health risks associated with smoking and they are interactive--allowing a woman to text back for more help if she is experiencing a craving or goes back to smoking.

After three months, 16 percent of the women who were enrolled in both Text4baby and Quit4baby had quit compared with just 11 percent of women getting just Text4baby. However, the difference between the two groups did not reach statistical significance, the authors say.

The more intensive intervention did seem to help two subgroups quit smoking at least in the short run, Abroms says. The combo of Text4baby and Quit4baby helped women age 26 and older and those in the second and third trimester of pregnancy quit through the delivery date and in some cases beyond. However, the researchers found that the resolve to quit seemed to disappear postpartum as many of these women started smoking again.

Very little help is provided to pregnant smokers who want to quit so the study's findings are important, especially if the strategy can be adjusted to be more effective, Abroms says. Despite the health risks, about 10 percent of women smoke throughout their pregnancy in the United States.

Additional studies must be done to find out if Quit4baby can be paired with other smoking cessation tools in order to provide long-term help for pregnant women who want to kick their smoking habit for good, she says.

The study, "A Randomized Trial of Text Messaging for Smoking Cessation in Pregnant Women," was published October 2 in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine.

*The headline of this release was edited for clarity to match the content in the body of the release.

The research was supported by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, part of the National Institutes of Health. Dr. Abroms has stock in Wellpass Inc. (formerly Voxiva, Inc.) and has licensed Text2quit and Quit4baby to Wellpass.

About Milken Institute School of Public Health at the George Washington University: Established in July 1997 as the School of Public Health and Health Services, Milken Institute School of Public Health is the only school of public health in the nation's capital. Today, more than 1,900 students from 54 U.S. states and territories and more than 50 countries pursue undergraduate, graduate and doctoral-level degrees in public health. The school also offers an online Master of Public Health MPH@GW, an online Executive Master of Health Administration MHA@GW, and an online Master of Science in Management of Health Informatics and Analytics, HealthInformatics@GW, which allow students to pursue their degree from anywhere in the world.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release offers information about both funding and conflicts of interest. It notes that the lead author, “Dr. Abroms has stock in Wellpass Inc. (formerly Voxiva, Inc.) and has licensed Text2quit and Quit4baby to Wellpass.” This is a real strength of the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a first-of-its-kind study, researchers demonstrate a benefit in overall survival among epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients receiving generic heart medications known as beta-blockers. Survival was shown to be greatest among those prescribed first-generation nonselective beta-blockers. According to The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center investigators, the drugs block the effects of stress pathways involved in tumor growth and spread. With further research, they may also prove beneficial in conjunction with other treatment regimens and across other cancer types.

Published today in the journal CANCER, the findings are the result of a multi-institutional retrospective analysis of the medical records of 1,425 women with ovarian cancer treated between 2000 and 2010. Researchers compared overall survival among patients with documented beta-blocker use during chemotherapy and those without. Among the 269 patients who received beta-blockers, 193 (71.7 percent) received beta-1-adrenergic receptor selective agents (SBBs) and the remaining patients received nonselective beta antagonists (NSBBs). The research team found:
• For patients receiving any beta-blocker, the median overall survival was 47.8 months versus 42 months for nonusers.
• Median overall survival based on beta-blocker receptor selectivity was 94.9 months for those receiving NSBBs versus 38 months for those receiving SBBs.
• Even among patients with hypertension, a longer median overall survival was observed among users of NSBBs compared with nonusers (90 months versus 38.2 months).

This study builds on a large body of research by principal investigator Anil Sood, M.D., professor in Gynecologic Medical Oncology and Cancer Biology at MD Anderson. It showed that stress hormones fuel progression of ovarian and other cancers, and that beta-blockers - among the most proven drugs in cardiovascular medicine - might be a new way to stifle that effect.

"Beta-blockers treat a variety of conditions, such as heart disease, high-blood pressure, glaucoma and migraines. They target a receptor protein in heart muscle that causes the heart to beat harder and faster when activated by stress hormones," Sood said. "Our research has shown that the same stress mechanisms impact ovarian cancer progression, so these drugs could play a new role in cancer treatment."

According to Sood, the usefulness of beta-blockers was unclear until now. "The ability to show improved survival using nonselective agents - which inhibit a specific stress pathway - is the culmination of years of research into ovarian cancer biology and pathogenesis."

He added that beta-blocker users in the study presented at a higher stage of disease, had an increased average BMI and were more likely to be hypertensive. All these factors were associated with decreased survival, yet those who received beta-blockers had either equivalent or improved overall survival. Further examination revealed that NSBB users had improved overall survival regardless of the presence of such prognostic factors or comorbidities. This was not true for patients who took SBBs.

Although further study is needed, these results highlight the importance of adrenergic receptor-β2 (ADRB2), a signaling pathway important to ovarian carcinogenesis and targeted by NSBBs (versus the ADRB1 pathway targeted by SBBs).

Ovarian cancer is the 5th most deadly cancer among women, accounting for more deaths than any other female reproductive system cancer. An estimated 21,290 new cases are diagnosed, and some 14,180 women die from the disease each year in the U.S., according to the American Cancer Society.

Future trials will seek to identify patients who would benefit most from beta-blocker use and the best beta-blocker for a specific tumor type based on adrenergic receptor expression. Then they potentially could be used as an adjuvant therapy during surgical recovery and chemotherapy to decrease tumor growth, delays in wound healing and metastasis. Beta-blockers may also reduce cancer-related psychological distress in newly diagnosed patients, according to the study authors.

There are currently two clinical trials, one led by MD Anderson, evaluating the combination of chemotherapy and propranolol (a type of NSBB) on cancer biology and on stress modulators in patients with newly diagnosed EOC. According to Sood, the preliminary data from these feasibility trials will be used to design prospective, randomized clinical trials examining NSBBs on patient outcomes.

"The stratification of patients by beta-blocker use and selectivity in this study makes it unique among all other studies examining the impact of these drugs on cancer. It also builds on the mounting evidence that beta-blockers may become a key treatment component for many patients in the future," said Sood.

Portions of this study were supported by National Institutes of Health grants (CA140933, CA104825, CA109298, P50CA083639, U54CA151688, U54CA96300, U54CA96297, and CA016672), an Ovarian Cancer Research Fund program Project Development Grant, the Department of Defense (grants OC073399, W81XWJ-10-0158, and OC100237), the Betty Ann Asche Murray Distinguished Professorship, the RGK Foundation, the Gilder Foundation, the Blanton-Davis Ovarian Cancer Research Program, and a Gynecologic Cancer Foundation-St. Louis Ovarian Cancer Awareness grant. One of the researchers has acted as a paid consultant for Incyte Pharmaceuticals and received research funding from Egen Pharmaceuticals.

Other researchers contributing to this study include: Robert L. Coleman, M.D., Alpa M. Nick, M.D., Pedro T. Ramirez, M.D., Lois M. Ramondetta, M.D., Diana Urbauer, Jack L. Watkins, all from MD Anderson; Susan K. Lutgendorf, Ph.D. from University of Iowa; Sanjeev Kumar, M.B., B.S. from the Mayo Clinic; Koji Matsuo, M.D., from Mercy Medical Center; Kathryn Squires, M.D. and Premal H. Thaker, M.D., M.S. from Washington University School of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release includes an exhaustive list of funding sources and notes that one of the journal article’s co-authors has received funding from two pharmaceutical companies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Taking vitamin D could help overweight and obese children lose weight, scientists believe.

Vitamin D is most commonly associated with the development and maintenance of strong bones as the body needs it to absorb calcium. But recently emerging research suggests vitamin D deficiency could also be a contributing factor of obesity.

The World Health Organization describes childhood obesity as one of the most serious public health challenges of the 21st century, with an estimated 41 million children under the age of 5 falling into this category. Obesity puts children at greater risk of developing preventable conditions like heart disease and diabetes at a younger age, and suffering poor health later in life.

Related: Household cleaning products might be making your children fat

In what is believed to be the first study to investigate the links between vitamin D supplementation and the weight and health of obese children and adolescents, researchers from University of Athens Medical School and Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, Athens, recruited 232 particpants.

The team measured participants' vitamin D levels, body fat percentage, as well as their markers of liver and heart function at the start of the study, and again 12 months later.

The researchers randomly assigned 117 children with supplements containing 50,000 IU vitamin D for six weeks, while the others acted as the control group.

Children who took vitamin D had a significantly lower BMI, the researchers found. They also had lower body fat, as well as healthier cholesterol levels.

Dr. Evangelia Charmandari, associate professor pediatric and adolescent endocrinology at at the Medical School of the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens and lead author of the study, said: "These findings suggest that simple vitamin D supplementation may reduce the risk of overweight and obese children developing serious heart and metabolic complications in later life.”

The findings are set to be presented at the 57th Annual European Society for Pediatric Endocrinology Meeting, and have therefore not yet been reviewed.

In their next investigation, the team will study whether vitamin D supplements can improve the health of obese children and adolescents who have been diagnosed with disorders linked to obesity, such as high cholesterol, high blood sugar levels, and high blood pressure.

"Although these initial findings indicate that vitamin D could be used in the treatment of obesity, there remains a lack of evidence on the safety and long-term effects of supplementation, particularly if there is no vitamin D deficiency,” said Charmandari. "However, if your child is overweight or obese I recommend that you consult your primary care physician for advice, and consider having their vitamin D levels tested."

Professor Mary Fewtrell, assistant officer for health promotion at the U.K.-based Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, told Newsweek: "Although the effect sizes are not given, these outcomes are certainly positive. It's encouraging that a simple intervention could have these effects and this certainly merits further investigation to consider its potential impacts on vitamin D supplementation for children with obesity."

Earlier this year, researchers in the Netherlands published a study indicating higher levels of belly fat are linked to lower vitamin D levels.

According to findings presented at the European Society of Endocrinology annual meeting in Barcelona, individuals with higher levels of total body and abdominal fat appeared to have lower levels of vitamin D.

Rachida Rafiq, the lead author of the study told Newsweek at the time: "Our results are significant as vitamin D deficiency and obesity are very common problems in our society nowadays," she told Newsweek, and argued that it is an important potential relationship to explore.

"Future studies should explore what the underlying mechanisms are that explain this specific relationship between vitamin D and visceral adipose tissue."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There appears to be at least one expert, Mary Fewtrell (of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health), who comments on the study yet is not involved in the research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Nearly three decades have passed since the debate began about a series of symptoms that have come to be known as chronic fatigue syndrome. Its cause is still unknown, but over the years, researchers have identified various brain, immune system and energy metabolism irregularities involved. Some patients describe the syndrome as feeling like an "unrelenting, unremitting flu."

Doctors say some treatments can help. Arthur Barsky, a psychiatrist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and a professor at Harvard Medical School, says patients need to change how they experience symptoms — typically pain, insomnia and anxiety. When patients adopt a more positive attitude, Barsky points out, it often translates into greater confidence and more energy.

A study published this year in the Lancet found that a form of talk therapy, as well as exercise, offered relief for some patients. Researchers from the United Kingdom looked at cognitive behavior therapy, or CBT.

In the study, over 600 patients with chronic fatigue syndrome were assigned to different treatments. All of them received medical care for symptoms like pain, insomnia or anxiety.

One group got counseled about how to pace activities. Another took part in an exercise program. And a third received the cognitive behavioral talk therapy. The therapy and the exercise group improved the most, reporting less fatigue, insomnia and anxiety.

Barsky says his patients do best when cognitive behavior therapy is also combined with gradually increased exercise. "People need to begin to push themselves in the face of their fatigue, because if you don't, you become deconditioned and you get caught in a cycle which ... makes fatigue worse," says Barsky.

But he cautions against overdoing it. People should start with mild, gentle exercise like clearing the table, doing the dishes, or taking the dog for a short walk. Then, slowly build up to longer and more frequent walks, he says.

Lucinda Bateman is a doctor at the Fatigue Consultation Clinic in Salt Lake City who specializes in chronic fatigue syndrome.

She's skeptical about the Lancet study, pointing out that patients improved only moderately, and not much more than those who were counseled about pacing themselves. Bateman suggests her patients pace themselves, and try to do only as many activities as they can manage.

She says some patients get caught in a "push and crash" cycle. When symptoms abate and they feel better, they may go all out, exercising, doing errands and socializing. But soon that level of activity often comes to a crashing end and patients can relapse dramatically, even becoming bedridden for several days or longer.

Bateman takes also issue with CBT's implication that chronic fatigue syndrome is psychosomatic. We still don't know what exactly causes the syndrome. And, like most professionals who treat patients, Bateman eagerly awaits the day when science can finally pinpoint its cause.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story only quoted two people, but we like that it at least attempted to bring in a different view on how to treat chronic fatigue. In talking with Lucinda Bateman at Fatigue Consultation Clinic in Salt Lake City, the story brought out some of the limitations of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MILAN (Reuters) - An established targeted therapy for bowel cancer may also help women with an aggressive form of breast cancer, a mid-stage clinical study revealed on Monday, opening up a potential new market for the medicine.

Adding Erbitux to cisplatin, a platinum-based chemotherapy, doubled the tumor response rate and the length of time patients lived without their disease worsening, compared with giving cisplatin on its own, in the Phase II trial.

“We are very excited by these results,” lead researcher Jose Baselga of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center in Boston told the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) — Europe’s biggest cancer meeting.

Erbitux — from Merck KGaA, Eli Lilly and Bristol-Myers Squibb — is approved for bowel and head and neck cancer. Sales last year were $1.7 billion.

An independent Nordic study, published at ESMO on Sunday, revealed 566 patients who were given Erbitux plus a three-drug chemotherapy regimen called FLOX, in first-line treatment for bowel cancer, did not live longer or gain any significant extra benefit to those on chemotherapy alone.

It is the first time researchers have shown that a drug like Erbitux, which targets a protein called epidermal growth factor involved in cancer cell growth, can provide substantial benefit in difficult-to-treat “triple negative” breast cancer.

Women with triple negative breast cancer have tumors that do not respond to two types of hormonal therapy, or drugs that target a protein called HER-2.

The disease tends to spread through the body rapidly and there are few treatment options, though Sanofi-Aventis has a promising drug in late-stage development.

The Phase II study included 173 women whose cancer had spread and who had received other treatments. The best overall tumor response rate, of 20 percent, was in those given Erbitux. This compared with 10 percent among those on cisplatin alone.

Erbitux, known generically as cetuximab, also more than doubled the median time before the patients’ disease worsened, to 3.7 months from 1.5 months.

Baselga said that level of improvement was rarely seen in this advanced-disease population and was highly promising.

“This study clearly opens the field ... I am convinced that cetuximab or other anti-EGFR agents have a role in triple negative breast cancer. No question,” he said.

Still, further studies will be needed to build the case, including testing Erbitux alongside other types of chemotherapy, he added, noting the Phase II study did not meet its primary objective of proving a greater than 20 percent response rate.

Dr. Fabrice Andre from Institut Gustave Roussy in Villejuif, France, who was not involved in the research, said the results were “extremely important” but echoed the view that the findings now had to be confirmed in larger-scale clinical tests.

In practice, experts suspect triple negative breast cancer represents a number of different disease sub-groups and that analyzing patients according to the molecular profile of their tumors may help identify a sub-group that could benefit most.

Wolfgang Wein, head of oncology at German drugmaker Merck, welcomed the latest findings, which could broaden the market for the company’s key medicine.

Merck suffered a setback last year when its attempts to win marketing approval to sell Erbitux in lung cancer were rebuffed by regulators.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 27, 2018 (HealthDay News) --What if a simple zap to the spine could relieve the debilitating lower back and leg pain brought on by a herniated disk?

Such is the promise of "pulse radiofrequency" therapy (pRF), which sends inflammation-reducing pulses of energy to nerve roots in the spine, a new study claims.

The therapy is not new, having first received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval in the 1980s.

But recent advances in CT scan technology now enable clinicians to deploy those energy pulses with much more accuracy, experts said. And the new research suggests the treatment could prove a boon to back pain patients for whom standard therapies have failed to do the trick.

"I was amazed with the results of pRF," said study author Dr. Alessandro Napoli. "Especially having read, as a radiologist, numerous lumbar MRI scans of patients with recurrent hernia after surgery."

And as a patient himself, Napoli added that "from personal experience I can tell you that the treatment is not painful, and the results are appreciated within days after a single treatment lasting 10 minutes."

Napoli is a professor of interventional radiology at Sapienza University of Rome in Italy.

He and his colleagues plan to report their findings Tuesday at the Radiological Society of North America annual meeting, in Chicago. Such research is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Lower disk herniation results when the insulating disks that sit between spinal vertebrae tear open, allowing jelly-like material to protrude and exert pressure on surrounding nerve roots. Beyond lower back pain, the condition often triggers sciatica, a pain that radiates down a patient's leg.

Standard therapies include over-the-counter pain meds, corticosteroid spinal injections, and/or invasive spine surgery that sometimes involves disk removal and vertebrae fusion.

The problem, said Napoli, is that such options entail risks without assured relief.

"Steroid injections are effective only in portion of the patients, and generally require more sessions," he noted. And though surgery safety has "largely improved," Napoli pointed to the risk for bleeding and infection, the need for a minimum two- to three-day hospital stay, the high cost, and the fact that some patients ultimately realize little benefit.

By contrast, pRF is scalpel-free, delivering radio signals directly to affected nerves via a CT scan-guided electrode. The process, said Napoli, requires no hospital stay, is noninvasive, far cheaper and less risky.

"The rationale for using pRF on disk herniation is that we eliminate the inflammation process of the compromised nerve root," he explained. "Without inflammation the pain fades, and the body starts a self-healing process that allows for complete resolution of the disk herniation in a large proportion of patients."

For the study, the Italian investigators compared 128 lumbar herniation patients who underwent a single 10-minute round of CT-guided pRF with 120 patients who received one to three rounds of steroid injections.

All the patients had already undergone standard interventions, with poor results.

By the one-year mark following either treatment, a full "perceived" recovery was reported by 95 percent of the pRF patients, compared with just 61 percent of the steroid injection patients.

Dr. Daniel Park, director of minimally invasive orthopedic spine surgery at William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Mich., offered some caution on the findings.

He noted that because "the majority of people with back pain improve with time and exercise alone," it remains an open question as to whether the pRF procedure really cured the condition.

Still, Park noted that diagnostic uncertainty can undermine the ability of surgery to get at the true source of a patient's pain, given that "the problem with low back pain is that there are many causes of it, and physicians have trouble identifying the cause of pain."

Nevertheless, he remains unsure if pRF is truly ready for prime time.

"Best case, I think [pRF] could be an option for people if they [have already] failed therapy and medication," said Park. "It may be a similar option for people if they do not or cannot have steroid injections, but they need more treatment. I think this is experimental, and should not be first-line."

The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons offers more information on herniated disks.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Laudably, the story contains cautionary comments from a physician who was not involved with the study. He points out that most people with back pain “improve with time and exercise alone,” and “it remains an open question as to whether the pRF procedure really cured the condition.”
We wish some of the cautions had been placed higher in the story.
The story did not mention conflicts of interest, and we could not find any that the authors have disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 22, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Women who experience depression during pregnancy may have another treatment option, new research suggests.

The study found that women treated with depression-specific acupuncture had a 63 percent response rate compared to a 44 percent response rate in women treated with control acupuncture or massage.

"We tested acupuncture as a standalone treatment, and the results are very positive," said study author Rachel Manber, a professor at the Stanford University School of Medicine Sleep Medicine Center in Redwood City, Calif. But, she added, because this is the first study of its kind, and the acupuncture protocol used was specifically designed for this study, "you always need replication of the findings."

Dr. Shari Lusskin, director of reproductive psychiatry at the New York University Langone Medical Center, echoed that sentiment. "It's encouraging to see alternative treatments being studied in a scientific manner, and this study should generate further studies. It needs to be replicated on a larger scale," she noted.

"This is one treatment, and perhaps it will become another possible treatment tool in our therapeutic toolbox," said Lusskin. But, she cautioned that "acupuncture is not a substitute for the appropriate use of antidepressant therapy especially in women with a prior history of response to antidepressants."

As many as 20 percent of women may experience depression during pregnancy, according to the March of Dimes. Symptoms include sad, hopeless feelings that persist, generally for more than two weeks, Lusskin said. Women may also experience severe anxiety or feel disconnected from the baby. And, she cautioned, suicidal thoughts are never normal and are a sign that you should seek help.

Many women are cautious about using medications during pregnancy, reports the study. Interpersonal psychotherapy is an option for women who are depressed during pregnancy, but this type of therapy isn't always available, according to the study.

For the study, Manber and her colleagues recruited 150 pregnant women who were diagnosed with a major depressive disorder. All were between 12 and 30 weeks of gestation.

The women were randomly assigned to one of three groups: depression-specific acupuncture (52 women), control acupuncture (49 women) or massage (49 women). The depression-specific protocol was designed just for this study, and the control acupuncture was specifically designed to avoid using acupuncture needles in any areas known to affect depression.

The treatments lasted for eight weeks. Women received treatment twice a week for the first four weeks, and then once a week for the next four weeks. The treatments lasted an average of 25 minutes.

The researchers found a 63 percent response rate in women who received the depression-specific acupuncture, while the response rate was 44.3 percent in the control acupuncture and massage groups. A response rate was defined as a 50 percent reduction in depression symptoms, Manber said.

Results of the study are scheduled to be published in the March issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

"We found our acupuncture protocol was helpful, but that does not mean that any acupuncture for depression treatment will be effective. The quality of what you get can differ from one practitioner to another," said Manber.

"Our goal is always to find treatments that have the maximum benefits and minimum risk," said Lusskin. "Many women think it's safer for the baby to go off antidepressants, but there's a real risk to the baby for untreated depression in pregnancy. And, we have enough safety data about antidepressant use in pregnancy that we can make informed choices about managing treatment during pregnancy."

The bottom line, she said, is to talk with your doctor to find the right combination of treatments that can help you. "Depression is not a one-size-fits-all illness, and treatment won't be one-size-fits-all either. If acupuncture ends up being helpful for you, that's great, but make sure you're treated into remission."

To learn more about depression during and after pregnancy, visit the National Women's Health Information Center.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes one independent expert who provides valuable commentary on the importance of the new findings. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gene expression in specific cells and in specific regions can provide a more precise, neuroprotective approach than traditional treatments for neurological diseases. For multiple sclerosis, specifically, increasing cholesterol synthesis gene expression in astrocytes of the spinal cord can be a pathway to repair nerves that affect walking.

Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune, neurodegenerative disease, characterized by distinct disabilities affecting walking, vision, and cognition, to name a few. MS patients differ markedly from each other regarding which disability affects them the most. Inflammation strips the myelin coating from nerve cell extensions, called axons, and connections at the ends of nerves, called synapses, are lost, together disrupting signaling and eventually causing permanent disability depending on where this occurs. UCLA researchers proposed that molecular mechanisms behind each disability may differ, and that neuroprotective treatments tailored for each disability may be more effective than nonspecific treatments aiming to reduce a composite of different disabilities. The team focused on astrocytes, a type of brain cell that becomes activated in MS and plays several important roles in disease, examining gene expression in astrocytes in different regions.

Working with a mouse model of MS, the research team assessed astrocytes in various regions of the brain and spinal cord known to be involved in walking, vision or cognition. They compared gene expression changes between regions that correspond to different disabilities. In the spinal cord - an area that's critical for walking -- they found a decrease in the expression of cholesterol synthesis genes. Cholesterol does not leave the blood and enter the brain, instead it is made in astrocytes and plays a role in making myelin, the nerve coating, and synapses, the nerve connections. They hypothesized that while inflammation causes loss of myelin and synapses, it is the decrease in cholesterol synthesis gene expression in astrocytes that explains why lesions do not repair in MS. They treated MS mice with a drug that increased expression in cholesterol synthesis genes - and this resulted in improved walking ability.

This disability-specific discovery approach represents a strategy for finding neuroprotective treatments for neurodegenerative diseases that are tailored to repair damage for each disability, one at a time, in contrast to a "one size fits all" treatment approach.

In addition to senior author Dr. Rhonda Voskuhl, who directs UCLA's Multiple Sclerosis Program and holds the Jack H. Skirball Chair in Multiple Sclerosis Research, study co-first authors were Noriko Itoh, Yuichiro Itoh, and Alessia Tassoni, with other co-authors including Emily Ren, Max Kaito, Ai Ohno, Vista Farkhondeh, Hadley Johnsonbaugh, Yan Ao, Josh Burda and Michael Sofroniew, all of UCLA.

The study is published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

The work was supported with funding from the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, the California Community Foundation, the Tom Sherak MS Hope Foundation, the Rhoda Goetz Foundation for Multiple Sclerosis, and other partners of the UCLA Multiple Sclerosis Program.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release lists the funding sources. The authors declared no conflicts of interest in the published study. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force on Sunday issued new guidance for the use of cholesterol-busting statin drugs. The report greatly expands the universe of people who should be screened to see if they need the medication to everyone over age 40 regardless of whether they have a history of cardiovascular disease.

The recommendations also support the position of the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association, which in 2013 radically shifted their advice from suggesting that doctors focus on the level of a patient’s low-density lipoproteins (LDL) or “bad cholesterol” to looking at a more comprehensive picture of risk based on things such as weight and blood pressure, as well as lifestyle factors.

“People with no signs, symptoms, or history of cardiovascular disease can still be at risk for having a heart attack or stroke,” said Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, who chairs the task force.

[Could these new cholesterol drugs save many people from heart attacks?]

The task force, which is made up of independent experts but commissioned by the government, concurred after a comprehensive review of the evidence on the topic determined that a broader evaluation of risk is needed. But it puts a greater emphasis on age than the ACC and AHA did in determining who might benefit from the medication in preventing heart attack or stroke. It is also slightly more conservative when it comes to determining the benefits of taking the medications, which include Lipitor, Crestor and Zocor.

The new guidelines, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, suggests that people ages 40 to 75 who have one or more risk factors — such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes or smoking that put them at a 10 percent or greater risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 10 years — should be on statins. The group also said that people with a 7.5 percent to 10 percent risk “may also benefit” but did not definitively recommend they take them. “People in this group should make an individual decision with their doctor about whether to start taking statins,” the task force advised.

In contrast, the ACC and AHA recommend that people with a 7.5 percent or greater risk take the drugs.

[Who should take statins? A vicious debate over cholesterol drugs.]

Another important difference between the groups is that the task force withheld a recommendation about starting statins in adults who are 76 and older, saying that “the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms.” In a commentary accompanying the recommendations, Philip Greenland and Robert Bonow note that there is “uncertainty and hesitation” in the guidelines regarding older people but said it appears that it is not necessary to stop taking statins at age 76 if you are already on them.

The task force and AHA groups carry tremendous influence in medical practice and in what insurance companies will cover. Medicare typically follows USPSTF guidelines in determining coverage and the Affordable Care Act specifies that USPSTF recommendations rated at the strongest levels must be used as a floor for coverage for private insurers. In the case of statins, this would apply to the use of the drug by those who are 40 to 75 years old with one or more risk factors for cardiovascular disease and who have a 10 percent or greater risk — but not those with 7.5 to 10 percent risk.

Individual doctors are free to take the advice or leave it, and in recent months there has been a lot of debate about what the scientific evidence really shows regarding the therapy.

There is a consensus among experts that people at substantial risk for heart disease benefit from statins but considerable disagreement about those at lower risk. Last month, National Institutes of Health Director Francis Collins wrote in the journal Lancet that “it’s a force for good.” But Rita Redberg, a cardiologist at the University of California at San Francisco and editor of JAMA Internal Medicine, and others have been vocal about their belief that the drugs are overprescribed and that the side effects — which range from muscle pain and cataracts to possibly an increased risk for diabetes in women — should be taken more seriously.

In an opinion piece Sunday, Redberg and Mitchell Katz, deputy editor of JAMA Internal Medicine, advised everyone to take “a step back” and ask “why this debate is so contentious.” They suggest that the estimates of the benefits of statins may be inflated, that the drugs as an intervention are “weak,” and that the reports of adverse events are incomplete.

“In deciding on any therapy, it is important to understand the risks and benefits, particularly for healthy people,” they wrote.

The two U.S. guidelines are notably more aggressive in recommending drugs than reports issued by their counterparts in other parts of the world, including the Canadian Cardiovascular Society (which recommends statins in men 40 and older but only after age 50 in women, and the U.K. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, which recommends discussing lifestyle modification before offering statin therapy). The European Society of Cardiology focuses more on managing LDL.

Statins are among the best-selling drugs in the United States, with a 2011 study showing at least 32 million Americans were taking them. The 2013 ACC and AHA guidelines recommend an estimated 24 million more people should be on them.

The task force’s recommendations come on the heels of an important new study, published Saturday, that shows that people who use statins survive heart attacks better than those who do not. They are more likely to not only get to the hospital and survive until they are discharged but also survive in greater numbers a year after their hospitalization than those who do not use statins.

This post has been updated.

Statin intolerance is real, researchers find. Another (more costly) drug may get around the problem.

2013: New guidelines could have far more Americans taking statin drugs for cholesterol
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes independent sources and we didn’t see any apparent conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study suggests that continuous movement while sitting may increase metabolic rate more than standing at a desk.

Craig Horswill, clinical associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the University of Illinois at Chicago, says the study adds to the growing body of evidence that suggests strategies for increasing non-exercise active thermogenesis — defined as spontaneous activity unrelated to a fitness routine — are needed to help overcome the detrimental effects of prolonged sitting.

Sitting has been identified as a risk factor for early mortality, independent of the presence of a disease, such as cancer or diabetes. Up to 7 percent of deaths have been attributed to sitting alone.

“Sitting is bad for our health, but it is a big part of daily life for many people,” said Horswill, an expert in exercise and metabolism in UIC’s College of Applied Health Sciences. “Exercise is a good way to counteract the negative effects of sitting, but just incorporating physical activity into one part of our day may not be enough to overcome the damage caused by prolonged sitting and an otherwise sedentary lifestyle.”

Because the workday is a major contributor to sedentary behavior, with more than 20 percent of workers in the U.S. reporting more than 8 hours each day, tactics that promote workstation activity have emerged in recent years, including standing desks, as well as dynamic pedal and treadmill workstations.

Horswill and his colleagues compared the metabolic rate produced by three workstations: seated at a desk, seated at a desk equipped with a device that stimulates leg movement and standing at a desk. The device, which is commercially available, was a movable footrest, suspended from the underside of the desk, which enabled the feet to swing, twist or teeter.

Participants in the study familiarized themselves with the workstations during one visit. On a second visit, researchers collected metabolic rate and heart rate data during three progressive stages: seated, seated with the device and standing. Each stage was 15 minutes.

The researchers found that modest movement while seated elevated the metabolic rate more than sitting and more than standing, by 17 and 7 percent respectively, and had no detrimental effect on cognitive function. The findings are published in WORK, a journal affiliated with the Canadian Association of Occupational Therapists and endorsed by the International Ergonomics Association.

“These results suggest that non-exercise active thermogenesis, which we call NEAT, can increase movement and calorie burning, and may have the potential to impact health,” said Horswill, the senior author on the study. “We expected to see the metabolic rate increase with each progressive stage, but instead found that metabolic rates from movement while seated were either equal to or higher than rates while standing.”

Horswill says the study needs to be further validated, but that the findings should be especially applicable to individuals poised to benefit from NEAT but unable to access popular standing desks because of injury, disability or discomfort.

“This is more evidence that NEAT, something everyone can do throughout the day, may be an important strategy for improving health, and even reducing early death,” said Horswill.

Haley Scott and Danel Voorhees are co-authors on the paper. Active Ideas LLC, which offers the HOVR device used in study, funded the research.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release notes in the last sentence that the research was funded by the company that makes the HOVR device used in the intervention.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA--Palbociclib, a new oral drug whose efficacy in combating breast cancer has been demonstrated alone and in combination with endocrine therapy, also has potential to combat other types of cancer, according to a literature review and additional original research conducted by experts at the Abramson Cancer Center (ACC) in the University of Pennsylvania published this month in JAMA Oncology.

Palbociclib targets the rapid division of tumor cells by inhibiting the activity of the enzymes CDK4 and CDK6, which propel cell division and increase in number in most cancers. It is the first CDK4/6 inhibitor to be approved for the treatment of breast cancer.

"All living cells undergo cell division and palbociclib's unique capacity to halt the cell division process (also known as the 'cell cycle') therefore has potentially broad applicability," said the study's lead author Amy S. Clark, MD, MSCE, an assistant professor of Hematology/Oncology at Penn's Perelman School of Medicine and ACC. "Pairing palbociclib with other anti-cancer therapies such as endocrine therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy can create a powerful combinatorial effect with real promise for addressing a variety of cancers." For example, amplification of CDK4 is reported in a high percentage of melanomas and esophageal cancers.

Targeted therapy uses medication and other interventions to more accurately identify and attack cancer cells, usually while doing no or little damage to normal cells.

"This drug has minor effects on normal cells other than neutrophils (white blood cells)," said the study's senior author, Peter J. O'Dwyer, MD, a professor of Hematology/Oncology at Penn and director of the Developmental Therapeutics Program at the ACC. "In tumors, it can cause shrinkage, or more commonly, arrest of growth. As we discover new functions for the CDK4/6 target of this medicine, we are likely to use it in combinations to make other anti-cancer agents work better."

In addition to inhibiting the cell cycle, palbociclib has been shown, for example to alter several recently described non-cell cycle functions of CDK4/6, a finding expected to expand its therapeutic role, O'Dwyer added.

Assessing 130 relevant publications in the literature, as well as interpreting their own continuing studies, the all-Penn team found that in addition to its safety and effectiveness in fighting certain types of breast cancer, early trials of palbociclib have shown promise of effectiveness in cases of lymphoma, sarcoma, and teratoma, tumors that while rare, often afflict younger patients.

A phase 2 trial showed that, among 17 patients with previously treated mantle-cell lymphoma, palbociclib resulted in one complete response and two partial responses. Although, median progression-free survival was four months, five patients had progression-free survival greater than one year. Another phase 2 trial with 29 sarcoma patients treated with palbociclib showed a progression-free survival of 66 percent at 12 weeks.

Also, combining palbociclib with other anti-cancer agents is feasible, and early results in myeloma and some solid tumors have led to more definitive studies.

In both breast and other cancer trials, palbociclib has been shown to be safe with once-daily dosing, and its main adverse effect is reversible neutropenia, an abnormally low count of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell that helps fight infections. The lower their neutrophil count, the more vulnerable patients are to infectious diseases. In such cases the drug is temporarily discontinued and reintroduced at a lower dose. Other side effects included fatigue (33 percent), nausea (30 percent), diarrhea (18 percent), constipation (12 percent), and rash (12 percent).

At the recommended doses, evidence of the desired drug effect in tumors has been obtained using novel PET imaging at Penn. These tools can help to individualize patient therapy going forward.

Other Penn co-authors are Thomas B. Karasic, MD; Angela DeMichele, MD, MSCE; David J.Vaughn, MD; Mark O'Hara, MD; Rodolfo Perini, MD; Paul Zhang, MD; Priti Lal, MD; Michael Feldman, MD, PhD; and Maryann Gallagher, RN.

The study was funded by Pfizer Inc and the National Institutes of Health (5P30 CA16520-25).
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that Pfizer and the National Institutes of Health funded the review.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago (CNN) -- For the first time, patients with the deadliest form of skin cancer have two new treatment options that prolong survival, according to new research presented at a cancer conference in Chicago on Sunday.

One drug specifically targets a mutated gene that tells a cancer cell to grow, the other boosts a patient's immune system in the fight against the disease. Both drugs cause tumors to shrink and prolong survival for patients with melanoma that has spread to other parts of the body, but neither is a cure.

"This is an unprecedented time of clinical options -- it is truly practice-changing," said Dr. Lynn Schuchter, who heads the Melanoma Center at the University of Pennsylvania and is not involved with the research.

MayoClinic: Find out more about melanoma

One study presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's (ASCO) conference on Sunday focused on the experimental drug vemurafenib. About half of all melanoma patients have a mutated BRAF gene. This mutation tells the cell to continue to grow.

"It's like the on-switch is stuck," said Dr. Paul Chapman, from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Center in New York and lead author of the study. Vemurafenib blocks the mutated gene, which kills the cancer cell and shrinks tumors.

Researchers compared this new drug, which comes in pill form, to the only FDA-approved chemotherapy drug for melanoma, dacarbazine: It has been used to treat melanoma patients since 1975, but is only effective in about 10% of patients.

Nearly 90% benefited from this new targeted drug, Schuchter said.

In a large, phase 3 study involving 675 people worldwide, patients on vemurafenib did much better than those on chemotherapy. Forty-eight percent of patients on vemurafenib had substantial tumor shrinkage that lasted for more than a month, compared to 5.5% of patients in the chemotherapy group.

Those taking vemurafenib had a 63% reduced risk of death compared to those on chemo. Patients on vemurafenib saw the drug work within 72 hours and 84% of the patients were still alive after six months, compared with 64% of patients getting dacarbazine.

"These are truly striking results" ASCO president Dr. George Sledge said.

Patient advocates like Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation, are thrilled because "the incidence of melanoma is going up all over the world and the treatment landscape has been terrible."

Drugs that treat breast cancer found to prevent it, too

Sledge and other cancer experts are confident that based on these study results, vemurafenib will almost certainly will get FDA approval this year.

A second study showed that the recently approved drug Ipilimumab, sold under the name Yervoy, also extends survival for melanoma patients with advanced disease.

It doesn't target a specific part of the cell. Instead, it stimulates the patient's immune system to allow it to better fight the cancer. Patients with and without the BRAF mutation were eligible to participate.

Among 502 patients enrolled in this clinical trial, half were given Yervoy plus dacarbazine and the other half were given a placebo and chemotherapy.

"Twenty-one percent of (the Yervoy) population was alive after three years," lead study author Dr. Jedd Wolchok said, compared to 12% who got the placebo and chemo. Wolchok, also an oncologist from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said patients taking Yervoy saw the drug work for them for 19 months, compared to only eight months in patients in the chemo group.

Schuchter says melanoma patients are celebrating this moment because there are now two good treatment options for patients, when there really were none before.

"I've been doing this for 25 years, and we've not had drugs that extended survival. That is what is so remarkable here," Schuchter said.

While patients taking vemurafenib do very well, Schuchter said the drug stops working after about nine or 10 months. But in many cases that are nine or 10 months they otherwise would not have had.

Yervoy takes a while to work, and some patients may not have that time, study author Chapman said. He also points out that both drugs do have side effects so patients have to be monitored.

Doctors and researchers will now explore how to best use these drugs -- give one before the other, or simultaneously.

Wolchok says manufacturers of both drugs (Genentech's vemurafenib and Bristol-Myers Squibb's Yervoy), which also funded these studies, have agreed to work with researchers to study how these drugs are tolerated by patients when taken together, giving doctors even more possible treatment options. This is very unusual in the world of drug development, he said.

According to the American Cancer Society, melanoma is one of the most common cancers in young adults today. More than 68,000 people were diagnosed with melanoma last year and about 8,700 died.

Not all melanomas can be prevented, but limiting exposure to strong sunlight and other sources of UV light like tanning beds can significantly reduce the risk of getting this very deadly cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two independent experts were quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Yoga enthusiasts link the practice to a long list of health benefits, including greater flexibility and range of motion, stronger muscles, better posture and balance, reduced emotional and physical stress, and increased self-awareness and self-esteem.

But definitively proving these benefits is challenging, requiring years of costly research. A pharmaceutical company is unlikely to fund a study that doesn’t involve a drug, and in any event, the research requires a large group of volunteers tracked over a very long time.

The subjects must provide health measurements at the outset, learn the proper poses, continue to do them regularly for years and be regularly evaluated.

No one knows these challenges better than Dr. Loren M. Fishman, a physiatrist at Columbia University who specializes in rehabilitative medicine. For years, he has been gathering evidence on yoga and bone health, hoping to determine whether yoga might be an effective therapy for osteoporosis.

The idea is not widely accepted in the medical community, but then, researchers know comparatively little about complementary medicine in general. So in 2005, Dr. Fishman began a small pilot study of yoga moves that turned up some encouraging results. Eleven practitioners had increased bone density in their spine and hips, he reported in 2009, compared with seven controls who did not practice yoga.

Knowing that more than 700,000 spinal fractures and more than 300,000 hip fractures occur annually in the United States, Dr. Fishman hoped that similar findings from a much larger study might convince doctors that this low-cost and less dangerous alternative to bone-loss drugs is worth pursuing.

Those medications can produce adverse side effects like gastrointestinal distress and fractures of the femur. Indeed, a recent study published in Clinical Interventions in Aging found that among 126,188 women found to have osteoporosis, all of whom had Medicare Part D drug coverage, only 28 percent started bone drug therapy within a year of diagnosis.

Many of those who avoided drugs were trying to avoid gastrointestinal problems.

On the other hand, yoga’s “side effects,” Dr. Fishman and colleagues wrote recently, “include better posture, improved balance, enhanced coordination, greater range of motion, higher strength, reduced levels of anxiety and better gait.”

Weight-bearing activity is often recommended to patients with bone loss, and Dr. Fishman argues that certain yoga positions fit the bill.

“Yoga puts more pressure on bone than gravity does,” he said in an interview. “By opposing one group of muscles against another, it stimulates osteocytes, the bone-making cells.”

Most experts argue that it’s difficult, perhaps impossible, for adults to gain significant bone mass. Undeterred, Dr. Fishman invested a chunk of his own money and with three collaborators — Yi-Hsueh Lu of The Rockefeller University, Bernard Rosner of Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and Dr. Gregory Chang of New York University — solicited volunteers worldwide via the Internet for a follow-up to his small pilot study.

Of the 741 people who joined his experiment from 2005 to 2015, 227 (202 of them women) followed through with doing the 12 assigned yoga poses daily or at least every other day. The average age of the 227 participants upon joining the study was 68, and 83 percent had osteoporosis or its precursor, osteopenia.

The 12 poses, by their English names, were tree, triangle, warrior II, side-angle, twisted triangle, locust, bridge, supine hand-to-foot I, supine hand-to-foot II, straight-legged twist, bent-knee twist and corpse pose. Each pose was held for 30 seconds. The daily regimen, once learned, took 12 minutes to complete.

The researchers collected data at the start of the study on the participants’ bone density measurements, blood and urine chemistry and X-rays of their spines and hips. They were each given a DVD of the 12 yoga poses used in the pilot study and an online program in which to record what they did and how often.

A decade after the start of the study, bone density measurements were again taken and emailed to the researchers; many participants also had repeat X-rays done. The findings, as reported last month in Topics of Geriatric Rehabilitation, showed improved bone density in the spine and femur of the 227 participants who were moderately or fully compliant with the assigned yoga exercises.

Improvements were seen in bone density in the hip as well, but they were not statistically significant.

Before the study, the participants had had 109 fractures, reported by them or found on X-rays.

At the time the study was submitted for publication, “with more than 90,000 hours of yoga practiced largely by people with osteoporosis or osteopenia, there have been no reported or X-ray detected fractures or serious injuries of any kind related to the practice of yoga in any of the 741 participants,” Dr. Fishman and his colleagues wrote.

“Yoga looks like it’s safe, even for people who have suffered significant bone loss,” Dr. Fishman said in an interview.

Furthermore, a special study of bone quality done on 18 of the participants showed that they had “better internal support of their bones, which is not measured by a bone density scan but is important to resisting fractures,” Dr. Fishman said.

The study has many limitations, including the use of self-selected volunteers and the lack of a control group. But all told, the team concluded, the results may lend support to Dr. Fishman’s long-held belief that yoga can help reverse bone loss.

Even if bone density did not increase, improvements in posture and balance that can accrue from the practice of yoga can be protective, Dr. Fishman said.

“Spinal fractures can result from poor posture, and there’s no medication for that, but yoga is helpful,” he said.

In addition, “Yoga is good for range of motion, strength, coordination and reduced anxiety,” he said, “all of which contribute to the ability to stay upright and not fall. If you don’t fall, you greatly reduce your risk of a serious fracture.”

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Dr. Fishman invested a ‘significant chunk’ of his own money into the research and we appreciate that the story put that financial interest out in the open. Apart from the selling of the DVDs used, it hard to imagine how there could be a significant financial gain from the study. However, given that investment, it wold have been valuable to have comments from others in the field speaking to the study results and the basic premise entailed. This kind of research might be more influenced by more subtle intellectual conflicts of interest, where the researchers are intellectually identified with an idea (yoga=good) and would have difficulty accepting alternative hypotheses. The lack of a control group becomes somewhat problematic as it is possible that a similar group of non-yoga performing people would also see increases in their bone density.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The number of Americans undergoing CT scans has increased dramatically in recent years, driving a significant increase in the amount of radiation that many people are being exposed to from medical procedures.

That trend is raising concern that the high-tech exams could cause a small but significant excess of cancers in coming decades and spurring debate about whether the increasingly ubiquitous tests are being overused, exposing millions of Americans to needless risk. "The radiation doses from CT have been pretty clearly demonstrated to increase cancer risk," said David J. Brenner, a professor of radiation oncology at Columbia University who co-authored the most recent of a series of reports in the past year warning about the potential risks of CT scans. "On an individual basis there's probably not a big risk, but a small cancer risk applied to an increasingly large population spells trouble down the road. That's the concern."

Although some prominent medical groups have issued warnings against overusing the exams -- especially for children -- some experts worry about frightening patients away from the invaluable tests.

"You don't want people to avoid getting a potentially lifesaving diagnosis or therapy because they are afraid to get a CT scan," said Arl Van Moore Jr., a Charlotte radiologist who chairs the American College of Radiology's board of chancellors. "When a scan is done the right way for the right reasons, the benefits clearly outweigh the risks of doing it."

CT (computed tomography), sometimes called CAT (computed axial tomography), is performed by computerized machines that scan patients with X-rays to create three-dimensional cross-sectional images of organs and other parts of the body, providing far greater detail than standard single X-rays.

The number of scans performed each year in the United States has increased sharply, rising from about 3 million in 1980 to at least 67 million in 2006. There are many reasons for the increase, including improvements in the technology that have speeded the procedure, a growing list of uses and a proliferation of the machines.

"CT has become ubiquitous," said Jason Launders, a senior project officer at the ECRI Institute, an independent nonprofit health-care research organization outside Philadelphia that released a report last year warning about the potential risks. "Now if you go into an emergency room you can be scanned in a few minutes. You can't get that kind of information any other way. So physicians tend to use CT as sort of a first line in working out a diagnosis."

The use of CT scans is expected to continue to rise as possible new applications, such as for lung and colon cancer screening, become more widespread.

While the value of CT scans for screening remains the focus of debate, no one questions the value of the tests for allowing doctors to quickly diagnose a wide variety of health problems, including head injuries, heart problems, cancer, appendicitis, fractures and gallstones.

"CT is probably the biggest advance in diagnostic radiology that has ever occurred," said Thomas Ohlhaber, deputy director of the Division of Mammography Quality and Radiation Programs at the Food and Drug Administration. "Exploratory surgery that was common 10 or 15 years ago has virtually disappeared and all the risks associated with that have gone away because of CT. But nothing comes free of risks."

The concern comes from the fact that CT scans expose patients to much more radiation than standard X-rays. A CT chest scan, for example, exposes a patient to more than 150 times more radiation than a standard chest X-ray. That's more than twice as much as a typical person receives from the environment in an entire year. (See graphic.)

The upsurge in CT use has fueled a big jump in the annual amount of radiation that each American is receiving from medical procedures of all kinds. The average level of that exposure has increased about 600-fold since 1980, according to a federal report being published this year.

"At the moment, about half of medical radiation exposure is from CT scans," said Fred A. Mettler Jr., a radiation health expert at the University of New Mexico who helped prepare the report. CT scans represented just a few percent of the average American's exposure to radiation from medical tests in 1980, he noted.

Because it would take decades to follow a large number of patients who have undergone CT scans to determine the exact risks posed by the exams, there are no direct data demonstrating the danger. But researchers have estimated the risk based on what is considered the best information available about the health effects of radiation -- data collected from survivors of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, as well as exposure of nuclear plant and medical workers.

Using that information, experts have estimated that every 1,000 to 2,000 CT scans may produce one fatal cancer that would not have occurred otherwise.

Although that overall risk is relatively small, the large number of scans being performed could translate into a significant number of cancers. Brenner and his colleagues estimate that CT scans may be responsible for perhaps 2 percent of all cancers in the United States. The ECRI Institute estimated the scans may be causing 6,000 extra cancers each year, half of them fatal.

"Twenty years from now we could see a huge bonus of cancer coming through because of indiscriminate use of CT today," Launders said. "That's the real issue people are worried about."

The individual risk varies depending on the age of the patient and the type of scan. Younger people face more risk than older people because they have more time for a cancer to develop. Children are especially vulnerable because their rapidly developing bodies are at least four times as sensitive to the damaging effects of radiation. A child's risk may run as high as one case of cancer for every 500 scans, experts say.

Among adults, "young women have the highest risk," said Andrew Einstein of Columbia University, who evaluated the risks from cardiac CT scans in a paper published in July in the Journal of the American Medical Association. A 20-year-old woman faced the greatest risk -- one additional cancer for every 143 scans, he reported.

Some question the estimates, saying the risk of exposure from radiation from multiple CT scans may not be the same as from radiation from an atomic bomb.

"It's very difficult, in our opinion to equate the data from Hiroshima, where you had an instantaneous entire-body dose of radiation, compared to a cumulative dose for multiple CT scans," said Moore, the radiologist. "It's apples and oranges. It's not really the same."

Einstein, Mettler and others, however, disagree. "Radiation is radiation. Those are X-rays that the folks at Hiroshima and Nagasaki got. These are X-rays from a CT scan. They're really the same thing," said Brenner, whose report was published in November in the New England Journal of Medicine. "If the dose is the same, then the risk is going to be the same."

Although the companies that make the CT machines have been developing new protocols designed to minimize radiation exposure, particularly for children, everyone agrees that the most prudent thing to do is to eliminate unnecessary use.

While there are scant hard data about how often CT scans are done needlessly, several experts estimated that perhaps one-third could be eliminated. There are many reasons CTs may be overused. Some CTs are full-body "virtual physicals" performed on people who appear perfectly healthy -- a practice widely opposed by medical authorities.

Some say part of the blame lies with physicians who have financial interests in imaging facilities. "There is statistical evidence that indicates that more scans are ordered when a physician has a financial interest than when he doesn't," said Moore.

Defensive medicine also plays a role, with some doctors ordering the tests to stave off accusations that they withheld the most cutting-edge technology from their patients.

In other cases, overuse results from worried patients and from parents demanding CT scans that may not be needed. Other times doctors may not realize how many tests involving radiation patients have already undergone -- information that could influence a doctor's decision -- or may order a CT scan when other tests that do not involve radiation, such as a blood test, an MRI or an ultrasound, would suffice. "There are alternatives that are arguably just as good," Brenner said.

And patients also can take more responsibility for reducing the number of unnecessary scans.

"If a patient walks in and says, 'Tell me what the dose is from this and tell me what the risk is,' they are going to make the doctor start thinking about it," Mettler said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple, independent experts who can provide differing perspectives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A treatment for depression using Emotional Faces Memory Task (EFMT), a technology originally developed by two Mount Sinai researchers, resulted in a significantly greater reduction of major depressive disorder (MDD) symptoms compared to a control group, according to initial clinical results presented at the Society of Biological Psychiatry Annual Scientific Convention on May 19, 2017, in San Diego. EFMT is a cognitive-emotional treatment that is delivered via an app on the Click Neurobehavioral Intervention (CNI) platform , a clinically-validated patient engagement platform developed by Click Therapeutics™.

This treatment was developed at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai by Brian Iacoviello, PhD, an Assistant Professor of Psychiatry who is Director of Scientific Affairs for Click Therapeutics, and Dennis S. Charney, MD, Anne and Joel Ehrenkranz Dean and Professor of Psychiatry, Neuroscience, and Pharmacological Sciences. The underlying mechanism for MDD that the intervention targets involves an imbalance in the activity of specific brain regions: individuals with MDD show hyperactivity of neural systems involved in emotion processing, such as the amygdala, coupled with decreased activity of systems involved in cognitive control and emotion regulation, such as the prefrontal cortex. The amygdala processes incoming emotionally salient stimuli, whereas the prefrontal cortex, as the executive center of the brain, decides whether the incoming stimuli are noteworthy.

Patients using this therapeutic are asked to identify an emotion displayed in a series of faces, and for each face, they are asked to identify the number of faces earlier in the series in which they encountered the same emotion. This aims to balance brain activity in these regions to work in concert with each other. In the trial, the therapeutic reduced MDD symptoms by 42 percent in the experimental group after six weeks compared to 15.7 percent in the control group, which was given a similar task using simple shapes instead of emotions. "The aim is to target the thinking abnormality we see in patients with MDD - that of perseverating, ruminating, obsessing, dwelling on the negative - by activating these two nodes (emotion processing and cognitive control) simultaneously. Thus, higher cognitive control regions will stay active even while the brain is processing salient emotional stimuli, giving the individual the capacity to shift their mindfulness and attention so that they are not perseverating," said Dr. Iacoviello. The initial results demonstrate that the efficacy of this digital therapeutic is comparable to drug therapy, with a highly favorable safety profile. Dr. Iacoviello added, "We will be advancing these encouraging results to the next level, by incorporating this therapeutic into a highly engaging mobile platform and launching it through the CNI platform. It's exciting to have the opportunity to test the program within a large health care system such as Mount Sinai."

Dr. Charney said, "Mount Sinai embraces creativity, innovation, and entrepreneurship. This technology illustrates our strengths in translating health care discoveries from the academic setting into industry, and ultimately to the patients that will benefit from them."

Mount Sinai Innovation Partners (MSIP), the commercialization-arm of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, has been a key partner in this development. Erik Lium, PhD, Senior Vice President at MSIP, said, "We strongly believed in the potential of this technology based on early trials at Mount Sinai, and are pleased with our commercial partnership with Click Therapeutics. We look forward to the development of this technology into a digital therapeutic that will be used to treat a major disease."

Mount Sinai Innovation Partners facilitates the real-world application and commercialization of Mount Sinai discoveries and the development of research partnerships with industry. MSIP is responsible for the full spectrum of commercialization activities required to bring the Icahn School of Medicine's inventions to life. These activities include evaluating, patenting, marketing, and licensing new technologies, while also engaging commercial and non-profit relationships for sponsored research, material transfer, and confidentiality. For more information, visit http://www. .

Click Therapeutics, Inc. engineers, validates, and commercializes Digital Therapeutics™ solutions to benefit people with unmet medical needs through cognitive and neurobehavioral modification. Click Therapeutics™ digital interventions enable change within individuals, and can be used independently or in conjunction with biomedical treatments. The Clickometrics® adaptive data science platform continuously personalizes user experience to drive cognitive and behavioral outcomes. As the leader in Digital Therapeutics™ solutions, Click Therapeutics is building the brains behind digital health. For more information, visit ClickTherapeutics.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We were glad to see the for-profit entity, Click Therapeutics, clearly labeled as a contributor to the research and employer of at least one of the investigators.
But we would have liked a clearer explanation of conflicts. Do any of the study authors participate in patents related to this work? How might researchers benefit financially? The study presentation does disclose they hold patent applications.
Excerpt:
“Mount Sinai Innovation Partners (MSIP), the commercialization-arm of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, has been a key partner in this development.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have grown blood vessels for kidney patients from their own cells, making it easier and safer for them to use dialysis machines, a new study says.

Some experts said the results suggested that doctors might one day be able to custom-produce blood vessels for patients with circulatory problems in their hearts or legs. Todd McAllister of Cytograft Tissue Engineering in California and colleagues implanted lab-grown blood vessels into 10 patients with advanced kidney disease in Argentina and Poland from 2004 to 2007.

Early results for two of these patients were announced in 2005. In 2007, the scientists published preliminary findings for another 4 patients in the New England Journal of Medicine.

In this most recent study, published Friday in the medical journal Lancet, scientists reported on the new blood vessels in those same patients and 4 others.

Dialysis patients need a vessel, or shunt, to connect them to dialysis machines. This can be made from their own vessels. But because dialysis is done so regularly, kidney patients often run out of healthy vessels and need an artificial one, often made out of gortex. Those are prone to infection and inflammation.

In the study, doctors took a small snippet of skin from patients. Cells from those samples were grown in a lab, to help them produce proteins like elastin and collagen. From those, scientists made sheets of tissue that were rolled into blood vessels 6 to 8 inches (15 to 20 centimeters) long.

The vessels were finished after 6 to 9 months. All of the vessels were implanted into patients' upper arms, to connect them to dialysis machines.

The vessels failed in three of the patients, which experts said was not surprising in patients so seriously ill. One other patient withdrew from the study and another died of unrelated causes.

In the five remaining patients, the vessels worked for at least 6 to 20 months after they were implanted. Afterwards, those patients needed fewer interventions, including surgeries, to maintain the vessels than regular dialysis patients.

McAllister said he and colleagues plan to test similar devices in patients with heart and leg problems. "It's basically a piece of plumbing to bypass blockages," he said.

The study was was paid for by Cytograft Tissue Engineering.

"This technology is very, very promising," said Vladimir Mironov of the Medical University of South Carolina, who co-wrote an accompanying commentary in the Lancet that praised the study as "a revolutionary milestone."

"It's difficult to predict what will happen next, but they are on the right track," Mironov said. He added the same technique might be useful for people with heart, leg or hernia problems. But Mironov worried the vessels, which cost between $15,000 and $20,000, might be too expensive to be used widely.

Dr. Bryan Becker, president of the National Kidney Foundation in the U.S., said about half of kidney patients could benefit from these vessels if further tests confirm they work. Becker was not linked to the Lancet study.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included quotes from a journal commentator and a comment from the president of the National Kidney Foundation, who was not connected with the study. The story noted that the lead researcher is an employee of the company developing the tissue-engineered blood vessel grafts and that the company funded the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philippe Autier is willing to bet that taking vitamin D supplements will never be proved to do anything beyond helping to build strong bones — and certainly not to prevent heart disease, cancer, diabetes, depression, multiple sclerosis or the common cold, as many claim. In fact, the physician has wagered a few good bottles of champagne that none of three large randomized trials now underway will find proof of positive effects.

To Autier, a researcher at the Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences in Glasgow, Scotland, the widespread faith in vitamin D’s benefits is like a religion. “People want to have a simple story they can believe in,” he says.

Cedric Garland, meanwhile, hews just as strongly to the opposite view — that vitamin D supplements confer a slew of benefits, including warding off colon cancer, breast cancer, even Type 1 diabetes.

“The science is, in my opinion, unassailable,” says Garland, an adjunct professor of epidemiology at the University of California at San Diego. “It’s just preposterous to say it’s not proven.”

In January 2014, Autier published a statistical analysis of results from hundreds of studies of vitamin D. He concluded: “Unfortunately, there is probably no benefit to expect from vitamin D supplementation in normally healthy people.”

Garland, on the other hand, is the co-author of dozens of studies showing a strong, inverse association between vitamin D levels and seemingly every disease under the sun. Indeed, sun exposure is Garland’s explanation for why rates of cancer, Type 1 diabetes and other diseases tend to be higher the farther people live from the equator. Vitamin D, after all, is the “sunshine vitamin,” synthesized from cholesterol in the skin in response to sunlight.

“It’s a mathematical relationship,” he said in a telephone interview. “The higher your latitude and the greater your area’s average cloud cover, the higher your rates of cancer.” Since he and his late brother, Frank Garland, published the first study, in 1980, revealing that relationship, hundreds of other studies have explored the link between vitamin D, including supplements, and health — but none were large enough, long enough or designed well enough to convince the skeptics.

Now three nationally recognized researchers are leading landmark studies designed to settle at least some of the questions about vitamin D once and for all. The one thing the research leaders are certain of is that the public’s faith in vitamin D as a modern panacea has far outpaced what the scientific evidence proves.

“There’s been a rush to judgment on vitamin D,” says JoAnn E. Manson, chief of the division of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. “Everyone has gotten on the bandwagon. Unfortunately, the lessons of history have shown repeatedly that many of these supplements that appeared to be very promising did not pan out in more rigorous testing.”

Manson should know. She has led or collaborated on more than a dozen large, randomized, placebo-controlled studies, dating back more than two decades, which found none of the expected protection against cancer, heart disease, dementia or other diseases that scientists once attributed to beta carotene, vitamin E or vitamin C supplements. (She did find, however, that supplementation with folic acid, vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 offered modest protection against age-related macular degeneration and, for those with a diet low in B vitamins to begin with, a hint of protection against the loss of cognitive abilities.)

Now Manson is co-directing the Vitamin D and Omega-3 Trial (VITAL), testing whether, compared with placebo, a daily supplement of either 2,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D or one gram of fish oil (another widely touted substance) reduces the risk of stroke, cancer, heart disease and other health problems. The five-year study, involving 25,874 men and women, is scheduled to end in October 2017.

Another trial is testing whether a daily supplement of 4,000 IU of vitamin D will prevent Type 2 diabetes. The so-called D2d study, which will run for four years, is seeking to enroll 2,382 people older than 30 who are at high risk of developing diabetes due to weight or blood-sugar levels but who have not yet been diagnosed with the disease.

“I would call myself an optimistic skeptic,” says Anastasios Pittas, principal investigator of the D2d study and a professor of medicine at Tufts School of Medicine in Boston. “The indirect evidence is very strong. People with higher levels of vitamin D in their blood have been shown again and again to have a lower risk of developing diabetes in the future. These studies are as consistent as we have ever seen with any nutrient.”

But, he adds, “those studies do not prove cause and effect. Before we make a blanket recommendation for the 86 million people in the United States who are at risk for Type 2 diabetes to go out and buy vitamin D supplements, we need to know for sure if they help.”

A third trial, designed to test whether 5,000 IU of vitamin D per day will slow the progression of multiple sclerosis in 172 patients, is being led by Ellen Mowry, an associate professor of neurology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

“I do discuss vitamin D with my patients,” Mowry says. “But I point out that we don’t yet have randomized, controlled-trials data to back it up. That’s why there are no official recommendations yet from any medical organizations. We have to be sure.”

So what are people to do in the meantime? Four years ago, Manson sat on a committee established by the Institute of Medicine to review how much vitamin D and calcium Americans need each day to maintain health and prevent disease. The report concluded that both are necessary for bone health but that as for preventing cancer, heart disease, diabetes and autoiummune disorders, the evidence was “inconsistent, inconclusive as to causality, and insufficient to inform nutritional requirements.” Even so, the committee recommended that children and adults up to age 70 get 600 IU of vitamin D daily — from food and, if necessary, supplements — and that adults age 71 and older get 800 IU.

Some studies have found no ill effects from taking far higher amounts, and many of the prospective but not proven benefits against cancer and other diseases are believed to require doses ranging from 2,000 to 5,000 IU. Manson urges people to rely on the Institute of Medicine report, which set a safe upper limit of 4,000 IU of vitamin D per day.

“It’s fine to take that amount,” Manson said. “But keep in mind, there isn’t yet evidence that taking those higher amounts will confer any benefits beyond the recommended daily allotment of 600 to 800 IU.”

Some studies, she noted, have even found evidence that very high levels of vitamin D circulating in the blood might be just as unhealthful as very low levels. A 2014 study, for instance, found that people with the highest levels of vitamin D in their blood (more than 60 nanograms per milliliter) were significantly more likely to die in the three months following a hospitalization as were people whose levels were between 30 and 49.9 ng/mL. Such findings are why she, Mowry and Pittas strongly advise people against taking more than the currently recommended upper daily limit of 4,000 IU, even though doses as high as 10,000 IU are available online and at many stores.

Frustrated by the uncertainty? Pittas takes it in stride.

“This is the beauty of medical research,” he says, “where you have some people convinced that vitamin D does nothing and others who believe it’s already proved to work. There is such controversy now that the only way to convince people who sit on those sides of the equation is to complete rigorous, randomized trials. We’ll see what happens. I have a hypothesis that vitamin D will work, but we have to test it. At the end of the studies, one of us will be right. I just don’t know which one.”

Hurley is a science journalist and author of “Natural Causes: Death, Lies and Politics in America’s Vitamin and Herbal Supplement Industry” (Broadway Books, 2007).
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The experts cited are leaders in the field. (Well done on the part of the story to entice these folks to comment.) There do not appear to be any major conflicts among the sources quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 22, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- By analyzing patterns in the brain's electrical activity, researchers say they've been able to assess autism risk in children as young as 6 months of age.

Researchers hooked up 79 babies aged 6 to 24 months to an EEG, or electroencephalogram, which records electrical activity in the brain. Forty-six of the infants had an older sibling with an autism spectrum disorder, while the other 33 had no family history of autism.

Children who have a sibling with autism are much more likely to develop autism themselves, explained lead study author William Bosl, a neuroinformatics researcher at Children's Hospital Boston. Prior research has shown that about 20 percent of siblings of children with autism will also develop autism and another 40 to 50 percent will have some characteristics of the disorder, such as repetitive behaviors or problems with social interaction, language or communication, but not the full-blown disorder.

While the children watched people blowing bubbles, researchers measured the babies' brain waves and analyzed the results using computer algorithms. The algorithms can detect subtle patterns in the lines created by EEGs that the human eye might miss, Bosl explained.

When the babies were nine months old, researchers could predict who was in the high-risk autism group -- that is, they had a sibling with autism -- with nearly 80 percent accuracy.

"In this study, we have taken the first step in showing that there is definitive information in the electrical signals measured by EEG to distinguish normal controls from infants at high risk for developing autism," Bosl said.

When broken out by gender, researchers found other differences. For example, at nine months they were able to predict which boys were in the high-risk group with near 100 percent accuracy. But accuracy for girls at that age was only 60 percent, not statistically significant.

At six months of age, however, they could predict the high risk girls with about 80 percent accuracy, though they couldn't do the same for boys that young.

"It seems perhaps they are on a slightly different developmental trajectory," Bosl said.

The study is published online Feb. 22 in BMC Medicine.

EEGs measure brain electrical activity through electrodes attached to the scalp. The technology has been around for awhile -- developed in the late 1920s, it has been used for more than 60 years to detect seizures in epileptics.

But it's the newer, artificial intelligence technology and sophisticated computer algorithms that enabled the researchers to look more deeply into what the EEGs show, Bosl said.

"Artificial intelligence gives us the ability to find patterns we might not find with our own eyes," Bosl said. "One of the difficulties with a disorder like autism is that it's very heterogenous. A very high-functioning person with autism might not be so different from a so-called 'normal' person who is quirky. Defining the differences may be somewhat subtle."

EEGs are also relatively inexpensive, painless and safe, Bosl said. And unlike MRIs, they require no sedation, so testing could be put to widespread use, he said.

"My hope is we would have a simple way of measuring brain activity in every child and see the patterns emerging that might track autism characteristics," Bosl said. "That would be tremendously useful. We know early intervention is extremely important. Right now, for a lot of children, that means 3 years old. What we don't know yet is if you can intervene at 9 or 12 months and how effective that could be."

Dr. Joshua Ewen, a neurologist and director of the clinical neurophysiology laboratory at the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, said the study is well done and looks promising, but needs to be replicated.

Also, the study predicted who was at high risk of autism, but it's unknown if those babies actually went on to develop autism, he noted.

"If it can eventually be shown that this technique can reliably identify which children will indeed develop autism, then we will have a valuable tool for early detection," Ewen said. "Early detection continues to be of critical importance, as it opens the door to early intervention, which has been shown to improve outcomes for children with autism."

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more on autism.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story spent the most time quoting the lead author, William Bosl from Children’s Hospital Boston. It also quoted Dr. Joshua Ewen, a neurologist and director of the clinical neurophysiology laboratory at the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore. We wish the story had made better use of Ewen and allowed him to help readers make sense of the study. His comments come too late to dampen the boosterism of Bosl hoping for every child to be hooked up to an EEG at nine months of age. Nonetheless, in citing an independent source, the story barely meets the criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUCSON, Ariz., Nov. 18, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- In a clinical trial conducted for HSRx Group, an Arizona-based biopharmaceutical company, the OTC acne treatment product HSRx 2121 significantly outperformed a market-leading product in reducing acne count, redness and severity.

The single-site, randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled comparative clinical study involved 90 subjects and calibrated results at 1, 2, 3, 7, 14, 28 and 42 days. The trial was conducted by Moore Clinical Research, Inc., an independent FDA-compliant contract research organization with considerable experience in acne product testing.

"For consumers desiring immediate results, HSRx 2121 is the clear choice," said Thomas Sullivan, Jr., Chief Executive Officer of HSRx Group. After 24 hours treatment, the percentage of subjects with reduced acne count was 64% greater for those using HSRx 2121 than for subjects using the competing product. At 24 hours, the percentage reduction in total acne count with HSRx 2121 was 20 times greater than it was for subjects using the competing product. "Acne sufferers' number one priority is getting rid of inflammatory lesions – pimples – fast," Sullivan said. "We demonstrated that with HSRx 2121."

After 48 hours, the percentage of subjects with unsightly acne-associated redness was reduced nearly three times as much with HSRx 2121 as with the competing product.

At seven days, the percentage of subjects exhibiting reduced severity was six times greater for those using HSRx 2121, compared to those using the competing product. The HSRx product demonstrated superior treatment performance throughout the entire clinical study. "That makes for a powerful marketing advantage," Sullivan said.

Acne treatment represents a vast global market estimated at $3-4 billion annually, with significant expansion expected among surging middle class populations in China and India. "Acne is a universal plague," said Frank Parise, HSRx Group Chief Financial Officer, citing a recent NASA warning that even the International Space Station harbors germs that can cause the disease. "Acne is among the 10 most prevalent human infectious diseases and recent studies show it has a significant long-term psychological impact on many of the 80+% of teenagers and young adults who suffer from it," he added.

"Our acne treatment product has enormous commercial potential, evidenced by the significant licensee interest it has attracted. As with each of our next generation OTC drug products, we intend to license HSRx 2121 to a leading marketing entity that has the resources and expertise to maximize sales, here and abroad," Parise said.

HSRx Group has developed a portfolio of next generation OTC drug products for many categories of common health conditions. Each product is subjected to independently conducted clinical trials against a current market-leading product to demonstrate its ability to deliver superior treatment outcomes with reduced side effects. All HSRx OTC drug products utilize natural ingredients in their formulations. HSRx out-licenses or joint-ventures its products with select marketing brands.

About HSRx Group

HSRx Group is a biopharmaceutical company developing next generation combination OTC and breakthrough drugs for the prevention and treatment of a broad group of chronic and infectious disease conditions. The HSRx technology integrates disease-fighting food nutrients with leading generic drugs to create multi-mechanism pharmaceutical products with long patent lives. Information is available at ‎HSRxGroup.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here. The release states that the trial was conducted by their pharma company HSRx Group and speaks openly about marketing. In fact, most of the release talks about what a great business opportunity it is and the potential for profit (vs. how it might impact the millions of sufferers): “The HSRx product demonstrated superior treatment performance throughout the entire clinical study.”That makes for a powerful marketing advantage,” Sullivan said.” And: “Our acne treatment product has enormous commercial potential, evidenced by the significant licensee interest it has attracted. As with each of our next generation OTC drug products, we intend to license HSRx 2121 to a leading marketing entity that has the resources and expertise to maximize sales, here and abroad,” Parise said.”
If you go to the website of the research organization you will find their acne study summaries (which interestingly DO mention the types of acne formulations used). Makes one wonder even more why the news release neglected to mention this.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Health.com) -- The makers of POM Wonderful pomegranate juice say that the drink improves blood flow and heart health, prevents and treats prostate cancer, and works 40 percent as well as Viagra (whatever that means). All for about four bucks a bottle.

Those impressive claims helped the company rack up $91 million in sales in 2009. They also earned the disapproval of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Last month, the agency sued POM Wonderful for making "false and unsubstantiated" health claims, and is asking the company to remove the claims from its ads.

A 100 percent juice drink that contains antioxidants (and no added sugar), POM is just one of many beverages that bill themselves as promoting better health. VitaminWater, kombucha tea, coconut water, and various brands of juice drinks made from acai, goji berry, and mangosteen have all used health claims in their marketing -- and some, like POM, have been the subject of scrutiny and legal action.

The FTC, along with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), has been cracking down on food and beverage makers for allegedly overselling the health benefits of their products. In 2009 alone, the FDA warned 17 companies that they were providing misleading nutritional information on their packaging or making overly specific health claims.

Health.com: 25 diet-busting foods you should never eat

Not all of the products were drinks, but "the beverage category stands out," says Bruce Silverglade, director of legal affairs at the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer advocacy group based in Washington, D.C. "At first blush it seems that beverage products are certainly a large proportion of food products that make bogus health-related claims."

Drinks such as POM have become increasingly popular with consumers in recent years, thanks in part to public health campaigns against soda that have been prompted by the obesity epidemic. "The trend is away from traditional soda pop [toward] products claiming to provide magical health benefits," Silverglade says.

Are the health claims true? Yes and no. The federal government doesn't require companies to vet health claims with the agency before plastering them on product packaging (as long as the claims are accompanied by a disclaimer about their uncertainty). But that doesn't mean the claims are invented -- most are based in research.

The research is often funded by the manufacturers, however, and industry-funded research can be prone to bias. A 2007 study found that research on health drinks that was funded entirely by beverage companies was between four and eight times more likely to find a favorable result than research with no industry support.

"If a cell phone company told you they tested all the models and their model came out the best, would you believe it? Probably not," says Dr. Lenard Lesser, M.D., one of the co-authors of that study and a researcher at UCLA. "The same is true with nutrition research, but the stakes are higher because we're putting our bodies at risk."

Where's the line between research and marketing?

However far-fetched the claims may sound, POM is standing behind them. (Two weeks before the FTC publicly announced its lawsuit, POM preemptively sued the FTC, claiming that preapproval of ads featuring health claims violates the company's right to free speech.)

But are shoppers really convinced that POM can unclog their arteries, cure cancer, and lead to hotter sex?

There seem to be more than a few believers out there. "

I started drinking POM after reading the studies two years ago, my triglycerides were almost 1000!," one of POM Wonderful's 12,000 fans breathlessly posted on Facebook after the FTC announced its lawsuit. "Working out everyday, drinking POM, and eating healthy, they are now less than 400. Forget what the Feds say! I believe!!!" (A triglycerides level of 400 is still nearly three times higher than what's considered normal.)

Most health beverage drinkers aren't as enthusiastic as the realtor from Alaska who posted the above testimonial. Quinton Ma, a 22-year-old marketing coordinator at Gawker Media, in New York City, started to drink VitaminWater as a middle schooler because it seemed like a healthy alternative to soda.

"I figured that if they were selling something that I could get extra vitamins from, it couldn't hurt to drink," Ma says. "Once I learned they were really just cleverly marketed sugar waters, I stopped."

Health.com: You are what you drink

But the fact is, even when people don't buy the health claims they often still buy the beverage. That's the paradox of products such as POM, Silverglade says: The health claims on these products strain the imagination, yet studies have repeatedly shown that health claims sell food.

That's because these claims -- however improbable they may seem -- distract shoppers from the real nutritional information and hook consumers with buzzwords like "antioxidant."

This phenomenon is known as a "health halo," an aura of healthfulness attached to a product based on labels like "low-fat" "all-natural" or "made with whole grains" that seduces consumers into overeating. According to a study by the FTC, this halo effect can even lead people to overlook warning statements -- about the high sodium content of a product, for example.

"A healthy halo develops around products like these," says Frances Largeman-Roth, R.D., Health magazine's senior food and nutrition editor. "The health-conscious consumer incorporates them into their lifestyle, thinking that they're doing a world of good for themselves."

The makers of POM Wonderful have spent $34 million on scientific research on POM products and pomegranates. According to the FTC's complaint, the studies POM has funded do not substantiate the company's claims, and a closer look at the research seems to bear that out.

One of the most prominent claims, that POM can decrease arterial plaque by 30 percent, was taken from a single pilot study that included just 19 people and was funded by the makers of POM. Another claim, that POM drinkers experience a 17 percent improvement in blood flow, was taken from another POM-funded study that included just 45 people and only lasted for three months.

"These days it's possible for a food company to pay just about anybody to conduct a study," says Silverglade.

Michael Aviram, Ds.C., a cholesterol researcher at Rambam Medical Center, in Haifa, Israel, defended his studies on pomegranates -- many of them funded by POM -- by noting that they were published in "very prestigious peer reviewed journals," including the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and Atherosclerosis. Dr. Harley Liker, M.D., a physician at UCLA Medical Center who has also led research funded by POM, directed all inquiries to a POM spokesman.

"A grocery store is a designed marketing environment to get people to buy things," says Lesser. "Lots of products are going to try to use health claims from research, often from their own industry, [just] to sell a product."

Health.com: 14 health products you probably don't need

Iffy health claims don't mean that products like pomegranate juice should be avoided at all costs, says Keri Gans, R.D., a spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association. As long as consumers limit themselves to 8-ounce servings and products with no added sugar, juice can be an excellent source of vitamins and other nutrients, Gans says. But it's "not going to solve any of your health issues," she adds.

The bottom line is that consumers shouldn't believe everything they read on labels. "If they focus on consuming an overall well-balanced diet, they might not need to focus so much on finding a product that makes false promises," Gans says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The diversity of voices in this story is a strong point. We hear from consumer advocates, industry and independent researchers, as well nutrition experts. One quibble is that comments from the industry-funded researchers are relegated to the very end of the story and they are made to sound like shills for POM. There’s nothing inherently wrong with industry-funded research, and these researchers can’t necessarily be held responsible for how the funding company portrays their findings. Whether pomegranate juice has health benefits is a question worth exploring; the problems arise when companies oversell or distort the results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This news release is available in French.

Montreal, October 7, 2015 -- Millions of people suffer from asthma. Many report having poor control of their symptoms. Fortunately, new research shows there is a simple antidote: 30 minutes of exercise a day, year-round.

In a study recently published in BMJ Open Respiratory Research, experts from Concordia University, the Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal and several other institutions* analyzed the exercise habits of 643 participants who had been diagnosed with asthma.

Results were overwhelmingly clear: those who engaged in optimal levels of physical activity on a regular basis were nearly two-and-a-half times more likely to have good control of their symptoms, compared with those who did no exercise.

The workout doesn't have to be strenuous. "We're not talking about running marathons here," says Simon Bacon, the study's lead author and a professor in the Department of Exercise Science at Concordia. "Just 30 minutes a day of walking, riding a bike, doing yoga -- anything active, really -- can result in significant reduction of asthma symptoms."

Traditionally, people with the condition have been discouraged from exercising because of a belief that it triggers shortness of breath and attacks. Bacon explains that simple precautionary measures can be taken to avoid the discomforts that can be caused by physical activity.

"The issue of exercise-induced bronchospasm is real -- but if you use your releaver medication, blue puffer, before you exercise, and then take the time to cool down afterwards, you should be okay," he says. "Even if you have asthma, there's no good reason not to get out there and exercise."

That's a message Bacon hopes resonates. Within his sample group of 643 individuals, a whopping 245 reported doing no physical activity. Only 100 said they engaged in the optimal 30 minutes a day.

"Those numbers reflect the population in general," says Bacon, who is also director of the Centre de réadaptation Jean-Jacques-Gauthier at Hopital du Sacré-Coeur. Forty per cent of people don't exercise at all, he says.

"We need to keep in mind that doing something is better than nothing, and doing more is better than less. Even the smallest amount of activity is beneficial."

It's something to keep in mind during winter months, when fitness levels tend to drop along with the temperature, and cold air provides another trigger for asthma symptoms.

"Our study shows that those who were able to engage in physical activity on a regular basis year-round benefit most," says Bacon. If necessary, he suggests finding an indoor place to move, whether it's the gym, a staircase or a shopping mall.

"It's all about being creative and finding environments where the cold doesn't become an issue."

Could a prescription for exercise be the result of this study Bacon is hopeful. "It would be great to see physicians recommending physical activity to patients with asthma, alongside traditional pharmacological treatments," he says.

Partners in research: Funding support for this study was provided by grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, Fonds de recherche du Quebec - Sante, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Michel Auger Foundation of Hopital du Sacre-Coeur de Montreal.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states the funding sources, which were grants from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council, Fonds de recherche du Quebec – Sante, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Michel Auger Foundation of Hopital du Sacre-Coeur de Montreal. No conflicts of interests were declared, both in the original journal article and in the news release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CINCINNATI--Following a concussion or mild traumatic brain injury (TBI), patients may suffer from light sensitivity or photophobia, making it challenging to return to normal activities. The sensitivity may also trigger or exacerbate headaches.

While sunglasses can provide some relief from photophobia, wearing them all the time is not always a practical solution, nor is it pleasant for patients to live in a dark room for days at a time. A new study from the University of Cincinnati (UC), published online this week in the Journal of Athletic Training, assessed the use of colored lenses in post-concussion patients and found wearing certain color-tinted sunglasses may be a good alternative to dark sunglasses.

"While sunglasses can provide some relief, they are not very practical indoors or in low light environments," says Joe Clark, PhD, professor in the Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine at the UC College of Medicine and lead author of the study. "What is needed is a light mitigation strategy that can be readily employed indoors, which can optimize relief in those who suffer from photophobia, or light sensitivity."

Clark and researchers at the College of Medicine assessed visual symptoms of 51 concussion patients and used frames with varying colored lenses to find out if certain hues provided relief from photophobia.

"We found that 85 percent of patients reporting photophobia had relief of the symptoms with one or more colors-- blue, green, red and purple--with no reported adverse events," Clark says.

"Sensitivity to light can be common and impact activities of daily life suggesting that light mitigation might improve quality of life in many of these patients. Photophobia is a common symptom for patients following traumatic brain injury. Our goal in this study was to provide medical staff like athletic trainers with a method and means to assess and subsequently provide relief to an athlete who may be experiencing symptoms of photophobia," Clark adds.

The goal is to help the concussion patient feel better as the brain heals. "We compare the colored glasses to being like a brace or cast but for the brain," he says. "It is temporary but prevents further injury or pain."

At least 3.8 million people in the United States sustain a concussion or traumatic brain injury every year, many not for the first time. As with many other health conditions, the presentation of concussion symptoms can vary greatly--while some individuals exhibit very little to no change in functionality and may report no symptoms at all, others may report confusion, headache, decreased balance and vision disturbances including blurry vision, trouble focusing and sensitivity to light.

Photophobia is so common that many neurosurgical intensive care units consider it standard operating procedure to keep lights dimmed in rooms containing TBI patients says Clark.

In addition to trying colored-lens sunglasses, the article suggests other ways to mitigate photophobia including wearing a wide-brimmed hat when outdoors, adjusting digital screen and device settings to an appropriate hue and brightness or purchasing filters for screens. However, the researchers noted, they do not recommend wearing colored glasses while driving. Certain colors make seeing stop lights or emergency vehicle lights difficult.

"We believe that an athletic trainer, in consultation with team physicians, may find it useful to apply this photophobia assessment and recommend colored glasses to his or her athlete," Clark says. "The use of the colored glasses in the high school, college or other setting can allow a person to engage in some medically approved activities, while minimizing the risk of symptom exacerbation. We believe the use of the colored glasses that provide photophobia mitigation has added benefits superior to dark sunglasses, especially for indoor lighting."

Additional researchers on the study include Jon Divine, MD, a professor in the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery at the UC College of Medicine and head team physician for University of Cincinnati Athletics.

There was no funding used for this study.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release states, “There was no funding used for this study.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dressed in street clothes, Tara Cassidy Driscoll lies face-down on an examining table at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Orthopedic surgeon George Theodore is about to blast her foot with powerful shock waves generated by sound.

After numbing her foot with Novocain, Theodore turns on an expensive German-made machine that beams tightly focused sound energy at Cassidy Driscoll's heel, near the point where her painful plantar fascia attaches to the heel bone. Suddenly the room is filled with the rhythmic click-click-click of a metronome.

It's a kind of paradox: Theodore is damaging her foot in order to heal it.

"The shocks are like a little baseball bat hitting the tissue," Theodore says. "It's producing a little bit of a repair process -- a little microbleeding."

The healing process takes place over several months after the shock-wave therapy, which Theodore does in a single treatment. [Other centers use lower-energy shock waves over several treatments.]

Theodore has been doing the shock-wave therapy for plantar fasciitis for about eight years, after longer experiences in Europe. It's the same technology used since the 1980s to blast kidney stones, an application called lithotripsy, but for foot problems doctors use less intense shock waves.

Shock-wave therapy for plantar fasciitis is beginning to catch on around the U.S., partly since this stubborn type of foot pain is so common -- and so difficult to treat. Nearly 2 million Americans seek care for plantar fasciitis (pronounced PLAN-tar FASH-ee-EYE-tus) every year.

Theodore tells Cassidy Driscoll that shock-wave therapy gives her a 60 to 80 percent chance of reducing her pain by half; about one-quarter of patients will become pain-free from the treatment.

After the 20-minute treatment, Cassidy Driscoll says she felt no pain, only a sort of tapping. She gets off the table, walks out of Theodore's office and drives herself home. Two days later, she says her foot felt bruised, but she didn't have enough pain to require medication.

Cassidy Driscoll will pay $1,000 for the treatment. Elsewhere the charge can range from $500 to several thousand dollars. But most insurers won't pay for it, because they consider it experimental.

Studies have given conflicting results, partly because there's no standardized way of doing shock-wave therapy. Different doctors use different sources of energy, different doses and a differing number of treatments.

"Is it rock-solid science that everyone agrees on? I would say no," says Dr. Naven Duggal, another Harvard orthopedic surgeon at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

Duggal is not impressed with reported success rates.

"Sixty to 80 percent [success] for something that somebody's not going to get guaranteed pain relief -- in my mind, it's not something I would go for," Duggal says.

Duggal says foot specialists don't really know what causes the pain of plantar fasciitis.

The plantar fascia is a tough, rubber-band-like structure on the bottom of the foot.

It has to be strong, because every time the foot strikes the ground, the plantar fascia bears the body's full weight. In high-impact activities like running, the forces even exceed the actual weight because it's so concentrated in a narrow spot where the fascia attaches to the heel bone. That's presumably why sufferers of plantar fasciitis feel the pain in the heel.

Concepts of what plantar fasciitis is have changed in recent years. Doctors used to think it occurred because the fascia became inflamed –- in fact, the suffix "-itis" denotes inflammation. But while inflammation can be involved in plantar fasciitis, it doesn't seem to be the cause, Duggal says.

Many think that plantar fasciitis is caused by heel spurs, bony hook-like growths that develop on many people's heels due to stress. But specialists don't think that anymore.

As ideas of what plantar fasciitis is change, so have treatments. Doctors don't do surgery for it anymore except in rare cases, largely because they've found surgery often makes people worse off.

"Patients have to be patient," Duggal says. "They have to understand that this condition unfortunately is not fully understood."

He's interested in another experimental treatment that's just entering clinical trials. It's called platelet-rich plasma, and it involves isolating blood cells called platelets from patients' own blood and injecting them into the plantar fascia. Though platelets are best known for their role in initiating blood clots, they also contain growth factors. So the hope is that platelet injections will stimulate healing without the damaging effects of shock-wave therapy. But it will be some years before that approach is proven -- or not.

Meanwhile, foot specialists and their patients are left with a smattering of low-tech treatments that they say all plantar fasciitis patients should try, whether or not they eventually go on to shock-wave therapy.

-- Icing the bottom of the foot, sometimes using ice to massage the heel area

-- Using cups made of gel in shoes to cushion the heel (and many orthopedic surgeons say expensive custom-made orthotics are not necessary)

-- Wearing a night splint, a simple brace that holds the foot in a flexed position to keep the plantar fascia stretched during sleep

-- Physical therapy, though some studies indicate that some PT practices such as ultrasound and whirlpool are not helpful

-- Use of NSAID (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory) drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen

-- Corticosteroid injections into the heel, though this is controversial and should not be used repeatedly

-- Backing off activities like running until the pain goes away, and then reinitiating them gradually

About 90 percent of sufferers will get better with time. Duggal says he advises patients to try a combination of these measures for at least a year.

Karen Firestone, a 54-year-old Boston businesswoman and avid runner, says that techniques like stretching, icing and taping were effective for her. She started having plantar fascia pain last summer, and on Duggal's advice has been diligent about doing everything she can to heal the problem.

"The stretching, the icing, the taping -- I do all these little pieces of help for my body, and it responds," Firestone says. "So I think people should take that message and go with it."

After a few months, she's back to running -- but shorter distances. And she stops whenever her heel pain acts up.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story finds experts on both sides of this issue and gives them each a reasonable amount of air time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 4, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Among men under 65 with early stage prostate cancer, those who have the prostate gland removed are less likely to die than those who adopt a "watchful waiting" approach, according to a new long-term study out of Europe.

But the findings are not likely to be practice-changing, said Dr. Richard E. Greenberg, chief of urologic oncology at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, who was not involved with the study.

"This is relatively early stage disease, and it shows what we would expect it to show: that those who have more years [to live] have better survival if treated aggressively," he said.

Men with prostate cancer face a confusing maze of options today, including not only surgery but hormone therapy, different kinds of radiation therapy and even simply foregoing medical treatment while monitoring the cancer closely ("watchful waiting," also known as "active surveillance").

"Watchful waiting" is often recommended when a man is not expected to die of the cancer and would like to avoid the risk of the debilitating side effects associated with prostate cancer treatment. These may include: incontinence and erectile dysfunction (surgery); erectile dysfunction and secondary cancers (radiation therapy); nausea, breast growth, liver problems (hormonal therapy); and weakness, hair loss, fluid retention (chemotherapy).

The data presented in the May 5 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine is a 15-year follow-up of a study for which three-years of follow-up had previously been reported.

The earlier study also found that undergoing a radical prostatectomy lowered the risk of the cancer spreading, as well as the death rate from prostate cancer or any other cause.

The researchers, Drs. Anna Bill-Axelson and Lars Holmberg of University Hospital, Uppsala, and colleagues, enrolled nearly 700 men with early prostate cancer under the age of 75 who were randomly selected either to undergo a radical prostatectomy or to stay in "watchful waiting" mode.

After an average follow-up of about 13 years, 14.6 percent of the men who had undergone surgery had died, versus 20.7 percent in the watchful waiting group, a 38 percent reduced risk.

The benefit was primarily seen among men younger than 65 and the authors estimated that seven men under the age of 65 and 8 over the age of 65 would need to be treated to save one life.

There was also a benefit in men whose tumors had low-risk characteristics.

Men whose cancer had moved outside of the prostate gland and who underwent removal of the prostate had a seven times higher risk of dying than men whose tumors hadn't spread.

Radical prostatectomy can come with a price -- including erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence and even bowel incontinence -- although these effects are not as common as techniques improve. A nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy, for example, may be able to prevent erectile dysfunction.

Also, the men in this study were diagnosed only after they had symptoms, unlike the majority of men in the United States, Greenberg said.

"The advantage of screening is that men are more likely to be cured of cancer but they also have a greater chance of not succumbing to the consequences of the surgical complications, whether [those] be erectile dysfunction or urinary incontinence," Greenberg said.

Also, he said, erectile dysfunction can also be a factor of aging and can be treated in most cases.

But much remains to be known about how best to treat different types of prostate cancer.

"The management of early stage prostate cancer continues to require further randomized controlled studies, which are underway, to determine the true benefit of treatment versus expectant management," said Dr. Marc Danziger, an attending urologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, who was not involved with the study.

"Currently, the potential benefit and side effects of treatment needs to be addressed on an individual basis in relation to the risk stratification of disease, patient desires, health status and risk tolerance," Danziger added.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer treatments.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two clinicians who were not involved in the study provided quotes which were used in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Jan. 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Preliminary findings suggest a drug used to treat another disease might also reduce painful flare-ups in gout patients starting new medication regimens.

In a new study, the protein-inhibitor drug rilonacept (Arcalyst) appeared to markedly lower the risk of gout flare-ups during the first few months of treatments aimed at lowering uric acid levels.

While effective in lowering the risk for gout attacks in the long-term, uric acid-lowering treatment can initially boost the risk for flare-ups as it breaks up and releases the uric acid crystal deposits at the source.

"To reduce deposits of crystals in the joints, we advise patients to initiate treatment with medications that lower levels of uric acid in the blood," study author Dr. H. Ralph Schumacher, Jr., a professor of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, said in a journal news release.

Gout, a debilitating and painful form of inflammatory arthritis, now affects upwards of 8.3 million Americans, according to the release. Flare-ups , which involve excruciating joint pain, redness, swelling and warmth, can last days or weeks.

The researchers wanted to learn if rilonacept could lower this short-term risk for by neutralizing a specific target protein -- interleukin 1 or IL-1 -- before it initiates inflammation.

They looked at 83 gout patients in 27 U.S. study centers who had a history of gout flare-ups and high levels of uric acid. All were placed on a chronic uric-acid lowering regimen of the standard drug allopurinol.

About half were also given an initial double-dose injection of rilonacept (320 milligrams) followed by a single dose for 16 weeks. The other half received sugar pills.

Rilonacept patients were less likely to have flare-ups, with 15 percent experiencing flare-ups three-months into the study compared with 45 percent among the non-rilonacept group, the researchers found.

"Well-tolerated drugs that reduce the risk of gout flares when initiating uric-acid lowering therapy could make patients more likely to continue important long-term treatments that control gout," Schumacher said in the release.

"(And) this trial provides well-controlled evidence that this IL-1 blocker is effective in preventing acute gout flares in this setting," he added. "Rilonacept appears safe and well tolerated and could increase patient adherence to long-term urate-lowering therapy."

The study appeared online Jan. 5 in the journal Arthritis & Rheumatism.

Dr. Michael A. Becker, a professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Chicago, described the findings as "very promising." However, he cautioned that the high cost of rilonacept will most likely curtail its use.

"This is a very expensive drug," he said. "And insurance will be an issue. So I think you will have to carefully justify its use and define the universe of patients who are likely to be treated with it."

"But there are a number of patients who can't take a less expensive alternative, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, because of their kidney function or ulcer disease," Becker noted. "So for this population of patients who can't tolerate cheaper medications, rilonacept may be a necessary indication."

For more on gout, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent expert is quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
GAITHERSBURG, Md. -- An experimental therapy with humble beginnings as a Chinese herbal remedy is generating excitement among researchers battling HIV when doctors are concerned about the ability of the virus to thwart drugs designed to fight it.

As the International AIDS Conference convenes next week, there are more than 20 drugs available to suppress the virus and at least 82 additional HIV therapies in development. But as quickly as drug companies find ways to sabotage HIV, the virus develops a new survival strategy. Nearly 30 percent of HIV-positive Americans have viral infections that were resistant to at least one drug in the multidrug cocktails that keep them alive.

``We desperately need new compounds with novel mechanisms of action," said Eric Freed, chief of the virus-cell interaction section of the HIV Drug Resistance Program of the National Cancer Institute.

That's why some patients, doctors, and researchers are excited about an experimental drug based on an herb known by the Latin name Syzigium claviflorum that had been used in Taiwan to treat diarrhea and stop bleeding. Now its derivative is being tapped to fight HIV by a small Watertown-based biotechnology company.

If approved by the Food and Drug Administration, bevirimat, developed by Panacos Pharmaceuticals Inc., would represent the first in a new class of drugs that uses an unusual approach to block maturation of the virus that causes AIDS.

The HIV virus can't make copies of itself; instead it hijacks a human cell to borrow its replication machinery. Bevirimat interrupts the process at a key stage, resulting in harmless, immature HIV copies that the body quickly flushes. The therapy is exciting, AIDS specialists say, even though it is at least three years from market, because it could offer a completely new tool to combat a 25-year-old foe.

And, bevirimat works later in the virus life cycle than protease inhibitors, which have been the mainstay of AIDS therapy. That hints at the opportunity to use bevirimat in potent combination with existing drugs, said Dr. Daniel R. Kuritzkes, director of AIDS research at Brigham and Women's Hospital and an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School.

Bevirimat is being developed as physicians begin to use drugs from different classes in combination to fight the virus at different steps in its life cycle.

``We can, once again, get control of virus replication in patients with the most advanced disease who are resistant to other drugs and really have a major impact on the course of disease and on survival in these patients," said Kuritzkes, who is a paid consultant to Panacos.

Such new therapies could prove effective when given in combinations of specific classes.

``It's only when we started giving people three drugs from at least two different classes that we really started making an impact," said Kenneth Mayer, medical research director at Boston's Fenway Community Health and a Brown University professor of medicine.

In 2003, roughly 1.2 million Americans lived with acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and another estimated 40,000 Americans are newly infected with the human immunodeficiency virus each year, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

But therapies have been improving steadily. By the calculations of researchers at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, people who started AIDS therapy in 2003 lived an estimated 13 years longer than people diagnosed with AIDS in 1988.

Experimental AIDS therapies in clinical trial or awaiting FDA approval hint at more life-saving benefits, like the once-a-day AIDS pill that the agency hailed last month as the ``holy grail" of drug development because it simplifies drug delivery in developing nations. The experimental therapies include drugs that bolster the body's ability to block the doorways that HIV uses to enter cells, that enhance the body's ability to neutralize the virus, and that limit the damage caused by HIV infection.

Panacos estimates its drug could garner $500,000 to $1 billion in peak annual sales from a drug candidate initially spotted by a professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill who was screening natural products in search of potential HIV therapies.

``There aren't many new mechanism drugs," Graham P. Allaway, Panacos president, said during an interview at the company's research-and-development facility here. ``So far, it looks potent, and it has a great safety profile."

In June, bevirimat entered a crucial, multicenter clinical trial that tests escalating doses of the drug in combination with antiretroviral therapy. If all goes well, the trial could enroll up to 144 patients.

``The proof of the pudding is always what happens when you give it to people and look at what the potency of the antiviral effect is," said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health. ``Preliminary results actually indicated that there is the effect that you'd be interested in."

Diedtra Henderson can be reached at dhenderson@globe.com.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Researchers and physicians who work with HIV/AIDS therapies are cited to provide perspective on this potential new drug treatment. Sources who are paid consultants for Panacos Pharmaceuticals are appropriately noted. Some appropriate attempt at balance is provided by the concluding quote from Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institutes of Health. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Evivo's quick and non-invasive test measures the presence of markers that indicate low or high levels of good Bifidobacterium , such as acetate and lactate. A stool sample containing high levels of these markers will be strong enough to change the test's liquid display from pink to yellow, indicating high levels of Bifidobacterium. The liquid will remain pink if a sample has low levels of acetate and lactate, indicating that Bifidobacterium is missing and that key nutrients from breast milk, human milk oligosaccharides (HMO), are being wasted. Evivo has commenced rigorous clinical trials with the prototype to demonstrate the results from infant stool samples.

Point-of-Care Diagnostic Expert Turns Focus to the Infant Gut

The development of the prototype is led by Dr. Bethany Henrick, Ph.D., Director of Immunology and Diagnostics for Evivo. With more than a decade of experience designing and creating rapid, point-of-care diagnostics, Henrick was formerly an integral part of the team that developed and optimized the world's fastest point-of-care HIV test in 2005.

"This is the first and only point-of-care screening test designed to identify infants that do not have enough Bifidobacterium levels to create a stable infant gut microbiome," said Dr. Henrick. "With recent research indicating most babies born after 1980 do not acquire Bifidobacterium at birth, our ability to detect significant levels of Bifidobacterium gives pediatricians and parents an immediate indication of whether or not their baby has this beneficial gut bacteria that set them up for lifelong health."

Identifying a Disappearing, Yet Critical Piece of Gut Health

Dr. Henrick's previously published findings, which are the basis for the Evivo test, show an inverse correlation between rising infant fecal pH, reduced acetate and lactate, and lower levels of beneficial Bifidobacterium, proving that the infant gut microbiome has been rapidly changing over the last three generations. In the past, babies acquired Bifidobacterium from their mother during childbirth, but due to the increased use of modern medical practices such as antibiotics, C-sections and formula feeding, nine out of 10 babies born in the U.S. today no longer acquire it. The generational loss of this good bacteria in the infant gut allows for potentially harmful bacteria such as E. Coli and Clostridia to thrive, which are linked to higher risk of short- and long-term health issues such as colic, eczema, allergies, diabetes, and obesity.

"Currently there is no way to easily determine whether a baby is colonized with healthy bacteria," said Mark Underwood, M.D., Chief of Neonatology at UC Davis Medical Center. "The ability to quickly measure levels of Bifidobacterium in a stool sample would enable pediatricians to identify babies with low levels of these beneficial bacteria and take appropriate action."

Evolve BioSystems' Evivo is the only baby probiotic clinically proven to restore Bifidobacterium to a baby's gut and reduce potentially harmful bacteria by 80 percent. In a landmark clinical trial, Evivo produced rapid, substantial and persistent stabilization of the infant gut microbiome, to help set a foundation for life-long health.

About Evolve BioSystems

Evolve BioSystems, Inc. is a privately-held microbiome company dedicated to developing the next generation of products to establish, restore, and maintain a healthy gut microbiome. Evolve recently completed a $40M Series C round of funding co-led by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Horizons Ventures, the venture division of the Li Ka Shing Foundation.

Evolve is a spin-out from the Foods for Health Institute (FFHI) at the University of California, Davis and builds on more than a decade of research into understanding the unique partnership of the infant gut microbiome and breast milk components. Having led to the development and commercial launch of products to resolve newborn gut dysbiosis, including Evivo® for infants, Evolve's discovery platform is now being applied to solving gut dysbiosis throughout the human life cycle. In addition to the landmark proof-of-concept trial, Evolve is undertaking further clinical studies to build out its suite of microbiome-based solutions.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The Evivo stool test is clearly described as owned by Evolve Biosystems, Inc., and that company’s associations and funding are similarly made clear.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 2, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- There's still no cure for the common cold, but there may be a way to shorten its misery: A new study suggests that higher doses of zinc lozenges in certain formulations may cut the length of colds by more than 40 percent.

Researcher Dr. Harri Hemila, of the University of Helsinki in Finland, reviewed 13 placebo-controlled trials examining the effect of zinc lozenges on cold infections. Three of them found that zinc acetate in daily doses of more than 75 milligrams (mg) shortened colds' duration by 42 percent, on average.

Five trials using zinc salts other than acetate in daily doses greater than 75 mg shortened colds by an average of 20 percent, while another five using less than 75 mg per day produced no effect.

"Much of the variation in the published study findings can be explained by the daily dose of zinc administered in the zinc lozenges," said Hemila, who funded the research himself. "When focusing on those studies which have used large daily doses of zinc, there is strong evidence that zinc lozenges shorten the duration of colds."

The study is published in The Open Respiratory Medicine Journal.

Despite the popularity of zinc supplements, controversy over their effectiveness has continued since a much-publicized 1984 study first suggested a cold-limiting effect. Allowing the lozenge to dissolve instead of swallowing it seemed to provide a therapeutic effect. Since then, more than a dozen studies have been carried out, but data on the trace mineral's effectiveness has been mixed.

All of the trials examined by Hemila compared zinc lozenges to placebos. While surprised to note how strong the correlation was between daily doses of zinc and its effect on colds' duration, he said he and his colleagues still don't know why it seems to work.

"In the evidence-based medicine framework, we are primarily interested in the question whether there is an effect, and how great, whereas the mechanism of the effect is a secondary issue," he said.

No prior studies showed zinc lozenge use -- even up to 150 mg per day -- might cause harm aside from bad taste or constipation, Hemila said, and the most recent trial on zinc acetate indicated no significant differences between zinc and placebo groups in adverse effects even though the daily zinc dose was 92 mg.

Dr. Lisa Winston, an epidemiologist at San Francisco General Hospital, praised the study as a "pretty good synthesis of the data," although she noted that the trials Hemila reviewed involved small numbers of participants.

"It's an area of controversy and question . . . but I don't think the evidence is strong enough, nor do I think the author is suggesting, that we can base clinical practice on it," said Winston, also an associate professor in the University of California-San Francisco Department of Medicine. "I would tell my patients we still don't have a cure [for the common cold], and we don't know if zinc works."

The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more about the common cold.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes the author of the original journal article and one expert. Neither of these appear to have conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Most doctors opt for screening women for cervical cancer more often than guidelines suggest, according to a new study.

Researchers based at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found that many primary care doctors would bring women back for cancer screening annually — while recommendations generally call for a three-year wait after normal tests.

That means more costs to women and the healthcare system, as well as a risk of unnecessary treatment for false-positive test results — with very little additional cancer-catching benefit.

“There’s really no advantage to annual screening compared to screening every two or three years,” lead author Katherine Roland told Reuters Health.

Guidelines from the American Cancer Society and other organizations recommend that women age 30 and older are screened using Pap smears and tests for the human papillomavirus, or HPV.

If both tests are normal, those guidelines call for a three-year wait before the next screening. That’s because HPV — which causes changes in the cervix that can lead to cancer — may take a decade to progress to that point.

“No test is perfect,” said Philip Castle, an HPV expert at the American Society for Clinical Pathology in Chicago. But, he added, “a single negative HPV test is very good at ruling out disease.”

Even when doctors use just a Pap test, Roland said, a woman who has had a few normal tests in a row can go two or three years before her next screening.

For the current study, she and her colleagues sent out questionnaires to a representative sample of about 600 office-based doctors and hospital departments around the country. They asked doctors and staff what tests they used for cervical cancer screening and presented them with three patient scenarios.

In those scenarios, a woman age 30 to 60 has had two consecutive normal Pap tests but no HPV tests; two normal Paps and a negative HPV test; or a negative HPV test but no recent Pap tests.

In all of those cases, guidelines recommend waiting three years before screening the patient again, the authors explain in the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. But for each scenario, between 67 percent and 85 percent of doctors said they would bring the woman back in a year.

Roland pointed to the extra costs women may incur to get childcare and make it to the doctor’s office — plus the costs to a strained healthcare system of ordering more tests.

And any extra screening increases the chance of getting a “false positive” result on a test — meaning the test finds something that doesn’t turn out to be cancer. In that case, women would need more invasive tests to rule out disease, Roland said, and risk “undue harm” from those procedures.

“Some of it is, don’t go looking before you need to go looking because you’ll find stuff that you’d rather not find,” said Castle, who was not involved in the new study.

Results from a survey of the same doctors have shown that many also give the HPV test alongside Pap smears to women under 30 — which is not recommended, because HPV is common in young women and often goes away on its own (see Reuters Health story of July 4, 2011.)

Castle said there could be a few reasons that doctors opt to screen women more often than is recommended. First, they might not know about the guidelines. But women may also be used to annual testing and ask for it themselves.

In addition, Roland added, some doctors might be afraid of missing very early cervical cancer and getting sued if they screen less frequently.

But if doctors and hospitals want to rein in spending and limit unnecessary risks, that attitude has to change, researchers agreed.

“We need to shift toward the wellness visit as opposed to, ‘You have to come in here every year for a Pap,’” Castle said.

Women should talk to their doctors about screening, especially if they think they are being screened too often, researchers added.

“A woman should know what test is being used,” said Dr. Mona Saraiya, a co-author on the new study. “Often a provider just does the HPV test” without telling the patient. “A woman should say, ‘What screening tests are you doing on me?’”

And if doctors want women to come back again next year, women should ask them why, Saraiya said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent expert from the American Society for Clinical Pathology was interviewed – someone not involved in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ever since she was an infant, Reagan Roberts could not tolerate being anywhere near cow's milk. A mere sip would leave her vomiting and gasping for breath. If she were even touched by someone with milk on their hands, she would break out in hives and a bright red rash.

"We just had to keep her away from milk," said Reagan's mother, Lissa. "We couldn't have it around the house. At preschool she had to sit by herself. We brought her food to birthday parties. We couldn't go to restaurants. It was very hard."

Today, however, Reagan, 9, of Ellicott City, can drink as much milk as she wants and eat anything.

"She eats ice cream. She eats cheese. She eats yogurt. She drinks chocolate milk. She eats any food anybody else can," Lissa Roberts said. "It's a miracle."

Reagan is one of a small number of children who have undergone an experimental treatment that is showing promise for treating milk, peanut and other food allergies. The approach, known as oral immunotherapy, involves slowly desensitizing the immune system by painstakingly ingesting increasing amounts of whatever triggers the reaction.

"It's pretty encouraging," said Robert A. Wood, chief of pediatric allergy and immunology at Johns Hopkins, who led the study that Reagan participated in at the Hopkins Children's Center in Baltimore. "We've still got a long way to go, but I never thought we'd get this far."

Although the approach appears to be highly effective for some children with milk and peanut allergies, the researchers conducting the studies and others caution that much more research is needed to prove and perfect the approach and that it is far from ready for widespread use. No one should try the approach on his own, because the treatments themselves can trigger potentially life-threatening reactions.

"It's still very investigational," said Wesley Burks, chief of the division of pediatric allergy and immunology at Duke University, who has produced promising results in children with peanut allergies. "We're very hopeful. But there are lot of things we need to do to understand it better, make it more effective and make sure it's safe."

The strategy is being tested in a handful of small studies that are part of a surge of research in a field that for years showed little progress.

"There's been a substantial uptick in the amount of research," said Marshall Plaut of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which has more than doubled the funding for food-allergy research since 2007. "I think it's time to be cautiously optimistic."

In addition to the oral immunotherapy studies, scientists are in the early stages of testing an experimental suppository, a Chinese herbal remedy and variations of oral immunotherapy that might be safer and more effective.

"There's definitely been a spike in the amount of work going on," said Hugh A. Sampson, a professor of pediatrics, allergy and immunology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York who leads a federally funded consortium studying food allergies. "Five years ago there was almost nothing going on in people with respect to therapies, whereas now there are a variety of different therapies being looked at."

The spike in research has been driven by increasing evidence that food allergies are becoming more common, occurring earlier in life and lasting longer. About 12 million Americans are estimated to suffer from food allergies, including about 3 million children. Some evidence suggests that peanut allergies may have doubled in children in the past decade.

The reason for the trend is the subject of intense research and debate. There are several theories, including changes in how food is processed and children's not being exposed to certain foods early in life. Evidence has also been mounting for the "hygiene hypothesis," which blames growing up in increasingly sterile homes, making the immune system overreact to ordinarily harmless substances, including food.

Whatever the cause, researchers have long struggled to develop therapies. Food allergies can trigger symptoms ranging from rashes and hives to responses believed to cause perhaps 200 deaths each year in the United States. Currently, food-allergic people have only two options: to avoid the substance that causes their reaction or to try to stop a reaction with an injection of epinephrine.

That leaves parents of allergic children scouring food labels, avoiding restaurants, sending their children to school and parties with specially made food and snacks, and still worrying about inadvertent contact with peanuts, milk, eggs and other ubiquitous foods.

"It's hard to live," said Angie Duty of Durham, N.C., whose 9-year-old son, Sam, was intensely allergic to peanuts before undergoing the therapy as part of one Burks's studies. "Sam doesn't like to be different, but of course he is different and we have to explain that to him."

Although doctors have long used shots to desensitize people allergic to pollen and other substances, early attempts to do the same for food allergies ended in failure.

"The side effects were so great that they were as bad if not worse than the disease itself," Burks said.

But a small number of researchers in recent years have begun trying the approach again, this time by orally administering the protein in the food that triggers the allergic reaction.

With doctors standing by in case of a severe reaction, each study subject undergoes careful testing to determine the maximum dose he or she can safely tolerate. Once that is established, the participants are sent home to sprinkle that amount of purified protein on their food for a week or two; then they return to the research center in to see if the dose can be increased. The procedure is repeated for months or even years to slowly raise the amount they can safely consume.

"It's a way of sort of rerouting or tricking the immune system to no longer be allergic to that food," said Stacie Jones, chief of allergy and immunology at the Arkansas Children's Hospital, who has been working Burks to test the approach for peanut allergies.

In a study involving 19 children who were severely allergic to milk, Wood found that within four to six months most of the children significantly increased the amount of milk protein they could tolerate. After between about nine months and two years, about half of the children could safely consume as much milk or food containing milk as they wanted.

"These are children who could have died from a teaspoon of milk before," Wood said.

In March, Burks and Jones reported the results of a pilot study involving 33 children with peanut allergies. The children started by ingesting peanut protein powder equivalent to one one-thousandth of a peanut. Four of the children had to drop out because of allergic reactions, but six of nine children who underwent the treatment for 2 1/2 years have been able to stop the peanut powder and have now gone six to eight months without reacting to eating peanuts. "It's fabulous," said Janet Vande Berg of Durham, N.C., whose 9-year-old daughter, Caroline, can eat peanuts for the first time in her life. "It makes a huge, huge difference in the quality of life for both the kids and the families. It just takes the stress away."

The researchers are tracking the remaining children in the study to see if any others achieve similar results and have followed up with a more stringent study in which 13 children received a similar treatment and seven received a placebo.

After about 10 months, all seven children on the placebo were still allergic, whereas none of the 13 on the peanut powder had reactions when they were challenged. All the children are now receiving the treatment and are being followed to see if they remain desensitized and perhaps become "tolerant," meaning they no longer need to consume daily doses of peanuts or peanut protein to maintain their ability to eat peanuts freely.

"I think it's an important advance in the field," said the NIH's Plaut. "It's a small number of subjects, so it's hard to draw full-blown conclusions. But it's the first data that suggest you may be able to achieve something like this in food allergies."

It remains far from clear, however, what proportion of children will benefit, how long the benefit might last and what proportion will need to continue to consume at least some milk or peanuts every day to maintain their protection. While some children, such as Vande Berg, appear to completely lose their allergies, others seem to just be able to eat more of the milk or food before reacting. But even that can be helpful.

"We know this therapy at least protects them from accidental ingestion so they won't have a life-threatening reaction," said Jones, the Arkansas researcher. "At the very least it's providing some security for these families."

Burks and Jones are part of the federal consortium, which is studying the same approach for eggs at research institutions across the country, including Johns Hopkins, and conducting detailed immunological studies to try to get a better understanding of how the treatment works.

Meanwhile, researchers in London are studying 640 babies at high risk for food allergies to see if exposing them to peanuts early in life reduces their chances of developing the allergy in the first place.

"There are a lot of people putting ideas out there and producing some promising preliminary data," Plaut said. "That makes me think there will be some important developments in the future."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A broad range of experts in the field and a funding agency spokesperson were all quoted as sources of information for this story.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Restaurants, office parties, potlucks, meals while traveling -- they're a minefield for people with celiac disease and gluten sensitivity who can suffer from stomach pain and upset, swollen joints, and other debilitating health problems when they ingest even a little bit of gluten.

The maker of a new handheld gluten-detecting device hopes to help make eating outside of a gluten-sensitive individual's own kitchen safer and easier.

The company, 6SensorLabs, has started taking pre-orders for the device it calls Nima, which can test food for gluten and get rapid results, said co-founder and chief technology officer Scott Sundvor.

Nima is not FDA-approved and it's not intended for medical use, but the company intends it as a "consumer" tool to use when dining out, Sundvor said.

"One of the things that we wanted to make sure we distinguish is that we don't see ourselves as a medical device," Sundvor told CBS News. "So we do not need FDA clearance for the device because we are not using it to diagnose or manage disease. We're simply providing a product to help people know what's in their food and guide their habits."

Gluten-free diners can place a sample of food into a capsule or "test pod" and then insert the capsule into a black, triangular device that basically acts like a mini chemistry test. In about two minutes, Sundvor said Nima can tell if the food sample has 20 parts per million or more of gluten. A smiley face means it's OK; a frowning face means it doesn't pass muster.

As a point of reference, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration requires manufacturers who choose to put a "gluten free" label on food packaging to meet the same 20 parts per million of gluten standard.

Gluten is a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye. People with celiac disease experience an immune reaction when they eat gluten that can lead to intestinal damage and impact the health of other organs if it's not managed well. It can cause stomach pain, a swollen belly, acid reflux, diarrhea, skin problems, and other symptoms.

The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases estimates that about 1 in 141 Americans has celiac disease, but many people don't know they have the condition. Gluten-sensitive people experience similar symptoms to those with celiac disease and improve when they eliminate gluten from their diets.

Nima is triangular and relatively dainty, about three and a half inches tall by three inches wide, and a little less than an inch thick. "Small enough to fit into your pocket along with your keys and mobile phone or a small clutch," said Sundvor.

Nima was first conceived when Sundvor and company co-founder Shireen Yates met about two years ago and realized they both had gluten intolerance and other food issues.

"We met at MIT through mutual friends. She was getting her MBA and I'd gotten my engineering degree from there. We had this shared experience; Shireen has several food allergies and I also have several food intolerances. We both just had these issues where we'd eat out and get sick or feel uncomfortable," Sundvor said. "Shireen had the idea, 'Why can't I just test my food and figure out what's in it?' So we started talking about the idea and we researched the market and realized it's something we could make happen."

It costs $179 to pre-order a tester plus three one-time-use pods, and $47.95 for a refill pack of 12 pods; prices will increase later this month, according to the company's website. The company plans to deliver the product by the middle of next year after they've tested it more thoroughly, Sundvor.

Marilyn Grunzweig Geller, chief executive officer of the Celiac Disease Foundation, said she is not familiar with the new gluten-sensing device and was unable to comment on it directly.

"Certainly an FDA-approved device that could help people determine if they were accidentally ingesting gluten could go a long way to helping people and would be useful." However, she adds, "I would never comment on a device that's not FDA-approved."

She said she's anecdotally aware of a number of "treatments" for celiac disease and has heard of gluten sensors, but is skeptical.

As for Nima, Sundvor said, "We're doing a huge amount of testing and one thing we want to be sure of before we start shipping is that we're 99.9 percent accurate."

He said they have received Nima prototypes and he and his girlfriend, who has celiac disease, are already trying it out.

The company also aims to create similar versions that could test for peanut and dairy allergens, among other problematic ingredients. A Nima app is in the works, too, that he says will let users share information about restaurants and log their results.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Importantly, the article quotes the CEO of the Celiac Disease Foundation as skeptical about the value of gluten sensors in general, along with purported “treatments” for the disorders. And she makes clear that she “would never comment on a device that’s not FDA-approved.” Bravo!
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago — Local bans on artery-clogging trans fats in restaurant foods led to fewer heart attacks and strokes in several New York counties, a new study suggests.

The study hints at the potential for widespread health benefits from an upcoming nationwide ban, the authors and other experts say. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2015 gave the food industry until next year to eliminate artificial trans fats from American products.

New York City enacted a restaurant ban on the fats in 2007 and several counties in the state did the same. Hospital admissions for heart attacks and strokes in those areas declined 6 percent starting three years after the bans, compared with counties without bans. The results translate to 43 fewer heart attacks and strokes per 100,000 people, said lead author Dr. Eric Brandt, a Yale University cardiology fellow.

His study was published Wednesday in JAMA Cardiology.

Trans fats, also called partially hydrogenated oils, enhance food texture and structure. They were once commonly used to make restaurant fried chicken, French fries, doughnuts and other foods and found in grocery items including cookies, crackers and margarine.

These fats can boost blood levels of unhealthy cholesterol, increasing risks for heart problems. The FDA in 2006 required them to be listed on food labels and the food industry has been switching to healthier oils.

The researchers examined hospital admissions data from 2002 to 2013 in 11 New York counties that adopted bans and in 25 counties that did not. Admissions for heart attacks and strokes declined in all counties, going from more than 800 to less than 700 per 100,000 people, but the drop was steeper in counties that enacted bans.

Alice Lichtenstein, a heart and nutrition specialist at Tufts University’s Boston campus, said the results are encouraging but that other changes could have contributed, such as smoking bans and mandatory calories on menus.

Dr. Mark Creager, former American Heart Association president, said the results echo previous studies “and are consistent with the thinking of most scientists” on potential benefits of these bans.

“Policies such as these when adapted on a nationwide level will be good for our entire population,” said Creager, director of Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center’s heart center in Lebanon, New Hampshire.

Copyright 2017 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included two independent sources; we did not detect any undisclosed conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Cannabidiol, which is found in marijuana plants, reduced the number of convulsive seizures in children with a severe and often fatal epilepsy disorder, according to research published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine . Among children taking cannabidiol, the decrease in the frequency of convulsive seizures -- which involve a loss of consciousness, stiffened muscles and jerking movements -- was 23 percentage points greater than the decrease in seizures among children taking a placebo.

The study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled human trial, which is considered the gold standard test for any new medicine.

GW Pharmaceuticals, a company that is developing cannabidiol medicines, helped subsidize the study.

"After 3,800 years of cannabis use for epilepsy ... we finally have solid evidence," said Dr. Orrin Devinsky, lead author of the study and director of NYU Langone's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center. His own previous research indicates that cannabis was used as early as 1800 B.C. in Sumeria to treat epilepsy; neurologists of the Victorian period used Indian hemp, which is rich in cannabidiol, for the same purpose.

Despite the generally positive results, most study participants reported side effects that included vomiting, fatigue, diarrhea and some liver issues.

A total of 120 patients with Dravet syndrome, ranging in age from nearly 2 to 18 years old, were randomly assigned to receive either an oral solution of cannabidiol or a placebo for a 14-week period.

"Dravet syndrome is a severe childhood-onset epilepsy that causes multiple kinds of seizures, developmental delays, speech and language problems, behavioral issues and movement and balance problems," said Brandy Fureman, vice president of research and new therapies at the Epilepsy Foundation. She was not involved in the new study.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that disrupts electrical communication between neurons in the brain. Considered a spectrum disorder, different epilepsy syndromes are defined by clusters of symptoms or features and treated accordingly.

Existing epilepsy medications usually don't work for patients with Dravet, so "up to 20% of these children die from seizures before age 20 years," Devinsky explained.

Within the study, individual participants experienced convulsive seizures at a rate ranging from four per month, on average, to 1,717 per month.

During the 14-week study, frequency of convulsive seizures decreased from an average of 12.4 to 5.9 per month in the cannabidiol group, compared with 14.9 to 14.1 in the placebo group. On average, the change in seizure frequency amounted to a 39% decrease for the cannabidiol group patients, compared with a roughly 13% decrease among the placebo group.

Five percent of the children became entirely seizure-free during the 14-week study. Overall, parents in the cannabidiol group felt that they witnessed "significantly greater" positive changes in their children than parents in the placebo group.

However, there was a downside. Most (93%) of the cannabidiol patients reported side effects, though three-quarters of the placebo group patients did as well. Nine out of 61 cannabidiol group patients dropped out of the study, eight of them because of side effects, compared with just three of the 59 placebo group patients.

"Tiredness (somnolence or fatigue) was most common; others were decreased appetite, diarrhea and vomiting," Devinsky explained.

Based on the overall results, Devinsky believes CBD should be evaluated for epilepsy types beyond Dravet syndrome, which is caused by a genetic mutation and affects about one in 20,000 to 40,000 children in the United States.

"No one study decides an issue; the sample size is still relatively small (because this is a rare syndrome and so hard to study large numbers of cases) and the duration of treatment so far has been relatively short," Hall, who was not involved in the research, wrote in an email.

Still, Hall said the research, which carefully measured safety and efficacy for a "substantial" number of children, showed "clear evidence of benefits in reducing seizure frequency and severity over the duration of the trial."

"Interestingly, it looks similar to our other seizure medications in terms of efficacy and tolerability," Porter said. "So, sadly, not a home run for most patients but another tool in our treatment regimen."

The marijuana plant is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance. Scientific researchers studying cannabidiol must meet federal security requirements and follow federal practices. Some scientists have said these federal requirements have slowed research supporting medicinal benefits of the plant.

Porter believes the study may open the door to having "more thoughtful discussions with our patients about the efficacy and the side effects" of cannabidiol. "Hopefully, the FDA will see this as a sign it should be moved off of Schedule I. If it stays on Schedule I, we will have trouble getting it to our patients when it does become available."

Changing the schedule of a drug falls to the Drug Enforcement Administration or the Department of Health and Human Services. An interested party, such as a drug company, may also petition for the process to begin. The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institute of Drug Abuse provide guidance to the DEA when reviewing scientific evidence on which to base a schedule change.

He noted that generating more evidence of effective use is "a good thing."

The University of Queensland's Hall believes that boundaries between medical use of cannabinoids and the recreational use of cannabis by adults should not be blurred. "If future clinical trials confirm these promising results, then appropriate regulation will enable the drug to be safely used for medical purposes," he said.

The Epilepsy Foundation's Fureman said, "before publication of this trial, much of the clinical evidence about CBD's effects on people's seizures was uncontrolled and anecdotal." She added that the new study is "critically important" for the epilepsy community, which believes a CBD-based medical product would be a first-in-class therapeutic option.

On the need for more scientific research, all these experts agree.

As Devinsky said, "natural substances are not necessarily safe and effective. They need to be evaluated rigorously."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes four independent sources, a very high number for a story about a study like this. It also explains that the study was partially funded by a drug company trying to commercialize a cannabis-based drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
STOCKHOLM (Reuters) - Giving patients with a history of heart attacks a margarine enriched with omega-3 oils in addition to standard drugs appears to make no difference to their chances of having a repeat attack.

A 40-month study of more than 4,800 patients showed taking low doses of omega-3 fatty acids in margarine did not significantly reduce rates of serious heart attacks and other cardiovascular events, Dutch researchers said on Sunday.

The finding raised questions about the benefits of omega-3, which has been shown in previous studies to make for healthier hearts. The margarines used in the study were developed for the researchers by food and consumer goods giant Unilever.

Doctors, however, are unlikely to rush to change clinical practice. Many already prescribe omega-3 fish oil capsules, including GlaxoSmithKline’s Lovaza, to reduce triglycerides, a type of blood fat linked to clogged arteries.

“It will be viewed as a largely negative study and people who are enthusiasts for omega fatty acids will continue to be enthusiasts and people who are skeptics will continue to be skeptics,” said Scott Wright of the Mayo Clinic in the United States, who was not involved in the research.

Daan Kromhout of Wageningen University, who led the study, told the European Society of Cardiology the lack of efficacy might reflect the good background drug treatment patients were receiving, with 85 percent on cholesterol-lowering statins, as well as blood pressure and blood-thinning tablets.

“We found the cardiovascular mortality rate in the study population was only half that expected, probably because of their excellent treatment,” he said.

“This may also be why the rate of major cardiovascular events during follow-up was no lower in the fatty acid groups than in the placebo group.”

All the men and women in the Dutch study were aged between 60 and 80 and had suffered a heart attack roughly four years previously.

They were randomly assigned use of one of four margarines on bread instead of their regular spread — one containing no extra omega-3 fatty acids; one with 400 milligrams a day of extra eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA); one with 2 grams of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA); and one with a combination of EPA-DHA and ALA.

Fish like salmon, herring and sardine are a common source of EPA-DHA, while ALA is found in vegetables including soybeans, flax seeds and walnuts.

Despite the overall negative results, researchers did find there was a reduction in repeat heart attacks and other cardiovascular events in women who took ALA margarine, although this was not statistically significant. Diabetes patients also showed a possible benefit.

Unilever, whose margarine brands that contain omega-3 include Flora and I Can’t Believe It’s Not Butter, said the lack of benefit seen with EPA and DHA was surprising, considering the weight of evidence published to date.

“The results indicate that more investigation is required into the efficacy of vegetable omega 3, but do not question the current authoritative dietary recommendations and advices for omega 3 intakes on which our products are based,” the company said in a statement.

The results of the study, which was supported by the Netherlands Heart Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, and Unilever, were also published in the New England Journal of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  The story included quotes from one of the authors of the study and a clinician who was not connected with the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Over the past few decades, as breast cancer has increasingly been treated as a systemic disease, the number of surgeries performed on the most serious cases has plummeted. With better drugs and radiation techniques available, the proportion of women with Stage 4 breast cancer who had surgery dropped from 67.8 percent in 1988 to 25.1 percent in 2011, according to a study published Wednesday in the journal JAMA Surgery.

But the study raises an intriguing question about that approach. It shows that women who had surgery survived longer than those who didn't: a median of 28 months vs. 19 months. When the researchers examined a small subset of the group — those who survived 10 years — they found that 9.6 percent had chosen to have surgery while 2.9 percent had not.

"Maybe we need to revisit this question of surgery," said Mary C. Schroeder, an assistant professor in the College of Pharmacy at the University of Iowa and one of the authors of the study. "It may not be right for all women, but it may be better for some women than it was in 1995."

[He had a 3.5-pound tumor and months to live. Here's how he survived]

Previous research has reached the same conclusion, but a significant problem with this study and others like it is that they rely on retrospective data, looking back over any number of years, said Michael S. Sabel, the chief of surgical oncology at the University of Michigan, who was not involved in the newly published study. In retrospective research, it's impossible to filter out the countless reasons that a woman and her doctor might have made the decision to treat the cancer with or without surgery, leaving the conclusions unreliable for clinical decision-making, he said.

"It's premature to suggest, and it’s a difficult conversation to have with patients, that removing the breast will help them live longer in the face of Stage 4 disease," Sabel said.

Two small prospective studies have suggested no survival difference among women with Stage 4 breast cancer who have surgery and those who don't, he said. A large, randomized, prospective study currently being conducted by the Eastern Clinical Oncology Group should produce the most reliable data on the subject to date, he said.

In a Stage 4 case, cancer cells have left the breast, metastizing to bones or other organs, which presents a more dire and immediate threat to a woman's survival than the presence of the original tumor. Still there may be reasons to remove the cancer in the breast. Some evidence suggests that it may be influencing the woman's immunological response to her cancer. Or it could be continuously "seeding" the spread of cancer to other parts of the body.

In their study, Schroeder; Alexandra Thomas, a professor at Iowa's Carver College of Medicine, and others looked at 21,372 women from 1988 to 2011 who had Stage 4 breast cancer at the time of their original diagnosis and did not receive radiation as part of their first course of therapy. Their median age was 63.

[Cancer trials are changing. That could mean faster access to better drugs]

The researchers found that median survival for all of the women improved from 20 to 26 months as more sophisticated treatments and better imaging techniques developed over that time. As other research has shown, African American women were over-represented among women who have Stage 4 breast cancer at the time they are first diagnosed.

In interviews, Schroeder and Thomas stressed that each decision about whether to have surgery is based on many factors that only a woman and her doctors can assess, in particular how far the cancer has spread and how sick she is.

But with better therapies to control the cancer systemically and improved imaging that finds ever-smaller deposits of cancer in other parts of the body, it may be time to see whether surgery also can help increase the length of survival times, they said.

"Aggressive local therapy may benefit select women, such as those with an already established potential for durable remission," they wrote in their paper. That would include younger women whose cancers have not spread in great volume to other organs and who have certain kinds of cancers that respond better to drugs, Lisa Newman, medical director of the Henry Ford Health System's International Center for the Study of Breast Cancer Subtypes, said in an e-mail. Newman was not involved in the study.

"Theoretically...patients with metastatic breast cancer might benefit from surgery to remove the cancerous breast tumor in combination with medical therapies as a more complete reduction of their total body cancer burden," she added.

With $45 billion pledge to charity, Mark Zuckerberg and wife imagine ‘a world without suffering from disease’

The myth of sugar-free drinks, candy: Study shows they can wreak havoc on teeth, too

Modern men tend to overeat like cavemen as a way of showing off to women

For more health news, you can sign up for our weekly newsletter here.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The Washington Post report interviews two independent sources – the chief surgical oncologist at the University of Michigan and the medical director of a breast cancer center – and their comments bring a much needed critical perspective to the piece.
No conflicts of interests are reported, both in the original research article and in the Washington Post story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Chicago) - Eating a meal of seafood or other foods containing omega-3 fatty acids at least once a week may protect against age-related memory loss and thinking problems in older people, according to a team of researchers at Rush University Medical Center and Wageningen University in the Netherlands.

Their research findings were published in the May 4 online issue of Neurology, the medical journal of the American Academy of Neurology. The study was supported by the National Institute on Aging and the Judith Zwartz Foundation.

The age-related memory loss and thinking problems of participants in the study who reported eating seafood less than once a week declined more rapidly compared to those who ate at least one seafood meal per week.

"This study helps show that while cognitive abilities naturally decline as part of the normal aging process, there is something that we can do to mitigate this process," says Martha Clare Morris, ScD, a Rush nutritional epidemiologist and senior author of the paper.

Four types of seafood, five types of brain function

The researchers followed 915 people with a mean age of 81.4 years for an average of five years. At study enrollment, none had signs of dementia. The participants were recruited from people already taking part in the Rush Memory and Aging Project, a study of residents of more than 40 retirement communities and senior public housing units across northern Illinois, plus older adults identified through church groups and social service agencies.

During the course of the study, each person received annual, standardized testing for cognitive ability in five areas -- episodic memory, working memory, semantic memory, visuospatial ability and perceptual speed. The study group also completed annual food frequency questionnaires, allowing the researchers to compare participants' reported seafood intake with changes in their cognitive abilities as measured by the tests.

The questionnaires included four types of seafood: tuna sandwiches; fish sticks, fish cakes and fish sandwiches; fresh fish as a main dish; and shrimp, lobster and crab. The participants were divided into two groups: those who ate at least one of those seafood meals per week and those who ate less than one of those seafood meals per week.

Participants in the higher seafood consumption group ate an average of two seafood meals per week. Those in the lower group ate an average of 0.5 meals per week.

Seafood is the direct nutrient source of a type of omega-3 fatty acid (docosahexaenoic acid) that is the main structural component of the brain. While epidemiologic studies have shown the importance of seafood and omega-3 fatty acids in preventing dementia, few prior studies have examined their associations with specific types of cognitive ability.

In the new Neurology article, the researchers report associations between seafood consumption and two of the areas of cognitive ability that they tested. People who ate more seafood had reduced rates of decline in the semantic memory, which is memory of verbal information. They also had slower rates of decline in a test of perceptual speed, or the ability to quickly compare letters, objects and patterns.

The study did not find a significant difference in the rate of decline in episodic memory (recollection of personal experiences), working memory (short-term memory used in mental function in the immediate present) and visuospatial ability (comprehension of relationships between objects).

The results were the same after researchers adjusted for other factors that could affect memory and thinking skills, such as education, physical activity, smoking and participating in mentally stimulating activities.

Further, the protective association of seafood was even stronger among individuals with a common genotype (APOE-ε4) that increases the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. The APOE is a gene involved in cholesterol transport to neurons. About 20 percent of the population carries the APOE-ε4 gene, although not everyone who has the gene will develop Alzheimer's disease.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly and prominently lists the sources of funding for the work, and there are no apparent conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a small, phase I clinical trial, Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center researchers say they show for the first time that the experimental drug guadecitabine (SGI-110) is safe in combination with the chemotherapy drug irinotecan and may overcome resistance to irinotecan in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Results of the study are expected to be presented April 17 at the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Annual Meeting 2016 in New Orleans (abstract CT017).

Guadecitabine works to reverse a so-called epigenetic change in cancer cells known as methylation, which may alter genetic activity in cells in a way that can block the action of tumor-suppressing genes, pushing cells to become cancerous and resistant to therapy. By reversing this change in cancer cells, the drug restores cancer cells' vulnerability to drugs such as irinotecan.

The clinical trial included 22 patients with metastatic colorectal cancer who had been treated previously with irinotecan and whose disease was progressing. The patients were divided into four groups, each receiving different doses of guadecitabine in combination with irinotecan, over an average period of four months.

During the study, 15 patients had at least one imaging scan to retest the extent and location of their cancers -- with 12 patients experiencing stable disease -- for more than the four-month period, on average, and one patient experiencing a partial response to the treatment (measured as at least a 30 percent reduction in the size of the tumors.)

Although the study's main purpose was to test the safety rather than the effectiveness of guadecitabine doses, "we were very happy to see some patients who benefited from the combination of the therapies for many months to more than a year," says Nilofer Azad, M.D., professor of oncology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

The study also showed signs that guadecitabine reduced methylation among the cancer cells. "We did see that giving a higher dose of the drug seemed to produce a better methylation response among patients," says Valerie Lee, M.D., a fellow at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center. "However, it seemed that patients were responding at all levels of the drug."

Among the side effects of the combined treatment, 16 patients experienced neutropenia, a low count of the infection-fighting white blood cells called neutrophils; five patients with neutropenia had fevers; three patients became anemic; and two patients developed thrombocytopenia, a lowered count of blood-clotting platelets. Other side effects included diarrhea (three patients), fatigue (two patients) and dehydration (two patients). There was one death during the study, possibly resulting from febrile neutropenia caused by the treatment.

The current study was based on previous studies in the laboratory of Nita Ahuja, M.D., director of the Sarcoma and Peritoneal Surface Malignancy Program and professor of surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, which showed that guadecitabine limited the growth of colorectal cancer cell lines when combined with irinotecan, says Azad.

The drug combination is being tested in an ongoing phase II clinical trial (NCT01896856) in a larger group of metastatic colorectal cancer patients at multiple institutions to determine the effectiveness of the dual therapy compared with chemotherapy regimens that do not include guadecitabine, says Azad.

Scientists leading the new study will also look for biomarkers in patients that could help determine which of them are most likely to benefit from guadecitabine and irinotecan. Lee says the research team will measure the amount of methylation in patients' cells when they begin their treatment and the presence of genes associated with irinotecan resistance, among other possible biomarkers.

In 2015, there were more than 130,000 people in the U.S. diagnosed with colon cancers. Five-year survival rates among people with localized colon cancers are more than 90 percent, but they are only 20 percent in those with metastatic cancer.

Guadecitabine is an experimental drug that has not been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. It is manufactured by Astex Pharmaceuticals, a supporter of the Johns Hopkins-led study. The research was also supported by the Van Andel Research Institute SU2C/AACR Epigenetics Dream Team.

Other scientists who contributed to the research include Judy Wang, Anup Sharma, Zachary Kerner, Stephen Baylin, Ellen Lilly, and Thomas Brown from Johns Hopkins; Anthony El Khoueiry from the University of Southern California; Henk Verheul and Elske Gootjes from Vrije Universiteit in the Netherlands; and Peter Jones from the Van Andel Research Institute.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states that the study was supported by Astex Pharmaceuticals, which manufactures guadecitabine.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study has found that it is possible to find a large number of "silent" cancers in the lungs of heavy smokers by periodically screening them with CAT scans. When the tumors are then surgically removed, most people live five years or more, in striking contrast to patients whose cancers are found only after they experience symptoms.

The study of nearly 32,000 people in eight countries boosts hope that early detection by CAT scans may reduce the death toll of lung cancer, much as mammography has done for breast cancer. But while the research clearly shows that the interval between diagnosis and death was longer in screened patients, it does not definitively show they lived longer -- a subtle difference with significant public health consequences.

Lung cancer kills about 162,000 Americans a year and is the leading cause of cancer death in men and women. Only 15 percent of people with the disease survive five years from the time it is diagnosed.

What it will take to prove that CAT scans are either useful or a waste of time and money is a matter of great controversy.

Some people, including many treatment advocates, think there is enough evidence to urge all heavy smokers to have routine CAT scans. Others, including researchers and policymakers in the government, say it is a question that will not be settled for five or six years, when other studies are complete.

The new research, which appears in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, seems destined to heat up that argument.

"I think it provides valuable information on many things. What it doesn't do is prove that you can reduce the number of people who will die from lung cancer," said Gary J. Kelloff, an oncologist at the National Cancer Institute.

Laurie Fenton, president of the Lung Cancer Alliance, an advocacy group headquartered in Washington, said: "We think this is a breakthrough for lung cancer. I think we have enough data to move forward and apply this to a high-risk population."

In 1994, the study, called the International Early Lung Cancer Action Program, began screening smokers and former smokers, as well as a few nonsmokers exposed to radon, beryllium and other cancer-causing substances.

In all, 31,567 people were screened. In the ensuing years, about 27,000 more scans were done, with some people having them annually. All were "spiral" or "helical" CAT scans in which the machine films the entire chest in the time that a person can hold a single breath.

About 13 percent of the baseline scans and 5 percent of the later ones found abnormalities. Many of these lump-shaped masses were watched with further scans to see whether they grew; others were examined with other imaging devices. Ultimately, 535 were biopsied to see if they were lung cancer -- and 484 were.

Of that group, 85 percent had small tumors that had not spread. Such early lung cancers can usually be cured; the problem is that they are usually found at that "asymptomatic stage" only by chance when someone has a CAT scan or chest X-ray for an unrelated reason.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple independent sources, providing much needed balance in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, July 8, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Some cancer patients who take cholesterol-lowering statins may live longer than those not on these heart medications, a study from Britain suggests.

While it did not prove a cause-and-effect connection, the study of nearly 1 million cancer patients found that those taking statin drugs such as Lipitor and Crestor appeared to have:
• and a 30 percent lower risk of dying from colon cancer.

"We need to further investigate the reasons for patients with high cholesterol having improved mortality in four of the most common cancers," said senior researcher Dr. Rahul Potluri, a clinical lecturer at Aston University School of Medicine in Birmingham.

Potluri cautioned, however, that this study can't prove that statins actually extended life in cancer patients.

At this time, people without high cholesterol should not be taking statins in the hope of warding off cancer or living longer with cancer, he said.

"People with high cholesterol should be taking statins to lower their cholesterol and reduce their cardiovascular risk," he said. "We cannot, however, recommend statins for cancer prevention without a positive clinical trial."

For the study, Potluri and colleagues collected data on nearly 1 million patients listed in a clinical database from January 2000 to March 2013. The database includes information on cancer and other medical conditions, including high cholesterol. Data on deaths was obtained from the U.K. Office for National Statistics.

Among the patients in the study, nearly 8,000 had lung cancer, 5,500 had breast cancer, 4,600 had prostate cancer and 4,500 had colon cancer, the researchers found.

After adjusting for factors that might play a role in dying, such as age, gender, ethnicity and common causes of death, the researchers found those taking statins lived longer than those who were not taking them.

The results were to be presented Friday at the European Society of Cardiology meeting in Florence, Italy. Research presented at meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

One expert doesn't think sufficient evidence exists yet to take statins to prevent or treat cancer.

"Regardless of whether or not a person has cancer, statin use should be discussed with a health care provider," said Eric Jacobs, strategic director of pharmacoepidemiology at the American Cancer Society.

"There is little evidence that statins affect cancer risk or survival, but clear evidence that they can help some people lower risk of heart attacks and strokes," he said.

Visit the American Heart Association for more on statins.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does not identify whether there are any conflicts for the study authors, but they do not appear to have any when we researched them ourselves. We are glad the story included a quote from an independent source at the American Cancer Society.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pediatricians Decide Boys Are Better Off Circumcised Than Not

The American Academy of Pediatrics on Monday announced its first major shift on circumcision in more than a decade, concluding that the health benefits of the procedure clearly outweigh any risks.

"There is clear evidence that supports the health benefits of circumcision," said Susan Blank, who led the 14-member task force that formulated the new policy being published in the journal Pediatrics.

The statement, and accompanying technical report, marks the first revision of the organization's position since 1999, when the academy backed away from circumcision. At that time, the group, which represents about 60,000 pediatricians nationwide, concluded that there was no clear evidence for or against circumcising newborns. The group affirmed that position in 2005.

Since then, the popularity of circumcision in the United States has declined. Only about 56 percent of newborn males are circumcised.

The academy's task force spent seven years combing through the latest research, analyzing more than a thousand studies. Their conclusion?

For starters, Blank says, circumcision helps baby boys pretty much immediately.

"The health benefits of male circumcision include a drop in the risk of urinary tract infection in the first year of life by up to 90 percent," she says.

But there's a much bigger reason to do it, Blank said. Circumcised males are far less likely to get infected with a long list of sexually transmitted diseases.

"It drops the risk of heterosexual HIV acquisition by about 60 percent. It drops the risk of human papillomavirus [HPV], herpes virus and other infectious genital ulcers," she says.

It also reduces the chances that men will spread HPV to their wives and girlfriends, protecting them from getting cervical cancer.

"We've reviewed the data and, you know, we have gone through them with a fine-tooth comb, and the data are pretty convincing," she says.

Critics, however, were not convinced. They liken the procedure to female genital mutilation.

"We have no right as parents or as physicians or adults to strap them down and chop off a normal part of their body. To do that is a human rights violation and an ethical travesty," says Georgeanne Chapin of the anti-circumcision group Intact America.

Chapin and other critics argue that the scientific evidence is questionable. For one thing, the studies about HIV have only been done in Africa, where AIDS is much more common among heterosexuals.

"They're cherry-picking their evidence," she says. "They act as though there's this huge body of literature. It's all the same couple of studies that have been regurgitated and reprogrammed. Over the past 150 years, all kinds of medical benefits have been proposed as resulting from cutting off the foreskin, and they have all been disproven."

Critics also question the safety of the procedure, saying too many boys are damaged for life by botched circumcisions.

But many experts say the academy is making the right call. They dismiss any comparison to female genital mutilation as grossly misleading and say male circumcision is about as safe as any procedure could be.

Some think the academy's position is long overdue, and that the group should have gone even further and more forcefully recommended circumcision.

"I think that all healthy newborn babies should be circumcised," says Edgar Schoen, a professor emeritus at the University of California, San Francisco. "I feel about newborn circumcision the way I do about immunization: It's a potent preventive health procedure that gives you a health advantage."

For its part, the pediatricians group hopes the new recommendations will encourage more parents to circumcise their sons — and more insurance plans to pay for it. As Shots reported last week, a lot of state Medicaid programs have stopped covering circumcision.

"Those families who choose circumcision should have access to circumcision. Cost should not be a barrier," Blank says.

The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been promising for years now to issue the government's first guidelines about circumcision. But the CDC keeps delaying it and still has not said when that will happen.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Both advocates for circumcision and opponents were quoted within the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS - September 05, 2016 -A new class of drugs called HIF-2 inhibitors is more effective and better tolerated than the standard of care drug sunitinib in treating kidney cancer, researchers with the Kidney Cancer Program at Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center have found.

HIF-2 inhibitors, which grew out of research begun more than 20 years ago at UT Southwestern Medical Center, work by interfering with processes that fuel the growth of cells.

Investigators conducted a pre-clinical trial in mice transplanted with kidney cancer from over 20 patients and showed that the HIF-2 inhibitor PT2399 controlled cancer in half of the tumors, according to a study published in the journal Nature.

"This is a completely new treatment for kidney cancer. We want to make HIF-2 inhibitors available to patients and are currently carrying out clinical trials," said Dr. James Brugarolas, Director of the Kidney Cancer Program, who is leading an $11 million SPORE grant from the National Cancer Institute seeking to translate new discoveries into novel therapies for kidney cancer patients. Part of the SPORE grant, one of just two directly related to kidney cancer in the nation, is focused on further researching HIF-2 inhibitors.

In a previous report, Dr. Kevin Courtney, Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine and a coauthor of the current study, reported at the American Association of Clinical Oncology annual meeting that HIF-2 inhibitors were safe in patients and had activity even in heavily pretreated patients. In the study in Nature, investigators show that HIF-2 inhibition was able to control metastatic kidney cancer even after 7 lines of prior therapy. See video.

The findings show that HIF-2 is a promising target to combat kidney cancer, said Dr. Brugarolas, senior author and a Virginia Murchison Linthicum Scholar in Medical Research at UT Southwestern.

Nearly 400,000 Americans are now living with a diagnosis of kidney cancer and more than 60,000 people are expected to be diagnosed with kidney cancer this year, according to the National Cancer Institute. Texas has the fifth highest rate of this cancer in the U.S.

HIFs or hypoxia-inducible factors, like HIF-2, allow the body's cells to adjust to low-oxygen environments. HIFs activate programs that promote the development of blood vessels, facilitate oxygen delivery and promote efficient nutrient utilization. Kidney cancer cells hijack the same system to fuel their growth.

HIF-2 inhibitors work by suppressing the effects of HIF-2 which include downregulating an important protein called VEGF that promotes the formation of blood vessels needed for tumors to grow.

"Unlike existing VEGF inhibitors, the HIF-2 inhibitor blocks VEGF only in the cancer and therefore does not cause cardiac toxicity or hypertension," Dr. Brugarolas explained.

In the Nature study, researchers compared the two drugs head to head and found that the HIF-2 inhibitor was more active than sunitinib and that it was active against tumors progressing on sunitinib.

"Furthermore, it was also better tolerated. As sometimes happens in patients, mice on sunitinib were sickly and lost weight, whereas mice on the HIF-2 inhibitor gained weight while on the study," he said.

Researchers surprisingly found a subset of tumors that do not respond to the drug, but were able to identify biomarkers that, once verified, would help determine which patients are more likely to benefit from HIF-2 therapies.

"HIF-2 is believed to be the most important driver of kidney cancer. Traditionally, proteins like HIF-2 were disregarded as drug targets because their shape made it nearly impossible to design drugs against them," Dr. Brugarolas said. "The approaches we have taken pave the way for identifying drug candidates for other proteins that have traditionally been considered undruggable."

HIF-2 also appears significant in other types of cancer, including deadly brain cancers called glioblastomas and non-small cell lung cancer, the most common type of lung malignancy.

How HIF-2 came to be

In 1997, UT Southwestern researchers Dr. Steven McKnight, Chairman of Biochemistry, and molecular geneticist Dr. David Russell, Vice Provost and Dean of Basic Research, led research discovering and describing the protein encoded by the EPAS1 gene, also known as HIF-2α, the main HIF-2 component. Over the course of a decade, the laboratories of Dr. Richard Bruick, Professor of Biochemistry, holder of the Michael L. Rosenberg Scholar in Biomedical Research, and a coauthor of the current study, and Dr. Kevin Gardner, Adjunct Professor of Biochemistry, solved the structure of HIF-2α.

By 2009, researchers had identified a "sweet spot" where drugs could bind and shut down HIF-2 activity. Using the Simmons Cancer Center's High-Throughput Screening, scientists tested more than 200,000 chemicals to see which ones could interfere with HIF-2, identifying several potential drug-like compounds. The most promising compounds were licensed to Peloton Therapeutics, Inc., a biotech firm co-founded by Dr. McKnight and based at UT Southwestern's BioCenter campus. In 2014, the first HIF-2 inhibitor, an oral drug known as PT2385, entered clinical trials in patients with advanced or metastatic renal clear cell carcinoma.

HIF-2 inhibitors also are the target of UTSW's recent $11 million SPORE (Specialized Program of Research Excellence) award. Investigators will further biomarkers to identify patients most likely to respond to the HIF-2 inhibitor, as well as to anticipate ways in which the tumor may evade the drug's impact.

UT Southwestern's SPORE program involves four innovative disease and clinical research teams targeting adult and pediatric kidney cancer. Other UTSW SPORE investigators are looking at the function of a gene that identifies a cluster of particularly aggressive tumors, in hopes of identifying vulnerabilities that can be targeted with drugs; examining kidney cancer metabolism to distinguish aggressive from less active tumors, potentially yielding a tailored treatment approach; and evaluating novel subtypes of childhood kidney cancer.

The Nature research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health including the SPORE; Peloton Therapeutics, Inc.; and the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas; the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (Center for Translational Medicine); National Natural Science Foundation of China; and philanthropy, including the Tom Green Memorial fund.

More than 30 researchers contributed to the study, including Dr. Payal Kapur, Associate Professor of Pathology; Dr. Ivan Pedrosa, Associate Professor of Radiology in the Advanced Imaging Research Center who holds the Jack Reynolds, M.D., Chair in Radiology; Dr. Xiankai Sun, Associate Professor of Radiology in the Advanced Imaging Research Center who holds the Dr. Jack Krohmer Professorship in Radiation Physics; Dr. Xian-Jin Xie, Professor of Clinical Sciences; Dr. Yang Xie, Associate Professor of Clinical Sciences; Dr. Tae Hyun Hwang, Assistant Professor of Clinical Sciences; Dr. Guiyang Hao, Assistant Professor of Radiology; Dr. Eugene Frenkel, Professor of Internal Medicine and Radiology who holds the Raymond D. and Patsy R. Nasher Distinguished Chair in Cancer Research, in Honor of Eugene P. Frenkel, M.D., the Elaine Dewey Sammons Distinguished Chair in Cancer Research, in Honor of Eugene P. Frenkel, M.D., and the A. Kenneth Pye Professorship in Cancer Research; and Dr. Renée M. McKay, Director of Research Administration for the Kidney Cancer Program.

Additional UT Southwestern researchers include lead authors Dr. Wenfang Chen, Haley Hill, Alana Christie, and Min Soo Kim, as well as Eboni Holloman, Andrea Pavia-Jimenez, Farrah Homayoun, Dr. Yuanqing Ma, Dr. Nirav Patel, Dr. Guiyang Hao, Qurratulain Yousuf, Allison Joyce, Dr. He Zhang, and Jenny Chang.

Disclosures: co-authors Tai Wong, James P. Rizzi, Eli M. Wallace, Naseem Zojwalla and John A. Josey are employees and own equity in Peloton Therapeutics, Inc.; Kevin Gardner and Richard Bruick have licensed IP, consult for and own equity; Min Soo Kim, Tae Hyun Hwang, Yang Xie and James Brugarolas are authors on a filed patent pertaining biomarkers of the HIF-2 inhibitor. UT Southwestern Medical Center owns stock in Peloton Therapeutics and has a financial interest in the intellectual property used within the research.

The Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center is the only NCI-designated comprehensive cancer center in North Texas and one of just 47 NCI-designated comprehensive cancer centers in the nation. Simmons Cancer Center includes 13 major cancer care programs. In addition, the Center's education and training programs support and develop the next generation of cancer researchers and clinicians. Simmons Cancer Center is among only 30 U.S. cancer research centers to be designated by the NCI as a National Clinical Trials Network Lead Academic Participating Site.

UT Southwestern, one of the premier academic medical centers in the nation, integrates pioneering biomedical research with exceptional clinical care and education. The institution's faculty includes many distinguished members, including six who have been awarded Nobel Prizes since 1985. The faculty of almost 2,800 is responsible for groundbreaking medical advances and is committed to translating science-driven research quickly to new clinical treatments. UT Southwestern physicians provide medical care in about 80 specialties to more than 100,000 hospitalized patients and oversee approximately 2.2 million outpatient visits a year.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release was particularly fulsome in explaining the multiple, overlapping conflicts of the researchers, the sponsoring pharmaceutical company and the academic institution that has a financial stake in this discovery. Well done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
While breathing fresh, clean air can boost productivity, sleep and overall health, not everyone can live in the great outdoors and it’s difficult to know just how clean the indoor air in your home or office is.

Since most people spend about 90 percent of their time inside, having poor indoor air quality could affect your health and the health of your family members—especially during winter.

“Low dry humidity in the winter can make asthma worse and children who have dried mucosa can acquire some nasal infections easier,” Dr. Robert G. Lahita, chairman of medicine at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center in New Jersey, told FoxNews.com. “Heating ducts that have mold and spores in them can make respiratory symptoms worse in the winter when hot air is blowing through them. Dry air can also exacerbate some illnesses and can be a problem as well.”

Different sources of air pollution in your home could include paints that release lead or volatile organic compounds (VOCs), carpets that harbor dirt, dust mites, and fungus and even nitrogen dioxide from gas stoves, but these aren’t the worst culprits, Lahita said.

“In the winter the biggest issue is carbon monoxide poisoning, with emergency medical services we see a few of these every year-- it is from faulty heaters, cooking without ventilation or fireplaces,” he said.

Every room in your house could be susceptive to some form of an air pollutant, but now there is a new device and app that says it can help you breathe easier by tracking air quality.

Awair is the first smart air quality device that monitors, analyzes and provides feedback to improve the air you breathe. The device collects data such as indoor temperature, humidity, carbon dioxide, fine dust particles and VOCs. It analyzes the data in real-time and gives an Awair score on a 0 to 100 color-coded scale, 0 being the worst air quality.

“The goal for the user is to keep five green dots. As soon as you see other colored (amber and red) dots show up on top of the green dots, your environment is getting off the healthy ranges whether it being temperature, humidity, CO2, VOCs, and dust,” Ronald Ro, the CEO and co-founder of Bitfinder Inc., the makers of Awair, told FoxNews.com.

Based on your air score, the monitoring gadget will send personalized alerts and advice to the user via its corresponding Awair mobile app. When air conditions are harmful, like when a bedroom has a high carbon dioxide level, it will send a notification to the user and advise them to open up a window through the app. The app also provides Mayo Clinic “message cards” that give relevant information and recommendations for ways to keep your indoor environment healthy.

If you already have a smart device system for your home, Awair is working on partnerships with several connected devices like Nest thermostat and other smart appliances so you can manage the air quality in your home or office when you're not there.

The Awair app is free to download, but each device costs $199 dollars.

For more information go to GetAwair.com.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This is satisfactory, but barely. The story does quote a physician with no obvious ties to Awair about how air quality may affect health. What’s not clear is why the reporter chose to spoke to the physician, who specializes in rheumatism, arthritis and related ailments. More importantly, the story is missing any independent sources who can weigh in on Awair, or how effective it may be at reducing any kind of health risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The findings were released at a news briefing held in advance of the annual meeting of the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) in San Diego.

But if the findings are confirmed, "patients who are taking aspirin for other reasons may see an added benefit," says study head Kevin Choe, MD, a radiation oncologist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical School in Dallas.

Researchers stress the findings are preliminary and that men with the cancer should not reach for the aspirin bottle in an attempt to improve their health.

Oct. 25, 2010 -- Aspirin , already linked in some studies to a lower risk of developing colon cancer , may also cut the risk of dying of prostate cancer by more than half, a large study suggests.

Studies have shown that people with cancer are more prone to blood clots and that people with blood clots are at increased risk of cancer. Also, lab and animal studies suggest drugs that anticlotting drugs like aspirin may interfere with cancer growth and spread. So Choe and colleagues hypothesized that anticlotting drugs may lower the risk of dying among men with prostate cancer.

The study involved 5,275 men with localized cancer whose disease had not spread beyond the prostate gland; 1,982 of the men were taking anticlotting medications: aspirin, Lovenox, Plavix, and/or warfarin.

By 10 years after diagnosis, 10% of men not taking one of these medications had died from prostate cancer vs. 4% of those who took an anticlotting medication.

The risk that cancer spread was also reduced by anticlotting medications, from 7% to 3%. Also, 43% of men who didn’t take anticlotting medications had a recurrence of their cancer, compared with 33% of men who did take them.

Men who took aspirin gained the greatest benefit, Choe says.

Harvard Medical School's Anthony Zietman, MD, president of ASTRO, tells WebMD that the findings are intriguing. However, they need to be confirmed, and the optimal dose, timing, and duration of use needs to be worked out, he says.

Aspirin and other anticlotting medications carry risks of their own, chiefly bleeding, Zietman says.

"We have to be sure the benefits outweigh the risks before we recommend this to patients."

This study was presented at a medical conference. The findings should be considered preliminary as they have not yet undergone the "peer review" process, in which outside experts scrutinize the data prior to publication in a medical journal.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 



It was easy to meet the basic requirement of this criterion, because the news briefing was moderated by an expert who was not involved in this study. Also, the researchers did not declare any conflicts of interest. However, it is possible that the moderator (who is also the president of the medical association sponsoring the meeting) may have had some role in selecting or shaping this study presentation and so it is hard to know for sure how independent he is.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The defense system that doctors are trying to breach evolved to keep out toxins and microbes. It consists mainly of cells that line the walls of capillaries in the brain and are so tightly packed that many molecules in the bloodstream cannot slip out between cells to reach the brain tissue itself. But certain drugs, like mannitol, will temporarily open the barrier and were first used more than 20 years ago to help other medicines reach the brain.

The new technique refines the art of opening the barrier: it uses microcatheters — fine, highly flexible tubes that are inserted into an artery in the groin and then threaded up into tiny blood vessels nearly anywhere in the brain — to spray chemotherapy directly onto tumors or areas from which they have been removed. The catheters are normally used to deliver clot-dissolving drugs to the brain to treat strokes.

“This will substantially alter the way that chemotherapy is given in the future,” said Dr. John Boockvar, the brain surgeon who devised the trial. “But we have to prove that at certain doses, nobody gets hurt.”

Referring to glioblastoma patients, Dr. Riina said, “Everyone is looking for something to do for these people.”

“Even if you buy someone just a year, that could be a wedding or a graduation,” he continued. “You never know what might happen in the year they hold onto.”

The study, which began in August, is still in its earliest phase, meaning its main goal is to measure safety, not efficacy — to find out if it is safe to spray Avastin directly into brain arteries and at what dose. Nonetheless, the doctors were pleased when M.R.I. scans of the first few patients showed that the treatment seemed to erase any sign of recurring glioblastomas. But how long the effect will last remains to be seen.

Despite a beautiful scan, the first patient who was treated died in October, from pneumonia and the spread of glioblastoma to his brainstem.

Innovations are desperately needed to make headway against glioblastoma, which is “one of the most deadly tumors that exist in humans,” said Dr. Russell Lonser, chairman of surgical neurology at the National Institutes of Health.

“This is a very good start,” Dr. Lonser said. “The early data is very interesting and exciting.”

The complexity of a study like this goes beyond the science. Clinical trials are also a complicated pact, emotionally and ethically, between desperate patients and doctors who must balance their ambition as researchers against their duty as clinicians, and must walk a fine line between offering too much hope and not enough.

“I tell patients, ‘I’m going to try to cure your disease, but so far glioblastoma is an incurable disease,’ ” Dr. Boockvar said.

“I’m optimistic,” Mr. Sugrue said one morning in September, after scheduling a second brain operation. But he had tears in his eyes.

There are about 10,000 new cases of glioblastoma a year in the United States, mostly in people over 45. The tumors are notorious for growing back like weeds even after being cut out and blasted with chemotherapy and radiation, and they are nearly always fatal. With the best treatment, the median survival time is about 15 months.

But in the last five years, the number of patients who survive 2 years has increased to 25 percent, from 8 percent, largely because doctors began using a chemotherapy pill called temozolomide, or Temodar, along with radiation (Temodar is believed to seep through the blood-brain barrier).

Dr. Boockvar said he thought that if he could just keep patients alive for two years, more advances might come along and give them time.

“The glioblastoma population is very studyable, unfortunately, because the prognosis is so grim,” he said.

Patients often wind up on the front lines of research, figuring they have little to lose and hoping they will be lucky enough to test the big breakthrough. More than 500 studies for people with glioblastoma are listed on the government Web site www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Mr. Sugrue, who lives in Stamford, Conn., with his wife, Donna, and their children Molly and Tim, began having headaches in April. He thought he had a sinus problem. But a scan found a brain tumor nearly the size of a golf ball. A local doctor referred him to Dr. Boockvar. He had the standard treatment: surgery, temozolomide pills and six weeks of radiation, which ended on June 25.

By July, an ominous bright spot on his M.R.I. scan suggested that the tumor might already be growing back. He continued chemotherapy, but the spot kept enlarging.

By mid-September, the Sugrues were back in Dr. Boockvar’s office to plan their next step. Stubbly hair was growing in on Mr. Sugrue’s scalp, except for a bare patch, around an arcing scar above his right ear. His eyes, bright blue with thick, dark lashes that gave him a boyish look, searched the doctor’s face.

The headaches had returned. New scans, displayed on a computer screen, showed signs of brain swelling and bright spots that should not have been there. Dr. Boockvar recommended more surgery and then chemotherapy with Avastin, which had recently been approved for recurring glioblastoma.

It was approved for intravenous use — to be dripped into a vein, usually in the arm — but he said Mr. Sugrue would be an ideal candidate for his study, in which the drug would be infused directly into an artery in the brain, producing levels at least 50 times what the intravenous route could achieve. One other patient had been treated that way, and M.R.I. scans showed that recurring tumors seemed to have melted away.

Mr. Sugrue said he was all for it, even though Dr. Boockvar warned him that the drug was no magic bullet. Then Dr. Boockvar ticked off the risks from a second brain operation.

“I have to quote you a 5 percent risk you’ll be visibly weak,” he said. “A 1 percent chance of paralysis on the left side.”

Mr. Sugrue wiped his eyes and began to apologize for losing his composure, but the surgeon cut him off and said, “In neurosurgery they say that if you don’t make your patient cry, you haven’t gotten informed consent.”

The trial grew out of a conversation about a year ago between Dr. Boockvar and Dr. Riina, an expert in using microcatheters to treat strokes.

“I said, ‘Why can’t you infuse chemotherapy for my brain tumor patients?’ ” Dr. Boockvar recalled. “And he said: ‘I can. Just show me what you want to do.’ ”

Dr. Riina said, “Technically, I can go anywhere in your brain.”

He said microcatheter technology had advanced “light-years” in the last decade and was just waiting for a new drug to come along for glioblastoma.

They wrote up a plan to test what they called “superselective intra-arterial cerebral infusion” of Avastin in 30 patients with glioblastomas that had recurred after standard treatment. Each patient would receive just one treatment directed into the brain, followed weeks later by a series of intravenous treatments with Avastin.

Their study involves a technique first developed about 30 years ago, which uses mannitol to open the blood-brain barrier temporarily to get chemotherapy into the brain. Mannitol pulls water out of the tightly packed cells lining the capillaries so that they shrink and pull away from one another, opening up gaps through which drug molecules can pass into the brain.

The technique was developed by Dr. Edward A. Neuwelt, a neurosurgeon at Oregon Health Sciences University and the Veterans Affairs Hospital in Portland. Its best results have been in people with a rare type of brain tumor called a primary central nervous system lymphoma. But it has not been helpful with glioblastoma, because until recently there was no chemotherapy to infuse that would have much effect on those tumors.

Dr. Neuwelt said that Avastin had helped to renew interest in opening the blood-brain barrier but that researchers disagreed about whether the drug would lend itself to that use.

Avastin starves tumors by blocking the growth of new blood vessels, which they need to survive. Dr. Boockvar said microcatheters should increase the odds of success by delivering a high dose of the drug directly to where it was needed most. Earlier research with other drugs used larger catheters inserted into the carotid arteries, which feed the entire brain — meaning that the tumor did not receive the most concentrated dose and that healthy brain tissue was exposed to the toxic drugs.

By mid-November, the researchers had treated five patients, including Mr. Sugrue; they first infused mannitol, waited five minutes and then sprayed in the Avastin. In all the patients’ M.R.I. scans, the telltale bright spots that marked tumor growth faded away after the treatment.

“I can’t tell you what it means,” Dr. Boockvar said. “Nobody knows.”

Indeed, the death of the first patient was a reminder that glioblastoma can invade other parts of the brain and the spinal fluid and that the highly localized spray of Avastin might miss deadly seeds of cancer.

But Dr. Boockvar remained hopeful for the remaining patients, describing the scans as “astronomically far better than I had anticipated.”

Mr. Sugrue was still in the hospital in late September when Dr. Boockvar burst into his room and got him out of bed to look at his own before-and-after scans.

“He took me to this room with all these computers and said, ‘I’ve got to show you this,’ ” Mr. Sugrue recalled. “This M.R.I. was a thing of beauty. I’m excited that he’s excited. That means a lot to me.”

Dr. Boockvar said: “Avastin may not be the best drug for this delivery technique. What’s exciting about our results is that we’ve proven there is a local effect.

“Suppose someone said, ‘I have much better drug.’ Now I can say I at least have a delivery system.”

With patients, Dr. Boockvar tries to walk a fine line, trying to level with them and yet not rob them of all hope. He knows the emotional toll that a cancer diagnosis can take: his own father had leukemia for about eight years and died in September. Mrs. Sugrue said the doctor urged her and her husband to resist doing an Internet search for glioblastoma because they would just read that it was a death sentence.

They said they tried to follow his advice, but when the subject of prognosis came up in an interview, both had tears in their eyes.

“You don’t ask the question if you don’t want the answer,” Mrs. Sugrue said. “What will be, will be. You do what you can.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The reporter draws on three principal sources: two physicians involved with the research and an independent expert on glioblastoma from NIH. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study shows that not all good fats are the same when it comes to protecting your health

A study shows that not all good fats are the same when it comes to protecting your health.

For decades, the message about fats has been relatively simple — reduce the amount of oils and fats you eat from animal and dairy products (less red meat and cheese) and substitute them with healthier fats from plants or fish (olive oil, omega-3 fatty acids). The difference came down to the specific type of fats that make up these foods — animal and dairy fats tend to be saturated, which means all of the free bonds available in a chain of carbon atoms are bound to hydrogen atoms, while plant fats are unsaturated, meaning some of carbon atoms have double bonds with each other. Saturated fats are more likely to build up within artery walls and form plaques that can trigger heart attacks.

But in the latest study on fats published in the BMJ, researchers found convincing evidence that not all plant fats are created equal and that linoleic acid, or omega-6 fatty acids, may be associated with a higher risk of early death from any cause, as well as increased risk of heart disease and death from heart-related conditions.

The study is actually a reanalysis of data that had not been included in the original publication of results from the Sydney Diet Heart Study, a trial that was conducted from 1966 to 1973. For more than three years, researchers at the time followed 458 men aged 30 to 59 years old who had a history of heart disease; about half were told to replace the saturated fats they consumed from animal and dairy sources with omega-6 linoleic acid, which is commonly found in safflower oil or margarines made from it. The other half were not told to change their diet in any way. When that study was published in 1978, researchers noted an increased risk of early death from any cause among the omega-6 group, but did not break down the data by what caused the deaths.

So Dr. Christopher Ramsden, a clinical investigator at the National Institutes of Health, who was interested in understanding the effects of linoleic acid on heart health, contacted one of the original authors and reviewed data that had not been included in the study. This information involved deaths from heart-related causes, and the new analysis showed that the omega-6 group had a 17% higher risk of dying during the study period from heart disease, compared with 11% among the control group.

The American Heart Association (AHA) currently recommends that people replace 25% to 35% of their daily saturated-fat intake with foods containing unsaturated fats, such as canola and olive oils. The AHA further breaks down the unsaturated-fat advice by suggesting that people devote about 5% to 10% of their daily calories to foods containing linoleic acid. The recommendation is based on a review of the available data.

The latest results, however, raise questions about that advice. Ramsden says the findings provide some refined understanding of unsaturated fats, which come in different chemical forms that may have varying benefits or risks. “I wouldn’t necessarily say that the [current advice] is necessarily completely wrong,” he says. “What happened is that in the 1960s all polyunsaturated fats were considered the same. They were grouped together under one mechanism of being able to lower blood-cholesterol levels. Then, over the ensuing decades, it became clear as science progressed that there were multiple types of polyunsaturated fats, and these compounds potentially have distinct biochemical and health effects.”

There has been some evidence to suggest that omega-6 fatty acids, for example, may trigger inflammation, a condition that is linked to an increased risk of heart problems, while omega-3 fatty acids, found in deepwater fish like salmon, tend to inhibit inflammatory reactions. Ramsden says the results highlight the need to study dietary ingredients in more detail, rather than lumping them together and assuming they have the same effect on the body.

Recognizing that need, the AHA says it is considering re-evaluating all its dietary recommendations, and will make the issue of polyunsaturated fats part of this assessment. Reviewing the dietary advice as a whole is important, says Alice Lichtenstein, a spokesperson for the association, since changes in one area could have unexpected, and potentially harmful, effects on other eating habits. When health organizations advised people to lower their intake of saturated fats, for example, many replaced the fats with carbohydrates, which can increase risk of diabetes and lead to higher levels of another type of fat in the blood, triglycerides. “One of the things we learned is that we need to look at the whole picture,” says Lichtenstein. “Just looking at one individual component puts undue emphasis on that component, and may lead to unanticipated consequences. We need to look at dietary patterns rather than individual nutrients or individual food components.”

Whether the association will change its advice about consuming linoleic acid isn’t clear yet, but Ramsden says the results of the latest study “could have important implications” for the way people eat if they want to stay heart-healthy.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes a comment from an American Heart Association spokesperson, who interestingly suggests that the new research may play a role in a re-analysis of the organization’s diet guidelines. That’s different than the stance taken by the spokesperson contacted by HealthDay, who hinted that the results wouldn’t have much effect on current recommendations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New York, NY - Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis symptoms were significantly lessened in patients who underwent bariatric, or weight loss, surgery, according to researchers from NYU Langone Medical Center.

According to the study's authors, the findings suggest that losing excess weight may improve symptoms in people who have these lifelong conditions. The NYU Langone researchers believe that obesity may contribute to the risk for development of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis through fat tissue-driven systemic inflammation.

"Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis are chronic inflammatory conditions that can be quite uncomfortable and often painful for patients, so any treatment that might reduce symptoms may improve quality of life," says lead study author Soumya Reddy, MD, an assistant professor of medicine in the division of rheumatology at NYU Langone, and co-director of NYU Langone's Psoriatic Arthritis Center. "Our new study shows that those who shed excess weight could see significant symptomatic relief."

The researchers say excess weight loss may reduce the body-wide inflammation and pain triggered by extreme excesses of fat tissue. They plan to present their findings on Sunday Nov. 8, 2015 at the 2015 ACR/ARHP Annual Meeting in San Francisco.

For the study, Reddy and colleagues reviewed the medical charts of 9,073 weight-loss surgery patients who were treated between 2002 and 2013 at NYU Langone's Weight Management Program. They identified 86 patients who had psoriasis before their operation, 21 of whom were also diagnosed with psoriatic arthritis, and compared their symptoms before and after undergoing bariatric surgery. The research team compared their patients' symptoms from before and after undergoing bariatric surgery. Patients were on average monitored for more than six years, with an average excess weight loss of 46.2 percent body weight.

The researchers found 55 percent of patients with psoriasis and 62 percent of patients with psoriatic arthritis reported improvements in their disease.

Patients who underwent surgery saw significant reductions in their disease severity scores at post-surgical follow-up -- according to a 0 to 10 rating scale -- with disease severity scores in patients with psoriasis dropping from 5.6 to 4.4, and scores falling from 6.4 to 4.5 for those with psoriatic arthritis.

Results were even more pronounced in those with severe disease activity, with scores falling from 7.7 before surgery to 5.7 after for patients with severe psoriasis, and from 8.2 to 4.8 after surgery for patients with severe psoriatic arthritis.

Further analysis showed those who lost the most excess weight a year after surgery showed the biggest improvements in their disease activity. Patients who saw the most improvements had more severe disease at the time of surgery and were of an older age at diagnosis.

"This study highlights the collaborative spirit of academic medicine, and how our rheumatology and bariatric surgery researchers worked together to not only help our patients directly, but inform the medical community at large," says study co-author Jose U. Scher, MD, assistant professor of rheumatology and co-director of the NYU Langone's Psoriatic Arthritis Center. "These findings can be used to identify people who may benefit most from this type of intervention."

The NYU Langone researchers next plan to conduct larger studies to further define their findings and the effects of excess weight loss and bariatric surgery on psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis disease activity.

Psoriasis is a condition that affects 7.5 million Americans, according to the National Psoriasis Foundation. It is estimated that as many as 20 percent of individuals with moderate to severe psoriasis develop psoriatic arthritis in their lifetime. Psoriasis is a chronic autoimmune-related skin condition in which thick, scaly patches appear on the skin. Psoriatic arthritis is similar in presentation -- but also can lead to joint pain.

Treatment requires a coordinated effort by dermatologists and rheumatologists to help manage symptoms such as swelling, inflammation and skin changes.

Poster Presentation Number 688: Clinical Improvements in Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis with Surgical Weight Loss
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release discloses that the patient histories that were reviewed came from bariatric surgery patients of NYU Langone, the institution that issued the news release. It states, “For the study, Reddy and colleagues reviewed the medical charts of 9,073 weight-loss surgery patients who were treated between 2002 and 2013 at NYU Langone’s Weight Management Program.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By the time 8-year-old Ava Christianson got to the National Institutes of Health this summer, she had lost several grueling rounds to leukemia and was bracing for the next one.

Intensive chemotherapy, which cures up to 90 percent of children with the most common type of leukemia, hadn’t kept her cancer from coming back. Neither had a painful bone-marrow transplant nor an experimental treatment. Her careworn father cried in the shower to hide his anguish. Her mother couldn’t help but wonder, “Why is this happening to our child?”

But Ava was fortunate in one respect. Discoveries in the burgeoning field of immunotherapy are offering lifelines to desperate patients who previously had none. “Five years ago,” said her mother, Bethany Christianson, “our doctor would have just had to tell us to go home.”

Instead, in a five-minute procedure at the NIH Clinical Center in late July, the freckle-face girl got another chance to beat the acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) that has stalked her since age 4. She was infused with 30 million of her own T cells, a key part of the immune system, that had been genetically modified to track down and kill her cancer like a pack of crazed dogs.

Ava’s treatment, called CAR T-cell therapy, is one of the new immunotherapies that attempt to rally the body’s own defenses to fight malignancies. Unlike other cancer advances, it is being tested widely in children because of its stunning effectiveness in ALL, the most common pediatric cancer. In early-stage trials, many patients who had repeatedly relapsed saw their leukemia disappear. Some remain cancer-free.

Yet big questions surround the therapy, and many scientists are urging caution. “There’s very real promise with this approach, but the immune system is complicated,” said Terry Fry, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) scientist who is running Ava’s trial. “There’s a lot that still needs to be worked out.”

[Here’s what you need to know about immunotherapy]

Complications can be lethal; one clinical trial was briefly halted in July after three young adults died of brain swelling. It is also far from clear that such a personalized approach — possibly costing hundreds of thousands of dollars — is economically viable on a large scale or will produce the lasting remissions that everyone hopes to see.

U.S. researchers running CAR T-cell trials for children and adults with leukemia and lymphoma have reported remission rates up to 90 percent in some cases. That’s a major achievement in a group whose cancer is emboldened by every treatment failure. But rates in other trials are considerably lower, and many patients eventually relapse.

“The treatment is great about getting people into remission but not at keeping everyone in remission,” said Rebecca Gardner, a pediatric oncologist at Seattle Children’s hospital. She ran an early-stage trial using CAR T-cell therapy in which 39 of 42 patients went into complete remission. By a year, about half had relapsed, either because their T cells had inexplicably disappeared or their cancer had changed so that the T cells could no longer recognize it. “Leukemia is really smart,” she said.

Ava’s family understands that better than most. She underwent her first CAR T-cell procedure in Minnesota last year, but her leukemia returned within six months. Her treatment at NIH involved a next-generation version, developed by NCI, that used a different target for her marauding T cells. In this first-in-humans trial, she is Patient No. 18.

In late August, the Christiansons learned that Ava had gone into remission. She and her mother, who were still at the Clinical Center in Bethesda, Md., gleefully rushed home to Wisconsin so Ava could start third grade.

Her parents, so frequently disappointed, remain guardedly optimistic. “Hope is all you have,” said her father, Jay Christianson.

Her mother added, “We just need this to work and to stay working.”

NCI’s Fry is careful not to make any promises about an extended remission. “I can’t say that’s going to be the case,” he said, “because we just don’t know. It’s too soon.”

Scientists have wanted for decades to marshal the immune system to vanquish cancer, but their attempts have mostly been frustrated. In the past few years, however, breakthroughs have led to the development of two types of immunotherapy — checkpoint inhibitors and CAR T cells — that are generating enormous excitement.

Checkpoint inhibitors are off-the-shelf therapies aimed at unleashing the immune system’s power to see and attack the disease. Used mostly in adults, to date, they are producing impressive results, albeit in a minority of cases. The most prominent: Jimmy Carter. The former president became the poster patient when he was successfully treated last year with a checkpoint inhibitor called Keytruda, along with surgery and radiation, for his advanced melanoma.

Much of the earliest research for customized CAR T-cell therapy was conducted at NCI, the University of Pennsylvania, the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Seattle Children’s.

“The technology of CAR T cells is really a breakthrough, especially for children,” said Michael Jensen, director of the Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer Research at Seattle Children’s Research Institute.

Almost all the initial work focused on CD19, a protein found on the surface of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Scientists figured out ways to use a chimeric antigen receptor, or CAR, to reprogram T cells to recognize the protein and kill the cancer.

[Immunotherapy is showing benefits in an increasing number of cancers]

Zane Esposito, a 13-year-old from Plano, Tex., calls himself the “T-Cell Explorer.” He was diagnosed with ALL in June 2010. “I just thought my back hurt,” he said. “I couldn’t walk up the steps very well.” Almost three years of treatment, including punishing chemotherapy, provided a couple of years of remission. His leukemia returned in January, and this time it did not respond to treatment.

Soon after Zane relapsed, he and his father bumped into friends in a local doughnut shop who told them about a TV segment on CAR T-cell therapy. Paul Esposito searched online and found Gardner’s clinical trial in Seattle. Zane signed on, got the treatment, went back into full remission and gained 25 pounds.

His Texas doctors have talked about a bone-marrow transplant to increase the chance of a true cure, but the Espositos have resisted. The Seattle doctors say it is not clear yet whether that is necessary or whether there would be still other options should Zane’s cancer recur.

Zane is moving on, with dreams of competing on “Chopped Junior” to show off his homemade pasta and pizza. On July 27, the day that Ava got her T cells, he celebrated his 13th birthday.

Ava was 4 when she started having leg pains, then trouble standing up. Her mother suspected Lyme disease. “You never think of cancer with a child,” she said, eyes filling as she recalled her daughter’s cancer diagnosis in November 2012. The doctors assured the family that it was typical leukemia — and curable.

Like most children, Ava quickly went into remission after starting the prescribed 30 months of chemotherapy. But at home in Prescott, a small Wisconsin city at the confluence of the Mississippi and St. Croix rivers, things did not get easier for the Christiansons. In early 2013, Ava was hospitalized in Minneapolis for a lung infection. About the same time, the couple’s second daughter, Audrey, was born 13 weeks premature and hospitalized in a neonatal intensive care unit in St. Paul. Bethany, who manages occupational therapists for a nursing-home chain, and Jay, a rural mail carrier, shuttled between the Twin Cities visiting their daughters.

“I would be with Ava during the day, and then when Jay got home, he would stay with Ava, and I would spend time with Audrey,” she said. “No matter what you do, you feel like a bad mom.”

A year or so after treatment began, Ava relapsed. Now she was in a much more dangerous category: children whose leukemia no longer responds to chemo. Her doctors arranged for a bone-marrow transplant, with her baby sister as the donor.

The transplant made her sick and the whole family miserable. Ava spent months in the hospital and then a year at home. Because of fears of infection, she couldn’t go out much. She missed all of first grade. But her parents had hope that the transplant would keep her cancer at bay.

[Brain cancer now the leading cause of cancer deaths in children]

At a six-month checkup, tests showed that the leukemia was back again. There were no more conventional treatments to try. But because of her two relapses, Ava was now eligible for a CAR T-cell trial at the University of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospital. Her T cells would be genetically altered to go after CD19.The number of cells then would be vastly increased and reinfused.

It sounded like science fiction, but Bethany Christianson found comfort in talking to the father of Emily Whitehead. In 2012, the 6-year-old Pennsylvania girl became the first child to be treated with reprogrammed T cells for leukemia. She has been in remission ever since.

Ava got her treatment in April 2015 — after her cells were extracted via a tube inserted into her neck — and five days later had a massive immune reaction with a high fever and intense pain. While that is typical, some patients become dangerously ill. Yet Ava recovered fast, went into remission and attended summer school, where she learned how to make pigs-in-a-blanket and wrote her own cookbook.

By then, her parents had gotten used to living in the midst of remissions and relapses. “When she felt better, we would do everything we could,” Bethany said. They visited Robot World, a scientifically themed attraction a few hours from Prescott. “You don’t put things off, because you are always thinking, ‘What if?’ ”

Last fall, doctors delivered the bad news. Ava’s cancer had changed. It was no longer producing the CD19 protein, which meant her modified T cells could no longer recognize the disease. But the leukemia was still producing another common protein, called CD22, and that offered an opportunity.

As it happened, Fry, head of the blood-cancer section in NCI’s pediatric oncology branch, had already launched the world’s first trial using CAR T-cell therapy to focus on CD22. It seemed an equally promising target that could broaden the therapy’s impact, researchers thought. At the time, they did not realize that a significant percentage of patients in the other trials might relapse because of changes in their cancer.

Fry insisted as he designed the study that children be included, despite ever-present concerns about exposing them to safety risks. He wanted to avoid a delay in testing what could be a lifesaving pediatric treatment. “I didn’t want to take two to three years on adults, and then go back and do children,” he said.

[For a 6-year-old with cancer, a future staked on medicine’s hottest field]

The clinical trial already has treated nearly two dozen leukemia and lymphoma patients through age 30. The majority have gone into remission, although some have had their cancer return. While it is far too early to know long-term outcomes, Fry said he is convinced the CD22 treatment holds much potential. He is planning another trial next year with the Stanford University School of Medicine. It will target both proteins — CD19 and CD22 — simultaneously.

Once Ava relapsed after the Minnesota trial, Fry’s study at the NIH Clinical Center appeared to be the only option. But there was no slot immediately available. With Ava deteriorating, doctors put her on an experimental treatment that sent her into remission but had serious side effects.

They immediately stopped the medication when they learned Ava might get her T-cell therapy in January — she actually needed a high level of leukemia in her body to participate. But on this wrenching roller coaster of research and treatment, it turned out that she still had to wait several more months.

Ava’s cancer returned in June. Her T cells were extracted in preparation for the trial, even as she got sicker and sicker.

She was admitted to the Clinical Center in mid-July, to a room with dancing penguins painted on the windows. The day before her therapy, an ebullient Audrey burst into the room and the two sisters ran down the hall to a play space.

Her mother was ready this time for the intense immune reaction that followed treatment, although she still found it hard to watch Ava spike a fever of 106. “When you see that temperature on the thermometer, every bone in your body says it’s wrong to let it get that high,” Bethany said. “Then suddenly it’s over.”

If his daughter’s cancer returns yet again, “I have no idea what we’ll do,” Jay said. “We’re kind of up against the edge.”

Fry thinks she might be able to undergo a second round of her latest immunotherapy, as long as her cancer is still producing CD22 proteins. Doctors in Minnesota also might recommend a second bone-marrow transplant — something her parents dread, saying it was the roughest treatment of all.

For now, Ava is happily back in school. “I just want her to be a kid,” Bethany Christianson said. “She has missed out on a lot of that.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This is a tricky one. There are multiple sources in the article who speak to the research itself, and most of them are clearly identified as being involved with the research in some way. There appears to be at least one expert source who is not affiliated with any of the clinical trials, but that is inferred, rather than explicitly stated. What makes this tricky is that the story discusses multiple trials, without clearly identifying most of them. That makes it difficult to provide a judgment call here. When it’s a toss-up, we try to err on the side of the story, so we’ll give this a Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The use of proton radiotherapy to treat the most common malignant brain tumor in children is as effective as standard photon (x-ray) radiation therapy while causing fewer long-term side effects such as hearing loss and cognitive disorders, according to a study receiving online publication in Lancet Oncology. The paper from a team led by Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) investigators describes patient outcomes an average of seven years after proton therapy for medulloblastoma, a fast-growing tumor that develops in the cerebellum at the base of the brain.

"Proton radiotherapy is still not widely available in the U.S. or around the world, but it is increasingly recognized for its potential to reduce the side effects of treatment, particularly in the pediatric population," says Torunn Yock, MD, MCh, MGH Department of Radiation Oncology, lead and corresponding author of the report. "At experienced centers, proton therapy has a proven track record of treatment success and safety."

In contrast to photon radiotherapy, in which a dose of radiation is delivered all along the x-ray beam as it passes through a patient's body, in proton therapy the dose is precisely focused on the target area with little or no dose delivered to normal tissues in front of or behind the tumor. This feature has made proton therapy particularly attractive to treat tumors in or near the brain or eyes, areas where the protection of nearby healthy tissues is particularly critical.

While medulloblastoma can often be successfully treated with a combination of surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, because of its location within the brain, long-term side effects are common. These can include hearing loss, which can be particularly problematic in young children; problems with learning and memory, and neuroendocrine disorders caused by irradiation of the pituitary gland and hypothalamus. Also commonly seen are problems affecting the heart, lungs, thyroid, spine and reproductive organs, all of which tend to be more serious in children treated at younger ages.

While proton therapy may appear to be ideal for reducing these adverse effects, no previous study had prospectively examined the long-term results of children treated for medulloblastoma with proton therapy. To investigate their hypothesis that proton therapy would reduce the incidence and severity of side effects without loss of treatment effectiveness, the researchers enrolled children and adolescents ages 3 to 21 - with an average age of around 6 ½ - who received proton therapy for medulloblastoma at the MGH from 2003 to 2009. All had previous surgery to remove as much of the tumor as possible, and all received chemotherapy before, during or after proton therapy.

Study participants were tested for hearing, a variety of cognitive functions, levels of important hormones and height and weight at the outset of the study and at several follow-up visits for up to eight years. Of 59 patients who enrolled, 12 died from their tumor during the study period and one from a traumatic brain injury. Significant hearing loss was seen in 12 percent of patients three years after treatment and in 16 percent at five years, which compares with around 25 percent reported in studies using photon radiotherapy. The cognitive effects of proton therapy - primarily affecting verbal comprehension and processing speed - were also less serious than what has been reported with photon radiotherapy, and those effects were primarily seen in children who were under the age of 8 when treated.

The neuroendocrine effects of proton therapy - deficits in any hormone level were seen in 63 percent of participants seven years after treatment - were similar to what has been reported with photon therapy. However, no cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, seizure or secondary tumor effects - all of which have been reported in photon therapy studies - were seen in the current study's participants. Survival rates and the incidence and type of tumor recurrence all were similar to what has been reported for photon radiotherapy.

"Our results indicate that proton therapy maintains excellent cure rates in pediatric medulloblastoma while reducing long-term side effects, particularly in hearing and neurocognitive function, and eliminating cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal and reproductive effects," says Yock, who is an associate professor of Radiation Oncology at Harvard Medical School. "While we are currently investigating quality of life differences between proton and photon treatment, I truly believe that - particularly for the youngest children - the ability to offer them proton therapy can make a big difference in their lives."

Nancy J. Tarbell, MD, MGH Radiation Oncology, is senior author of the Lancet Oncology report. Additional co-authors are Elizabeth Weyman, Bree Eaton, MD, and Shannon M MacDonald, MD, MGH Radiation Oncology; Beow Yeap, ScD, MGH Department of Medicine; David Ebb, MD, Beverly Lavally, RN, and Mary Huang, MD, MGH Pediatric Oncology; Nicole Sherry, MD, MGH Pediatric Endocrinology; Robin Jones, MD, MGH Pediatric Neurology; Margaret Pulsifer, PhD, MGH Psychiatry; Annah Abrams, MD, MGH Child Psychiatary; and Karen Marcus, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital Radiation Oncology. The study was funded in part by National Cancer Institute grant P01 CA021239.

Massachusetts General Hospital, founded in 1811, is the original and largest teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. The MGH conducts the largest hospital-based research program in the United States, with an annual research budget of more than $800 million and major research centers in AIDS, cardiovascular research, cancer, computational and integrative biology, cutaneous biology, human genetics, medical imaging, neurodegenerative disorders, regenerative medicine, reproductive biology, systems biology, transplantation biology and photomedicine. In July 2015, MGH returned into the number one spot on the 2015-16 U.S. News & World Report list of "America's Best Hospitals."
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources and conflicts are clearly explained.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Anew gastric balloon that can be swallowed like a pill and then filledwhile in the stomach, helped patients lose more than 37 percent oftheir excess weight over four months, according to new researchpresented here at ObesityWeek 2015, the largest international eventfocused on the basic science, clinical application and prevention andtreatment of obesity. The weeklong conference is hosted by the

AmericanSociety for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS) and The ObesitySociety (TOS).

AllurionTechnologies, the manufacturer of the device called Elipse, whichis not yet commercially available, is studyingwhat it says is the “first procedureless gastric balloon” inpatients with a body mass index (BMI) of 27 or more.

Thetreatment involves patients swallowing a capsule that quicklydissolves in the stomach to reveal a deflated gastric balloon inside.With a thin catheter attached to the device, but long enough toremain outside the patient’s mouth, a physician fills the balloonwith fluid (550 mL) to about the size of a grapefruit. The catheteris then removed, while the balloon remains in the stomach for fourmonths. At that point, a valve designed to open on its own, allowsthe balloon to empty and be excreted naturally from the body,eliminating the need for endoscopy or another procedure.

“ Likeother gastric balloons, the mechanism of action of Elipse is likelymultifactorial and includes increased satiety from the reduction ofavailable space in the stomach, delayed gastric emptying, and changesin hormones that control hunger and appetite,” saidRam Chuttani, MD*, study co-author and director of Endoscopy andchief, Interventional Gastroenterology at Beth Israel DeaconessMedical Center in Boston. “Our findings demonstrate that Elipseprovides individuals and their caregivers with a safe, effective, andnon-invasive weight loss intervention that does not require surgery,endoscopy, or anesthesia.”

Researcherspresented interim results for the first 34 patients of a multi-centerstudy that showed individuals lost an average of 22 pounds after fourmonths or 37 percent of their excess weight. Patients also sawimprovements in triglycerides and hemoglobin A1c (HgbA1c) levels,risk factors for heart disease and diabetes. Similar to othergastric balloons, the most common adverse events reported were nauseaand vomiting.

immediate pastpresident of the ASMBS and vice-chair, UC Irvine Department ofSurgery and chief of gastrointestinal surgery, who was not involvedin the study said the device is not a permanent solution to weightloss, but has the potential to help those individuals who areoverweight or have obesity and are not candidates for bariatricsurgery.

“ Newtreatment options are being studied and approved for the treatment ofobesity, which is good news for our patients and the healthcareprofessionals involved in their treatment,” said Dr. Nguyen, whowas not involved in the study. “For many struggling with theirweight, procedureless gastric balloon devices may serve as atreatment option that bridges the gap between weight-loss drugs andsurgery.”

TheU.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) this year alone approved theOrberaIntragastric Balloon from Apollo Endosurgery and theReShapeIntegrated Dual Balloon System from ReShape Medical. Bothdevices are indicated for adults with BMIs between 30 and 40 whocould not lose weight through diet and exercise alone. The FDA also approved threeweight-loss drugs since 2012.

Inaddition to Dr. Chuttani, study authors of the abstract entitled,“The First Procedureless Gastric Balloon: A Prospective StudyEvaluating Safety, Weight Loss, Metabolic Parameters and Quality ofLife,” include, Evzen Machytka MD, PhD, Martina Bojkova MD, TomasKupka MD, and Marek Buzga MSc, PhD from the University of Ostrava,Ioannis Raftopoulos MD, Andreas Giannakou MD, and Kandiliotis IoannisMD from the Iatriko Medical Center, and Kathy Stecco MD, Samuel LevyMD, and Shantanu Gaur MD, from Allurion Technologies.

Accordingto the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), more than 78million adults were obese in 2011–2012. i The ASMBS estimates about 24 million people have severe or morbidobesity. Individuals with a BMI greater than 30 have a 50 to 100percent increased risk of premature death compared to healthy weightindividuals as well as an increased risk of developing more than 40obesity-related diseases and conditions including type 2 diabetes,heart disease and cancer. ii iii

Metabolic/bariatricsurgery has been shown to be the most effective and long lastingtreatment for morbid obesity and many related conditions and resultsin significant weight loss. The Agency for Healthcare Research andQuality (AHRQ) reported significant improvements in the safety ofmetabolic/bariatric surgery due in large part to improvedlaparoscopic techniques. iv The risk of death is about 0.1 percent v and the overall likelihood of major complications is about 4percent. vi

TheASMBS is the largest organization for bariatric surgeons in thenation. It is a non-profit organization that works to advance the artand science of bariatric surgery and is committed to educatingmedical professionals and the lay public about bariatric surgery asan option for the treatment of morbid obesity, as well as theassociated risks and benefits. It encourages its members toinvestigate and discover new advances in obesity, while maintaining asteady exchange of experiences and ideas that may lead to improvedoutcomes for morbidly obese patients. For more information, visitwww.asmbs.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release states that the manufacturer is “studying what it says is the first procedureless gastric balloon.'” It isn’t exactly clear what role the the manufacturer had in the study but the release does disclose that one of the quoted study co-authors “holds an equity position in Allurion Technologies,” the manufacturers of the device. This means he has an ownership interest in the company and will profit if the device is approved and adopted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study published late last month in The New England Journal of Medicine is raising provocative questions about how best to treat a torn anterior cruciate ligament. For the study, researchers from Lund University in Sweden recruited 121 young adults who had injured their A.C.L.’s. The volunteers, between 18 and 35, were physically active, and many were competitive athletes. They agreed, rather bravely, to be randomly assigned to one of two groups and accept radically different treatments for their torn A.C.L.’s. The first group began physical therapy and then underwent surgical reconstruction of the ligament, considered by many people to be the best option for injured athletes. The second group received only physical therapy, with the option to have the operation later. Twenty-three subjects of that group did eventually have the operation. (For those fortunate enough not to be personally familiar with A.C.L. surgery, reconstruction involves replacing the injured ligament with tissue from elsewhere in your own leg or from a cadaver.)

Over two years, the injured knees were assessed using a comprehensive numerical score that rated pain, function during activity and other measures. At the time of the original injury, the knee also had been scored. At the end of the two years, both groups showed considerable improvement. The scores for the surgically repaired knees had risen by 39.2 points. The scores for the more conservatively treated knees also had risen, by 39.4 points. In other words, the outcomes were virtually identical. Despite a widespread belief that surgery leads to a stronger knee, the results showed that surgically reconstructing the A.C.L. as soon as possible after the tear “was not superior” to more conservative treatment, the study’s authors wrote. The findings suggest, the authors concluded, that “more than half the A.C.L. reconstructions” currently being conducted on injured knees “could be avoided without adversely affecting outcomes.”

This possibility should reverberate across playing fields nationwide, where, at the moment, preseason high school, collegiate and adult-league sports practices are under way, with a concomitant surge in A.C.L. tears. By one estimate, as many as 1 in every 556 fit, active people will tear an A.C.L. — particularly if they participate in sports that involve frequent pivoting and landing, like soccer, football, tennis, skiing and basketball. At the same time, the urge to treat the injury with surgery appears to be growing. The “belief among most surgeons and patients is that surgery is a ‘must,’ at least if you aim to go back into an active lifestyle,” the Swedish authors of the study e-mailed in response to questions.

Part of the reason for A.C.L. surgery’s popularity is that by most measures, it works. In the current study, most of the group members who had reconstructive surgery reported that their injured knees felt healthy after two years and that they had returned to activity — not, in most cases, at the same level as before their injuries, but they were active. Significantly, their knees also were notably more “stable” than the joints that hadn’t been surgically fixed. Stability is, in theory, desirable. A stable knee rarely gives way.

But in practice, the importance of stability after A.C.L. treatment is “controversial,” The New England Journal study’s authors, Richard Frobell, Ph.D., and Stefan Lohmander, M.D., Ph.D., of Lund University, wrote in their e-mail. In an important 2009 study published in The British Journal of Sports Medicine, researchers retrospectively compared outcomes after 10 years in competitive athletes who had surgery or had opted for conservative treatment of their torn A.C.L.’s. The surgically repaired knees were notably more stable. But they weren’t fundamentally healthier. The surgically reconstructed knees and the conservatively treated joints experienced similar (and high) levels of early onset knee arthritis, a common occurrence after an A.C.L. tear. The treatments were almost identical, too, in terms of whether the athletes could return to sports and whether they reported subsequent knee problems.

Why, then, undergo A.C.L. reconstruction, an operation that can be expensive and, like all surgical procedures, carries risks? Several top-flight orthopedic surgeons I contacted say that they remain convinced that surgery leads to a better long-term outcome for certain patients, particularly if they want to return to pivoting sports. “The reason to have the surgery is to preserve” other parts of the knee from injury during activity, says Dr. Warren Dunn, an assistant professor of orthopedics and rehabilitation at Vanderbilt University who has extensively studied A.C.L. tears. He points out that in The New England Journal of Medicine study, only 8 percent of the patients in the first surgical group subsequently tore a meniscus, a fragile pillow of cartilage that can rip if a knee gives way. Twenty-five percent of those in the physical therapy group eventually tore their meniscuses.

What these numbers mean for anyone who tears an A.C.L. or is the parent of a young athlete in that situation is that they should have a long, frank conversation with an orthopedic surgeon and possibly also a nonsurgical sports-medicine specialist about options. “We recommend surgery based on activity level and sports,” Dr. Dunn says. “Most subjects can do in-line activities” like running or biking “without an A.C.L.” He adds, “On the other hand, we believe that A.C.L.-deficient subjects that do return” to sports involving cutting, pivoting or planting the leg “can consequently injure the meniscus” or other cartilage in the knee and would benefit from a replacement A.C.L.

The authors of the study are less sure. “On the basis of our study results, we’d tell patients” that “there is no apparent downside of starting a good rehab program and waiting with the surgery decision to see if it is needed or not,” the authors wrote to me.

The ultimate lesson of The New England Journal study is almost certainly that more science on the subject is needed. “We definitely know only parts of the long-term outcome” after different A.C.L. treatments, says Dr. Duncan Meuffels, an assistant professor of orthopedic surgery at Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam and lead author of The British Journal of Sports Medicine study.

But large-scale, randomized controlled studies, the gold standard of medical research, may be difficult to orchestrate, in part because people with shredded A.C.L.’s can balk at being denied surgery. In The New England Journal study, some of those assigned to physical therapy wound up requesting surgery, although they weren’t experiencing any knee problems. For them, it seems, “the desire to undergo surgery was based on expectations rather than symptoms,” the authors told me. It may be years, unfortunately, before we know if such expectations are justified or if unreconstructed injured knees can be fine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It cites the opinions of orthopedic surgeons, including one who seems clearly uninvolved in the NEJM study, and the author of the 2009 British Journal of Sports Medicine study. It also tells us the affiliations of interviewees who were involved and not involved in the two studies. 
Note that the study publication discloses that the research was funded by a number of organizations in Sweden as well as Pfizer. As this wasn’t a drug study, we’re not sure what Pfizer’s interest were and point it out as an FYI.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Boston, MA-- The investigational drug abaloparatide-SC (subcutaneous) may help increase bone mineral density in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis and reduce their risk of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures, new industry-sponsored research suggests. The results of the pre-specified subgroup analysis within the ACTIVE clinical trial will be presented Friday, April 1, at ENDO 2016, the annual meeting of the Endocrine Society, in Boston.

According to lead study author Felicia Cosman, MD, osteoporosis specialist and Medical Director of the Clinical Research Center at Helen Hayes Hospital, Senior Clinical Director of the National Osteoporosis Foundation and Professor of Medicine at Columbia University, who is a consultant to Radius Health, Inc., in Waltham, Massachusetts, "Abaloparatide-SC increased bone mineral density in both the spine and hip and reduced the risk of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures consistently in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis regardless of their baseline patient characteristics, including age, bone mineral density, and whether or not they had prior fractures."

The researchers investigated patients enrolled in the randomized, double-blind, comparative, multicenter international phase 3 ACTIVE trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 80 micrograms of abaloparatide-SC in preventing fractures in otherwise healthy, ambulatory, postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Osteoporosis was defined broadly, using both BMD criteria as well as recent history of nonvertebral fracture and confirmed prevalent vertebral fracture on x-ray. Overall, 2,463 patients between 49 and 86 years of age were randomized to one of three treatment arms for 18 months: double-blind 80 micrograms of abaloparatide-SC, blind-matched placebo, or open-label 20 micrograms of subcutaneous teriparatide (an FDA-approved prescription drug known to increase bone density and strength).

At 18 months, abaloparatide-SC significantly increased bone mineral density from baseline at the lumbar spine by 9.2%, the total hip by 3.4% and the femoral neck by 2.9%, compared with placebo. Abaloparatide-SC also reduced new vertebral fractures by 86%, nonvertebral fractures by 43%, clinical fractures by 43%, and major osteoporotic fractures by 70% compared with placebo after 18 months of treatment. The drug also reduced major osteoporotic fractures by 55% compared with teriparatide and increased bone density to a greater extent in the hip region compared with teriparatide.

The authors found that the risk of new vertebral or nonvertebral fractures dropped consistently among the participants taking abaloparatide-SC, irrespective of their baseline risk factors; and they found an increase in bone mineral density by abaloparatide in each of the baseline risk subgroups.

The data suggest that abaloparatide appears to be an effective treatment for a broad group of postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.

The study was funded by Radius Health, Inc.

Endocrinologists are at the core of solving the most pressing health problems of our time, from diabetes and obesity to infertility, bone health, and hormone-related cancers. The Endocrine Society is the world's oldest and largest organization of scientists devoted to hormone research and physicians who care for people with hormone-related conditions.

The Society, which is celebrating its centennial in 2016, has more than 18,000 members, including scientists, physicians, educators, nurses and students in 122 countries. To learn more about the Society and the field of endocrinology, visit our site at http://www. . Follow us on Twitter at @TheEndoSociety and @EndoMedia.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release prominently and early notes that the research is “industry sponsored,” and names the company (Radius Health, Inc.). It also notes that the investigator quoted in the release is a consultant to the company. Kudos!
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - A computerized brain training program cut the risk of dementia among healthy people by 48 percent, U.S. researchers said on Sunday in reporting an analysis of the results of a 10-year study.

The preliminary findings, presented at the Alzheimer’s Association International Conference in Toronto, are the first to show that any kind of intervention could delay the development of dementia in normal, healthy adults.

To date, cognitive psychologists and neuroscientists have largely rejected evidence that computer-based cognitive-training software or “brain games” have any effect on cognitive function.

The new findings would be quite promising if they hold up through peer review and publication in a scientific journal, said Dr. John King, an expert in social research at the National Institute of Aging. The institute is part of the National Institutes of Health, which funded the study.

King worked on the original clinical trial on which the new analysis is based. The study, known as Active, examined the effects of cognitive training programs on 2,785 healthy older adults.

Participants were divided into three groups. One got training for memory improvement, one for reasoning and one with computerized training in speed-of-processing.

In the speed training, which emphasized visual perception, individuals were asked to identify objects on a screen quickly. The program got harder with each correct answer.

Participants had 10 one-hour training sessions conducted in a classroom setting over five weeks. Some received four additional “booster” sessions one year after the original training, and four more two years after that.

Scientists measured cognitive and functional changes immediately and at one, two, three, five and 10 years after the training to see if it affected how participants performed daily tasks.

Results of that study, published in 2014, found modest benefits in the reasoning and speed-of-processing groups, but not memory.

The new analysis was by Dr. Jerri Edwards of the University of South Florida, whose mentor, Dr. Karlene Ball of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, sold her rights to the program to Posit Science. Edwards also was a paid consultant for the company for part of 2008.

The program is now incorporated in Posit Science’s BrainHQ.com brain training program.

Edwards did a secondary analysis of the 10-year data, looking at the time it took individuals to develop dementia.

She found that the group that did speed training showed 33 percent less risk of dementia relative to the control group, while the memory and the reasoning interventions offered no such benefit.

People who completed 11 or more speed training sessions were at 48 percent less risk for developing dementia over the 10 years of the study, Edwards said.

“At first blush, that’s kind of a big deal,” Mayo Clinic Alzheimer’s expert Dr. Ronald Petersen said. “This may even be clinically relevant.”

In 2014, a group of nearly 70 neuroscientists and cognitive psychologists led by researchers at Stanford University’s Center on Longevity and the Berlin Max Planck Institute for Human Development signed a letter saying there was “little evidence” of such results from brain games. The letter was in response to heavy marketing by companies touting the benefits of their programs based on scant scientific data.

Edwards said she was frustrated with the scientific debate, which is one reason she agreed to present her findings before they were published. “I’m sick of our studies being ignored,” she said.

King said the training offered in the program was slightly different from the current Posit Science offering and that it was unclear whether speed training would help people who are already at risk for dementia.

“It’s a promising result from an interesting data set,” he said. “I do think we will know more after the paper is reviewed.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article introduces past and current investigators of the study, and their relationship to the company Posit Science:
“The new analysis was by Dr. Jerri Edwards of the University of South Florida, whose mentor, Dr. Karlene Ball of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, sold her rights to the program to Posit Science. Edwards also was a paid consultant for the company for part of 2008.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Aug. 10, 2011 -- Two of three patients dying of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) appear cured and a third is in partial remission after infusions of genetically engineered T cells.

The treatment success came in a pilot study that was only meant to find out whether the treatment was safe, and to determine the right dose to use in later studies. But the therapy worked vastly better than University of Pennsylvania researchers David L. Porter, MD, Carl H. June, MD, and colleagues had dared to hope.

"Our results were absolutely dramatic. It is tremendously exciting," Porter tells WebMD. "These kinds of outcomes don't come around very often. We are really hopeful that we can now translate this into treatment for much larger numbers of patients and apply this technique to other diseases and to many more patients."

Excitement is spreading as oncologists learn about the findings. "I think it is a big deal," says Jacque Galipeau, MD, professor of hematology and medical oncology at Emory University Winship Cancer Center. Galipeau was not involved in the Porter study.

"Here's this guy, the handwriting is on the wall, any hematologist will tell you he is a goner -- this guy was essentially cured," Galipeau tells WebMD. "These genetically engineered cells did what everyone in the field has tried to do for 20 years. The man probably had kilograms of disease in his body, and the cells mopped it up completely."

The treatment uses a form of white blood cells called T cells harvested from each patient. A manmade virus-like vector is used to transfer special molecules to the T cells. One of the molecules, CD19, makes the T cells attack B lymphocytes -- the cells that become cancerous in CLL.

All this has been done before. These genetically engineered cells are called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. They kill cancer in the test tube. But in humans, they die away before they do much damage to tumors.

What's new about the current treatment is the addition of a special signaling molecule called 4-1BB. This signal does several things: it gives CAR T cells more potent anti-tumor activity, and it somehow allows the cells to persist and multiply in patients' bodies. Moreover, the signal does not call down the deadly all-out immune attack -- the feared "cytokine storm" -- that can do more harm than good.

This may be why relatively small infusions of the CAR T cells had such a profound effect. Each of the cells killed thousands of cancer cells and destroyed more than 2 pounds of tumor in each patient.

"Within three weeks, the tumors had been blown away, in a way that was much more violent than we ever expected,"June says in a news release. 'It worked much better than we thought it would."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Both stories could have used more outside sources. In each case, only one outside source was quoted. In the WebMD case, the outside source was overly effusive. In the Reuters case, the outside source did a better job tempering some of the enthusiasm of the authors with a realistic assessment of the treatment’s prospects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS - April 18, 2016 - A five-year study shows that Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT) to treat prostate cancer offers a higher cure rate than more traditional approaches, according to researchers at UT Southwestern Medical Center Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center.

The study - the first trial to publish five-year results from SBRT treatment for prostate cancer - found a 98.6 percent cure rate with SBRT, a noninvasive form of radiation treatment that involves high-dose radiation beams entering the body through various angles and intersecting at the desired target. It is a state-of-the-art technology that allows for a concentrated dose to reach the tumor while limiting the radiation dose to surrounding healthy tissue.

"The high cure rate is striking when compared to the reported five-year cure rates from other approaches like surgery or conventional radiation, which range between 80 to 90 percent, while the side effects of this treatment are comparable to other types of treatment," said Dr. Raquibul Hannan, Assistant Professor of Radiation Oncology and lead author for the study. "What we now have is a more potent and effective form of completely noninvasive treatment for prostate cancer, conveniently completed in five treatments."
• Prostatectomy, the surgical removal of the prostate gland, which can be done with minimally invasive techniques and robotic assistance;
• Brachytherapy, in which doctors implant numerous small radioactive seeds about the size of a grain of rice into the prostate gland using multiple large needles inserted through the skin in the operating room. Once implanted, the seeds release their radioactivity directly into the prostate gland; and
• External beam radiation, which involves 42 to 45 treatments administered over two or more months, five days a week.

"The current form of radiation is 44 treatments given over nine weeks. In contrast, the SBRT therapy we used allows the delivery of highly focused radiation in only five treatments, allowing patients to return to their normal lives more quickly," said senior author Dr. Robert Timmerman, Director of the Annette Simmons Stereotactic Treatment Center at UT Southwestern, and Professor and Vice Chairman of the Department of Radiation Oncology. "SBRT is both more convenient and has increased potency."

UT Southwestern served as the lead site for the multi-institutional clinical trial, which involved first-time prostate cancer patients diagnosed with stage I or stage II (low and intermediate risk) prostate cancer. A total of 91 patients were treated prospectively and followed for five years, with only one patient experiencing a recurrence of his cancer. The findings are published in the European Journal of Cancer.

Terry Martin of McKinney, Texas, - about an hour outside Dallas - said the fewer number of treatments was a compelling advantage when he was evaluating treatment options.

"I live 45 minutes away from UT Southwestern. The difference between being treated five times versus 44 times is enormous," said Mr. Martin, a retired airline pilot. "I felt that I was back to normal just 10 days after finishing treatment."

In addition to shorter treatment times, researchers found that side effects were not necessarily different compared to other forms of prostate cancer treatment. In the short term, the side effects of SBRT can include urinary issues (urgency, frequency and burning) and rectal irritation, which are often temporary and reverse within four weeks of treatment. Researchers found a small risk of longer-term urinary and rectal complications, which is also comparable to conventional treatments. Decrease in erectile function was seen in 25 percent of patients, fewer than with conventional radiation or surgery, said Dr. Hannan.

To reduce the side effects associated with SBRT, current clinical trials at UTSW are using a unique and biodegradable rectal spacer gel to protect the rectum. UTSW is currently the only accredited site in Texas at which this spacer gel can be used.

Other clinical trials at the UTSW Department of Radiation Oncology are seeking to expand the application of SBRT to high-risk (Stage III) prostate cancer patients. "Our hope is that the high potency of this form of treatment will significantly improve treatment of these patients," says Dr. Hannan, the principal investigator of the high-risk prostate SBRT trial.

UT Southwestern has been a leader in pioneering use of SBRT. Dr. Timmerman, Director of Image-Guided Stereotactic Radiation Therapy, Medical Director of Radiation Oncology, and holder of the Effie Marie Cain Distinguished Chair in Cancer Therapy Research, has served as the lead investigator in several national trials designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of SBRT to treat other types of cancer, including cancer in the lung, liver, and spine. A range of clinical trials of SBRT therapy are under way at Simmons Cancer Center, including new investigations evaluating use of SBRT for cancers in the breast and larynx.

Since 2009, UT Southwestern has trained more than 300 physicians and peers interested in implementing SBRT in their clinical practice. Simmons Cancer Center's arsenal of stereotactic radiotherapy technology includes the cutting-edge Gamma Knife, CyberKnife, Agility, Vero SBRT and TrueBeam technologies.

The SBRT study for prostate cancer was supported by a grant from the U.S. Department of Defense. Additional UTSW researchers involved in the study include Dr. Yair Lotan, Professor of Urology and holder of the Helen J. and Robert S. Strauss Professorship in Urology, and Dr. Xian-Jin Xie, Professor of Clinical Science.

The Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center is the only NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Center in North Texas and one of just 45 NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers in the nation. The Simmons Cancer Center includes 13 major cancer care programs with a focus on treating the whole patient with innovative treatments, while fostering groundbreaking basic research that has the potential to improve patient care and prevention of cancer worldwide. In addition, the Center's education and training programs support and develop the next generation of cancer researchers and clinicians.

The Simmons Cancer Center is among only 30 U.S. cancer research centers and the only cancer center in North Texas to be named a National Clinical Trials Network Lead Academic Participating Site, a prestigious designation by the NCI, designed to bolster clinical cancer research for adults and to provide patients access to cancer research trials sponsored by the NCI, where promising new drugs often are tested.

UT Southwestern, one of the premier academic medical centers in the nation, integrates pioneering biomedical research with exceptional clinical care and education. The institution's faculty has included six who have been awarded Nobel Prizes since 1985. The faculty of almost 2,800 is responsible for groundbreaking medical advances and is committed to translating science-driven research quickly to new clinical treatments. UT Southwestern physicians provide medical care in about 80 specialties to more than 92,000 hospitalized patients and oversee approximately 2.2 million outpatient visits a year.

This news release is available on our home page at http://www.

To automatically receive news releases from UT Southwestern via email, subscribe at http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release provides the funding source (the U.S. Department of Defense) although it does not explicitly comment on the absence of conflict.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A swollen lymph node on the neck was the only symptom Karen Anderson noticed.

The 47-year-old pre-school teacher from Eugene was stunned when her biopsy came back positive for melanoma –the most life-threatening form of skin cancer. Malignant cells had spread throughout her body.

Surgeons removed affected lymph nodes but within months tumors appeared in her liver, breast, skull and other lymph nodes. "My oncologist said this is going to kill you and you need to think about preparing for that," Anderson says.

Two years ago, she gained access to an experimental immune-enhancing treatment in clinical trials at Providence Cancer Center in Portland. Called ipilimumab, it unleashes an all-out immune system attack on cancer cells. At first, the injections caused only side-effects: widespread itching, fatigue, and diarrhea. Worse, Anderson says, "I could feel the tumors getting bigger. They felt hot to me."

Then after several months the tumors began to shrink. After one year, the once palpable tumors were no longer detectable in diagnostic scans. While far from a cure, the treatment is the first to improve survival in people with melanoma that has spread, or metastasized, says Dr. Walter Urba, director of cancer research at the Providence Cancer Center. Urba is a co-author of the

on ipilimumab published in the New England Journal of Medicine Saturday.

Success in a cancer as deadly and difficult to treat as advanced melanoma is raising hopes that the treatment may also prove useful in staving off other tumors, including lung and prostate cancer. Drug companies are racing to develop competing versions of the immune-enhancing therapy, an antibody produced through genetic engineering.

"I would not be here today without it," says Anderson, who is undergoing a second round of treatment for resurgent tumors. "It's given me time with my kids, my husband, my family – and it's been quality time."

Melanoma is a rare skin cancer, but accounts for most of the 66,000 annual deaths from skin cancer worldwide. If caught early, before cancer cells break off and spread, surgery can stop melanoma. But most people diagnosed after melanoma has metastasized die within a year.

"For years and years, we've been looking for an effective therapy," Urba says.

Ipilimumab, nicknamed Ippy, is one of the first antibody-based therapies that use the body's immune defenses to destroy cancer cells. The antibodies bind to a specific protein studding the surface of T cells, immune system cells that seek and destroy virus-infected and cancerous cells. The surface protein works like a switch, inactivating T cells after a few days to prevent the immune system from running amok and destroying healthy tissue. The antibodies temporarily jam the switch, allowing T cells to continue attacking cancer tissue for weeks or months – for as long as patients continue to receive injections of the engineered antibody.

More than 600 melanoma patients took part in the ipilimumab clinical trial at 125 cancer centers in 13 countries. All patients had inoperable cancers with widespread tumors after conventional treatment. Some patients received ipilimumab alone, others it combined with a cancer vaccine called gp100, and a third group received only the cancer vaccine.

Ipilimumab appeared to double survival compared with the gp100 vaccine alone. After one year, nearly half of patients given ipilimumab alone or in combination remained alive, compared with one quarter of patients given only the vaccine. After two years, 24 percent of patients treated with ipilimumab were alive, 22 percent of patients treated with the combination, while survival dropped to 14 percent among patients treated with the vaccine alone.

"Some of the people are now out 44 months and still remain free of disease," Urba says.

Serious side effects also became clear. Nearly two-thirds of patients on ipilimumab experienced side effects caused by over-active immunity, such as severe itching, intestinal irritation and diarrhea. Researchers linked 14 deaths to the study drugs, half caused by immune-system reactions.

Still, the study stands as "a major landmark in cancer immunotherapy," says Dr. Bernard Fox, president of the International Society for Biological Therapy of Cancer. He says the results highlight the potential for using the same approach to treat other cancers. Already, early studies in patients with lung cancer and prostate cancer have produced positive, though inconclusive results.

"There is no reason it can't be applied to any of the common tumor types," Urba says. "They all have antigens on their surface that T cells can recognize." Ongoing trials are testing ipilimumab with other cancer drugs, in different doses and against different cancers.

Drug company Bristol-Myers Squibb told investors the drug could gain regulatory approval as early as next year and become available to cancer patients in 2012. Ipilimumab was developed by Medarex, a New Jersey company owned by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Other drug companies are at work on competing versions of the immune-enhancing antibody therapy.

For now, federal regulators have authorized

to people who have serious or immediately life-threatening, inoperable melanoma that has spread, who have no alternative treatment options, and whose physicians believe the drug is appropriate. Providence Cancer Center is the only site in Oregon offering compassionate use of the drug. The Northwest's other participating centers are the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance and Swedish Cancer Institute in Seattle, Providence Cancer Center in Spokane, and Multicare Health System in Tacoma.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Story quoted one independent source in addition to one of the study co-authors. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
January 6, 2015 / It is normal for cognitive function to slightly deteriorate with age. Memory capacity begins to worsen, along with processing speed and the ability to form long-term memories. Finding a way to defer the onset of these issues becomes increasingly important as life expectancy gets longer and global populations age.

This study, conducted by researchers from Italy's University of L'Aquila and Mars, Incorporated, reinforces the results of several recent cognitive studies--throwing more light on the important role diet plays in maintaining cognitive health. Dr. Giovambattista Desideri, lead author on the paper, said, "The results of this study are encouraging--they support the idea that diet, and specifically a diet rich in cocoa flavanols, can play an important role in maintaining cognitive health as we age."

This study was the second installment in a two-part investigation by this team into the effects cocoa flavanols have on the brain. The first study, published in the journal Hypertension in 2012, found cognitive and cardiometabolic benefits of habitual cocoa flavanol consumption in older adults who had been diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Despite these findings, the question of the benefits of cocoa flavanols on cognitive function among individuals without MCI remained uncertain.

This second study just published in the AJCN looked to address this question. Enrolling men and women aged 61-85 years with no evidence of cognitive dysfunction, the participants in this controlled, randomized, double-blind study were assigned to one of three flavanol groups, consuming a drink containing either high (993 mg), intermediate (520 mg) or low (48 mg) amounts of cocoa flavanols every day for eight weeks. The nutritionally matched drinks were specially prepared. The high- and intermediate-flavanol cocoa drinks were produced using Mars' patented Cocoapro® process, while the low-flavanol drink was made with a highly processed, alkalized cocoa powder. Other than the inclusion of the test drink, normal diets and regular lifestyle were maintained throughout the study.

At the start of the study and again after eight weeks, cognitive function was assessed using a battery of tests that examined memory, retention, recall, as well as executive function. Among those individuals who regularly consumed either the high- or intermediate-flavanol drinks, there were significant improvements in overall cognitive function after only eight weeks. As cognitive function was normal for this aged population, this study shows that even cognitively healthy individuals can quickly benefit from the regular inclusion of cocoa flavanols in their diets.

In addition to evaluating cognitive function, the researchers also monitored insulin resistance, blood pressure and other metabolic markers. Excitingly, there was also evidence of improvements in these cardiometabolic outcomes. In the high- and intermediate-flavanol groups, both systolic and diastolic blood pressures were reduced and insulin resistance was significantly improved. In contrast, only a modest improvement in diastolic blood pressure was observed in the low-flavanol group, with no significant improvements in either systolic blood pressure or insulin resistance among the consumers of the low-flavanol drink.

It is not yet fully understood how cocoa flavanols bring about improvements in cognitive function, but the study's authors suggest that the improvements in insulin resistance and blood pressure could be revealing. "Earlier studies suggest a central role for insulin resistance in brain aging," said Desideri. "These results could therefore provide some insight into a possible mechanism of action for the cognitive improvements we have observed."

Over the past decade, there has been significant evidence indicating that consuming cocoa flavanols improves vascular function. Dr. Catherine Kwik-Uribe, human health and nutrition director at Mars, Incorporated, and co-author on this latest study, said, "Since the brain is a heavily vascularized tissue, we might also be looking at vascular improvements as underlying the observed improvements in cognitive function."

Dr. Kwik-Uribe went on to speak about Mars' flavanol research program that has spanned over two decades: "The amount of research showing the beneficial effects of cocoa flavanol consumption is growing and Mars is proud to be a partner in important research like this that highlights the positive role cocoa flavanols may play in supporting healthy aging."

Dr. Desideri and his team are already thinking about the next steps: "It is clear from our latest research and other recent studies that cocoa flavanols have profound effects on the body, and specifically the brain," said Desideri. "Now we'd like to know how they work and how long the effects last. If these further studies confirm the findings that brain health can be improved by consuming dietary flavanols, it may have the potential to affect the daily lives of millions of people world-wide."

Note to Editors: This research trial was carried out with a special cocoa flavanol test product, designed to deliver a standardized amount of flavanols within a nutritionally suitable drink. This test product is currently not commercially available. Flavanol content of commercially available chocolate is variable and, given its macronutrient profile, it is not recommended as a health food.

Flavanols are a distinct group of naturally occurring compounds that can be found in a variety of foods such as tea and red wine. Cocoa flavanols refers to the group of bioactives found naturally in fresh cocoa beans. Cocoa is an especially rich source of flavanols and the type and mixture of flavanols and procyanidins found in cocoa is unique. Mars studies show cocoa flavanols have a range of proven health benefits, including improved circulation and cardiovascular health. For more information, please visit Mars Center for Cocoa Health Science at http://www. .

For more than 20 years, and based on collaborating with a multidisciplinary group of international experts, Mars, Incorporated has been conducting comprehensive and innovative research with a network of scientific collaborators around the world to advance the understanding of cocoa flavanols and their health benefits for the purpose of improving human health. Building on decades of research in cocoa flavanols, the Mars Center for Cocoa Health Science (MCCHS) was formally established in 2012 as a Center of Excellence to pioneer, capture and share the latest scientific research in the field. MCCHS provides access to more than 20 years of gold standard research, over 140 published peer-reviewed scientific papers, videos, slides and other information that Mars, Incorporated and its collaborators have developed to advance cocoa flavanol understanding. For more information, please visit http://www. . Follow us: twitter.com/CocoaHealthSci

In 1911, Frank C. Mars made the first Mars candies in his Tacoma, Washington kitchen and established Mars' first roots as a confectionery company. In the 1920s, Forrest E. Mars, Sr. joined his father in business and together they launched the MILKY WAY® bar. In 1932, Forrest, Sr. moved to the United Kingdom with a dream of building a business based on the objective of creating a "mutuality of benefits for all stakeholders" - this objective serves as the foundation of Mars, Incorporated today. Based in McLean, Virginia, Mars has net sales of more than $33 billion, six business segments including Petcare, Chocolate, Wrigley, Food, Drinks, Symbioscience, and more than 75,000 Associates worldwide that are putting its Principles into action to make a difference for people and the planet through its performance.

For more information, please visit http://www. . Follow us: facebook.com/mars, twitter.com/marsglobal, youtube.com/mars, linkedin.com/company/mars

Daniela Mastroiacovo, Catherine Kwik-Uribe, Davide Grassi, Stefano Necozione, Angelo Raffaele, Luana Pistacchio, Roberta Righetti, Raffaella Bocale, Maria Carmela Lechiara, Carmine Marini, Claudio Ferri, and Giovambattista Desideri. Cocoa flavanol consumption improves cognitive function, blood pressure control, and metabolic profile in elderly subjects: the Cocoa, Cognition, and Aging (CoCoA) Study--a randomized controlled trial, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, First published ahead of print December 17, 2014 as doi: 10.3945/ajcn.114.092189.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release was issued by Mars Inc., and it says high up, “This study, conducted by researchers from Italy’s University of L’Aquila and Mars, Incorporated”. While the release references Mars throughout, and we don’t think any reporter would be confused about who was behind the study, the release could have stated directly that Mars funded the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A few short visits and phone calls with a nurse may be enough to help insomniacs get their zzz’s, suggests a new study of sleep-deprived older adults.

Researchers found that more than half of participants overcame chronic insomnia within a month of starting a brief behavioral treatment.

The key ingredient in the therapy, according to lead researcher Dr. Daniel Buysse of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, was a simple, somewhat counter-intuitive lesson: “When you are sleeping poorly, the most important thing you can do is spend less time in bed.”

Insomnia affects about one in every five Americans, rising to one in three among the elderly, and has been linked to a range of physical problems, from accidents to hypertension. Not surprisingly, it is also detrimental to mental health.

Three decades of research has shown cognitive behavioral therapy to be equally effective to a pill for insomnia, with fewer side effects. Yet the time and resource-intense strategy — usually involving between six- and eight hour-long appointments with a clinical psychologist - is not widely available and its cost, generally hundreds of dollars, is prohibitive for many.

Buysse and his colleagues wondered if the pill-free treatment could be shortened and simplified, providing more rapid results at a lower cost.

To find out, they studied 79 adults with chronic insomnia. Participants averaged 72 years of age and were randomly assigned to receive either printed educational material about sleep or the brief behavioral treatment consisting of one 45- to 60-minute in-person session, a 30-minute follow-up session and two 20-minute phone calls.

A mental health nurse practitioner in a regular doctor’s office focused the behavioral instruction on how to restrict time in bed and set regular sleep-wake schedules, while also discussing the biological rationale behind the strategy, including the body’s daily cycles of physical, mental and behavioral changes.

“This (therapy) has the effect of compressing your sleep into a more solid block,” Buysse told Reuters Health in an e-mail. “More consolidated sleep is more refreshing.”

Based on questionnaires and sleep diaries, the researchers found that two out of every three participants receiving the behavioral intervention responded favorably by the end of 4 weeks, while just one out of every four receiving the printed material experienced substantial improvement in their sleep.

The gap was similarly wide when the researchers looked at the number of participants who no longer met the criteria for insomnia: 55 percent versus 13 percent.

On average, for every 2.4 participants treated, one responded favorably and one overcame insomnia, report the researchers in the Archives of Internal Medicine.

These improvements were sustained for at least 6 months, and were backed up by data from a sleep monitor worn on the wrist or ankle. When the researchers looked at information from a different, more in-depth sleep monitoring system, however, they failed to find significantly better outcomes with the behavioral therapy.

The new results were similar to those previously published on the more intense cognitive behavioral therapy.

“A lot of insomniacs spend a lot of time lying in bed worrying about their sleep, among other things. They expect to have insomnia,” Dr. Thomas Neylan of the University of California, San Francisco, who wrote an accompanying commentary in the journal, told Reuters Health.

“Generally, the most expedient thing to do is just prescribe a sleeping pill,” noted Neylan.

But the drugs can pose problems, ranging from dependence or abuse to cognitive impairment during the day. And the risks may be even more pronounced among older patients, added senior author Timothy Monk, also of the University of Pittsburgh. Under the influence of the drugs, seniors may be more likely to fall and fracture a bone.

While brief behavioral treatment for insomnia is not yet generally available, Monk told Reuters Health in an e-mail that his team hopes their findings will be “an important first step in that process.”

In the meantime, Neylan offers insomniacs some advice: “If you’re not ready to fall asleep, don’t lie down in bed and try to force yourself to sleep. And if you wake up in the middle of night and don’t fall back asleep easily, get out of bed.”

“You don’t want to have any linkage between the experience of lying in bed and being awake,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


The story includes comments from the author of a commentary article that appeared in the Archives of Internal Medicine along with the research article. In the disclosure section of their article, some of the researchers reported ties to pharmaceutical companies, but since this trial tested a non-drug approach and was funded by public agency and academic grants, it seems reasonable to consider the industry links as not being relevant to this study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dallas, Texas -February 4, 2016 - MorNuCo Laboratories of West Lafayette, Indiana, and their ONCOblot® Test recently completed a retrospective clinical trial focusing on the early detection of malignant mesothelioma, with the exciting results that the ONCOblot® test detected a molecular marker that is indicative of the presence of mesothelioma, 4-10 years in advance of clinical symptoms appearing. MorNuCo Laboratories is elated to share these results with the public, as early detection is widely considered the corner stone of an effective strategy to reduce cancer-related deaths.

Malignant mesothelioma is an aggressive and almost uniformly fatal tumor caused primarily by exposure to asbestos. In this study, the serum presence of a mesothelioma-specific form of the ENOX2 protein (a recently identified marker of malignancy) was found within the serum of asbestos-exposed individuals an average of 6.2 years in advance of clinical symptoms by using the ONCOblot tissue of origin cancer detection test.

Serum samples that were collected from asbestos-exposed individuals prior to the development of mesothelioma as part of a cancer surveillance program were tested for ENOX2 protein presence to determine how long in advance of clinical symptoms that the mesothelioma-specific ENOX2 protein transcript variants could be detected.

The results of this study showed that two mesothelioma-specific ENOX2 protein transcript variants were detected in the serum of asbestos-exposed individuals 4-10 years prior to clinical diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma, an exciting sign of progress in the cancer detection field.

"The completion of this trial is an exciting new chapter for our work," says Nick Miner, Vice President of Business Development. "Although asbestos-induced mesothelioma is a very specific example of early detection, we are currently pursuing larger-scale clinical trials to investigate the utility of the ENOX2 protein marker to predict the onset of cancers of other tissues of origin as well." Miner continued.

Although the fight against cancer often appears to be an overwhelmingly intransigent problem, significant progress is being made regarding the development of additional tools for cancer detection, such as the ONCOblot Test.

The ONCOblot® Test was developed and created by Dr. D. James Morré and Dr. Dorothy M. Morré of MorNuCo Inc., located in the Purdue Research Park, West Lafayette, IN. The Morré's are committed to the premise that understanding cancer is the key to its conquest. The ONCOblot® test is based on more than 20 years of basic research. The ONCOblot test is a Laboratory Developed Test (LDT) that was developed at MorNuCo Inc. The ONCOblot Test is CLIA registered and meets all current FDA regulations as an LDT. A 510(k) application is being prepared for submission to the FDA to register the ONCOblot test as a medical device.

If you'd like more information about the ONCOblot® Test, please visit http://www. or e-mail info@oncoblotlabs.com

If you'd like to read the clinical study, please visit http://clinicalproteomicsjournal.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the study was done by MorNuCo, the company that developed the ONCOblot test.
Another useful flag apparent to close readers is that the only person quoted in the release is not a researcher, but the company’s vice president of business development.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
They don't call it "The Big C" for nothing. People don't even like to say the word out loud.

The good news, we're told, is that there are many things we can do – or not do – in our adult lives to lower our risk of developing different types of cancer. Want to avoid lung cancer? Don't smoke. Want to lower your risk of skin cancer? Stay out of the sun, or utilize a proper sunscreen.

But a new study published Monday in Cancer suggests that at least one decision our parents make FOR us may have an impact on our predisposition to certain types of cancer.

Researchers at the University of Washington School of Medicine and the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center looked at the association between circumcision and the prevalence of prostate cancer. They concluded that circumcision before first sexual intercourse is associated with a 15% reduction in the relative risk of developing prostate cancer.

It's important to note, right off the bat, that this study is not purporting to establish a cause and effect relationship. As is often the case, there are many additional factors at play.

First, a bit of background. It has long been established that men who are uncircumcised are more prone to contracting sexually transmitted infections. As the study's authors point out, "The mechanism(s) by which circumcision reduced acquisition of an STI [sexually transmitted infection] is thought to be related to the microenvironment of the thin, lightly keratinized mucosal lining of the inner foreskin."

This tissue is subject to small tears that allow potential access of pathogens into the bloodstream. Furthermore, "The moist environment under the preputial skin may help pathogens survive for extended periods prior to direct infection." Circumcision, of course, removes this protective environment.

Why is this important? Infections are reported to cause almost 20% of cancers worldwide, either directly by infection, or indirectly via inflammation. Several STIs – such as gonorrhea, Chlamydia, HPV & HIV – have been found in the prostate.

Participants in the study were asked about their family’s medical history, which may increase a man’s risk of developing prostate cancer, and their PSA screening history, which can lead to overdiagnosis of the condition. Men were also asked to self-report their circumcision status, number of sexual partners, and their history of STIs.

Circumcision was reported in 68.8% of the cases and 71.5% of the controls. Caucasian men more commonly reported circumcision (69%) than African American men (43%). For 91% who reported circumcision, the procedure was performed shortly after birth.

A few potential caveats to note include the reliance on self-reporting when it comes to a man's history of STIs, as well as his sexual partners. A cursory review of the data suggests, for example, that the number of male sexual partners is greatly underreported. Male-to-male sexual activity has been shown to lead to an increased rate in STIs, including HIV.

This gives pause to make one wonder what other facts were underreported, though the numbers of circumcised vs. not circumcised do fall in line with national survey results.

The bottom line from the American Cancer Society: While this is an interesting finding, it's not likely to spur any change in recommendations or medical practice.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story concludes with a statement attributed to the American Cancer Society suggesting that the findings won’t change medical practice. While this statement is certainly no substitute for an actual conversation with an expert, it’s more context than we see from many similar blog posts about medical studies. We’ll give it a passing grade, though barely.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The study “has wide-reaching implications,” said Dr. Louise Wilkins-Haug, director for maternal-fetal medicine and reproductive genetics at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, who was not involved in the research. “Individuals need to be careful” to ensure that companies use rigorous laboratory procedures and support accuracy claims with data, she added.

One potential worry is that women might abort fetuses of an undesired sex. Several companies do not sell tests in China or India, where boys are prized over girls and fetuses found to be female have been aborted. While sex selection is not considered a widespread objective in the United States, companies say that occasionally customers expressed that interest, and have been denied the test. A recent study of third pregnancies in the journal Prenatal Diagnosis found that in some Asian-American groups, more boys than girls are born in ratios that are “strongly suggesting prenatal sex selection,” the authors said.

At least one company, Consumer Genetics, which sells the Pink or Blue test, requires customers to sign a waiver saying they are not using the test for that purpose. “We don’t want this technology to be used as a method of gender selection,” said the company’s executive vice president, Terry Carmichael. Sex-determination tests are part of a new frontier of fetal DNA testing, which can be used to determine paternity and blood type, and is being used to develop early screening tests for genetic diseases or disorders like Down syndrome.

The new study found that to be reliable, the sex-determination tests had to be performed after at least seven weeks of gestation. Most tests that were highly accurate were conducted on a mother’s blood, not urine. And certain rigorous laboratory procedures had to be followed. For the blood tests, women prick their fingers and send blood samples to labs. If the Y chromosome is detected, the fetus is male. Absence of a Y chromosome would probably mean the fetus is female, but could mean that fetal DNA was not found in that sample.

The tests are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration because they are not used for medical purposes, a spokeswoman said, but the agency is investigating the explosion of home genetic tests like these and genome-sequencing kits.

Dr. Diana Bianchi, executive director of the Mother Infant Research Institute at Tufts Medical Center in Boston and the lead author of the sex-determination report, said, “A very important aspect of the study is how this advances prenatal care.”

But there are potential concerns too, she said, including that women may spend more than $250 for the tests when they don’t have insurance for prenatal care. A typical blood test like Pink or Blue, for example, costs $25 for the kit. Lab fees and shipping costs, which vary, bring the total expense to $265 to $330.

Dr. Bianchi is conducting another study to “try to find out why people are buying these things and what are the consequences,” she said. “It’s very important to educate health care providers that pregnant women are buying these tests.”

Another type of test not studied by the researchers has become popular because it is cheaper and can be done at home. These tests analyze hormones in women’s urine, a method that several experts said has not been studied as rigorously as DNA. Rebecca Griffin, a founder of the biggest seller, Intelligender, said two independent studies found it 90 percent accurate at 10 weeks.

Another company, TrovaGene, has developed a DNA test using urine, which, according to Gabriele Cerrone, TrovaGene’s co-founder and director, is 95 percent accurate at predicting boys at seven weeks, and 88 percent accurate at predicting girls. TrovaGene is also developing a test for Down syndrome.

Most DNA tests on the market use blood.

Raylene Lewis, 34, of College Station, Tex., had a frustrating experience with a now-defunct company, Acu-Gen, which guaranteed 99.9 percent accuracy with its blood tests. In 2005, she was told she was having a boy, and she chose a name, bought boy clothes and told everyone. When an ultrasound revealed she was carrying a girl, “I was absolutely shocked,“ she said. She was not unhappy, she said, but “it was like the baby boy disappeared.”

When the Lewises complained to Acu-Gen’s president, they were told, “We are very sure that genetically you are having a male,” she said, reading a transcript of the conversation, which they recorded. The official suggested that the baby might be “what a baby girl looks like on the outside,” but that “we’re giving you the results on the inside.”

Ms. Lewis, who sued Acu-Gen, said she ultimately received a refund. Lawyers for Acu-Gen could not be reached for comment.

The Pink or Blue test, which claims 95 percent accuracy at seven weeks and gives refunds for wrong results, appears to meet the standards described in the new study.

Chelsea Wallace, 23, of Okeechobee, Fla., was thrilled early this year when the test she took at seven weeks said she was having a boy, a result confirmed weeks later by ultrasound. Ms. Wallace, who has a 3-year-old daughter, said she also would have been happy with a girl, but that since she and her fiancé could not agree on a boy’s name, finding out early gave them time to choose the name Layton. It also helped her plan, she said.

“As soon as I found out I was pregnant,” said Ms. Wallace, whose son is due in September, “I wanted to know what I was having.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted four sources, in addition to the study’s lead author.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new, experimental cholesterol-fighting drug is creating quite a buzz among researchers and other experts, prompting some to use words such as "dramatic," "breakthrough" and "game changing," to describe early-stage clinical trial results.

If these initial results pan out in larger trials, the drug could prove to be more effective than statins, the widely prescribed drugs which have been very successful in lowering levels of LDL - or bad cholesterol.

Researchers have known for some time that when the protein PCSK9, which stands for proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9, binds to LDL receptors on the liver, it compromises the organ's ability to filter the bad cholesterol from the blood. 

 

 Too much LDL cholesterol circulating in the blood can lead to the thickening of artery walls, making them less flexible and therefore impairing their function and increasing the risk of heart disease.

In this phase one clinical trial, which is designed to determine if a drug is safe, researchers found that using a monoclonal antibody (lab-produced protein) called REGN727, was not only safe, but effectively blocked PCSK9 and therefore signficantly reduced bad cholesterol in healthy patients as well as those also taking the popular cholesterol-lowering drug Lipitor.

Earlier studies had shown this effect in primates, but this new study, published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine, provides the first clinical trial data for testing the drug on humans. This new drug is being developed by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi, who funded the research.

“Wars for PCSK9 are far bigger than the statin wars," said Dr. Evan A Stein, lead author of the study and researcher at the Metabolic and Atherosclerosis Research Center in Cincinnati, Ohio. “This is a hot research area and everybody is so close together."

Other companies including Amgen, Merck & Company, Novartis and Pfizer, are also hot on the trail developing their own PCSK9 inhibitor drugs. Stein said.

Additional results for PCSK9 inhibitor drugs are expected to be presented at the annual American College of Cardiology meeting which begins Saturday in Chicago, he said.

The REGN727 study included three trial arms. Two arms used 72 healthy volunteers who were either injected with a single dose of the drug in increasing amounts to test for side effects, which is the purpose of a phase one clinical trial. A third arm included 21 people with a family history of high cholesterol, and 30 people with nonfamilial high cholesterol. All of those subjects were also receiving treatment with the statin Lipitor.

A control group of subjects with nonfamilial high cholesterol was treated only with a special diet. None of the subjects who received REGN727 discontinued the study because of adverse effects, and the subjects who received REGN727 had a striking reduction of 60 to 65% in LDL cholesterol, according to Stein.

Stein characterized the results of the trial as “pretty dramatic.”

A PCSK9 inhibitor, Stein said, differs from statins "because it's unlike any other drug. With statins you get toxicity – with these drugs we don’t see any side effects with the antibody.”

In an accompanying editorial, authors Dr. Stephen G. Young, and Loren G. Fong, Ph.D. write: “At this point, the status of PCSK9 therapeutics appears to be full speed ahead. Soon, we can expect more human trials in which investigators will dissect the properties of different PCSK9 antibodies and assess the effect of these agents.”

However, without long-term safety data and evidence that PCSK9 inhibitors truly help prevent heart disease, Young and Fong caution that it will remain unclear how important this class of drugs will be.

The cost of this drug will also play a role in determining which patients might use it, Fong and Young say. But they also note that "patients who cannot tolerate statins could benefit greatly."

If the results are confirmed, “This is game changing science,” said Dr. Richard A. Stein, a spokesman for the American Heart Association who's not related to the study author or involved in the research.

Stein called the trial results “a very important breakthrough," while being careful to note that they represent early science which should be confirmed through larger and longer studies.

He said the study methodology was thorough because it included people with high cholesterol as well as people with genetic familial high cholesterol, which is proven to be a result of impaired PCSK9 genetic function.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag.
The story did quote the editorial writers and did seek comment from an American Heart Association spokesman.
But the story did not report, as MedPage Today did, that: “Many of the co-authors were employees of Regeneron, one of whom jointly wrote the paper with Stein.”
We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"As the U.S. health care payment system shifts from volume to value, we are focused on identifying new approaches to health service delivery that provide better care and improve patient outcomes while lowering costs," said Troyen A. Brennan, MD, study author and Chief Medical Officer, CVS Health. "Our research shows that home infusion care is a promising model that is both cost- and clinically-effective and is overwhelmingly preferred by patients when intravenous therapy is required."

Researchers conducted a systematic review of existing peer-reviewed research evaluating infusion care for several conditions, including cystic fibrosis, antibiotics following orthopedic surgery and several cancers requiring infused chemotherapies. Researchers compared measures of quality, safety, clinical outcomes, quality of life and costs of home infusion services to those provided in medical settings. The research showed that patients receiving intravenous therapy at home had as good or better clinical outcomes as those patients who received the same therapy in a traditional health care setting. In addition, patients overwhelmingly preferred receiving their infusion therapies at home, reporting fewer disruptions in personal schedules and responsibilities. The costs associated with home infusion were also consistently lower than services provided in a health care facility, with savings ranging between $1,928 and $2,974 per course of treatment.

"At CVS Health, we provide important home infusion services to patients through Coram, which is just one of the ways we are expanding our clinical delivery model and helping to move important health services to lower cost sites of care," added Alan Lotvin, MD, Executive Vice President, CVS Specialty. "In fact, our patients report high satisfaction with our Coram home infusion services, citing convenience and comfort as key elements that improved their overall experience."



Home infusion services are a rapidly growing delivery model in the health care system with rising rates of chronic and acute conditions that require intravenous therapy. Despite this, clinical outcomes and quality of care have not previously been systematically evaluated. While many commercial health plans provide comprehensive coverage for home infusion services, Medicare has limited reimbursement for this type of care, and Congress is discussing how to implement a comprehensive home infusion benefit for Medicare beneficiaries.

Coram, a service provided by CVS Health, provides vital infusion care and support to tens of thousands of Americans each month with a range of conditions including immune deficiencies, rheumatoid arthritis and serious infections requiring intravenous antibiotic therapy. Care is administered by experienced infusion nurses and pharmacists, and in addition, patients receive additional disease management education and support throughout their treatment.

The CVS Health Research Institute is focused on contributing to the body of scientific knowledge related to pharmacy and health care through research collaborations with external academic institutions, participation in federally-funded research, analysis and sharing of CVS Health data sources and coordination of pilot programs and initiatives. CVS Health Research Institute findings support a continuous quality improvement environment, which encourages product innovation and development to benefit CVS Health patients, clients and their members.

About CVS Health 

CVS Health (NYSE: CVS) is a pharmacy innovation company helping people on their path to better health. Through its more than 9,600 retail pharmacies, more than 1,100 walk-in medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with nearly 80 million plan members, a dedicated senior pharmacy care business serving more than one million patients per year, and expanding specialty pharmacy services, the Company enables people, businesses and communities to manage health in more affordable and effective ways. This unique integrated model increases access to quality care, delivers better health outcomes and lowers overall health care costs. Find more information about how CVS Health is shaping the future of health at .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release is clear that the study was done by the CVS Health Research Institute. Since this is a news release from a profit-making company that operates directly to sell services under study, we hope the readers quickly understand there is an inherent conflict. This is the equivalent of a Coca Cola study about the benefits of drinking their product.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A research team from the University of Liverpool has reached an important milestone towards creating a urine diagnostic test for prostate cancer that could mean that invasive diagnostic procedures that men currently undergo eventually become a thing of the past.

'The use of a gas chromatography (GC)-sensor system combined with advanced statistical methods towards the diagnosis of urological malignancies', published today in the Journal of Breath Research, describes a diagnostic test using a special tool to 'smell' the cancer in men's urine.

Working in collaboration with the University of the West of England's (UWE Bristol) Urological Institute team at Southmead Hospital and Bristol Royal Infirmary, the pilot study included 155 men presenting to urology clinics. Of this group, 58 were diagnosed with prostate cancer, 24 with bladder cancer and 73 with haematuria or poor stream without cancer. The results of the pilot study using the GC sensor system indicate that it is able to successfully identify different patterns of volatile compounds that allow classification of urine samples from patients with urological cancers.

Professor Chris Probert from the University of Liverpool's Institute of Translational Medicine began work on this project with UWE Bristol when he was working in Bristol as a gastroenterologist with clinical and research interest in inflammatory bowel disease.

The research team used a gas chromatography sensor system called Odoreader that was developed by a team led by Professor Probert and Professor Norman Ratcliffe at UWE Bristol. The test involves inserting urine samples into the Odoreader that are then measured using algorithms developed by the research team at the University of Liverpool and UWE Bristol.

Professor Probert said: "There is an urgent need to identify these cancers at an earlier stage when they are more treatable as the earlier a person is diagnosed the better. After further sample testing the next step is to take this technology and put it into a user friendly format. With help from industry partners we will be able to further develop the Odoreader, which will enable it to be used where it is needed most; at a patient's bedside, in a doctor's surgery, in a clinic or Walk In Centre, providing fast, inexpensive, accurate results."

Professor Norman Ratcliffe said, "There is currently no accurate test for prostate cancer, the vagaries of the PSA test indicators can sometimes result in unnecessary biopsies, resulting in psychological toll, risk of infection from the procedure and even sometimes missing cancer cases. Our aim is to create a test that avoids this procedure at initial diagnosis by detecting cancer in a non-invasive way by smelling the disease in men's urine. A few years ago we did similar work to detect bladder cancer following a discovery that dogs could sniff out cancer. We have been using the Odoreader, which is like an electronic nose to sense the cancer."

"The Odoreader has a 30 metre column that enables the compounds in the urine to travel through at different rates thus breaking the sample into a readable format. This is then translated into an algorithm enabling detection of cancer by reading the patterns presented. The positioning of the prostate gland which is very close to the bladder gives the urine profile a different algorithm if the man has cancer."

Mr Raj Prasad, Consultant Urologist at Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, said: "If this test succeeds at full medical trial it will revolutionise diagnostics. Even with detailed template biopsies there is a risk that we may fail to detect prostate cancer in some cases. Currently indicators such as diagnosed prostatomegaly (enlarged prostate) and unusually high PSA levels can lead to recommendations for biopsy if there is a concern that cancer may be prevalent. An accurate urine test would mean that many men who currently undergo prostate biopsy may not need to do so."

The pilot trial was funded by the Rotary Club in Bristol who held annual Run for the Future events in Bristol.

The research team is now looking to fund a full clinical trial.

A video in which Professor Probert explains how the machine works can be found here
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources are stated and the origins of the equipment being used and tested is also made clear in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 17, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Regular use of ibuprofen, a common anti-inflammatory drug, significantly lowers the risk for developing Parkinson's disease, Harvard researchers report.

People who took three or more tablets a week showed a 40 percent lower risk than those who didn't take the common pain reliever, their study found.

Study author Dr. Xiang Gao, an instructor and epidemiologist at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, said the findings are important for anyone at increased risk for Parkinson's because most people with the disease eventually become severely disabled.

"There is thus a need for better preventive interventions," Gao said. "In this context, our findings regarding the potential neuroprotective effect of ibuprofen, one of the most commonly used analgesics, on Parkinson's disease may have important public health and clinical implications."

Parkinson's is a disease that affects nerve cells in the brain that control the movement of muscles. It affects an estimated 1 million people in the United States, men far more often than women. The exact cause is unknown, but experts believe it's a combination of genetic and environmental factors.

Gao said that though the drug levodopa is the current standard treatment for Parkinson's, much more is needed. He is scheduled to present the findings in Toronto at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Neurology in April.

The findings came from an analysis of data on 136,474 people who did not have Parkinson's at the start of the study. In a six-year span, 293 were diagnosed with the disease. Those who took the largest doses of ibuprofen were less likely to have developed Parkinson's than were those who took smaller amounts of the drug, the study found.

No other pain reliever was found to lower the risk for Parkinson's.

Dr. Michele Tagliati, an associate professor of neurology and director of the Parkinson's Disease Center at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City, described the results as somewhat surprising and said they emphasized the need for further study.

"It's intriguing [that the finding applied to] just ibuprofen and not aspirin or acetaminophen or other commonly prescribed medications for inflammation because it implies something more specific to ibuprofen that should be investigated," Tagliati said. "So it narrows the focus to a subgroup of [anti-inflammatory drugs]."

Tagliati called the study "eye-opening." Parkinson's is not considered an inflammatory disease, he said, adding: "We might be missing something. There is more work to be done."

But in the meantime, Tagliati said, he would "definitely discuss ibuprofen use" with his patients because, if it works to protect against the disease, it could very well benefit those who already have it.

He cautioned that persistent use of ibuprofen can lead to gastritis, or inflammation of the stomach lining, but said that, in comparison, "there is very little to lose when measuring its side effects against the effects of Parkinson's," which can include loss of balance, stiffness, hallucinations and dementia.

The National Parkinson's Foundation has more on Parkinson's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent source was quoted.  But we’re troubled by the story letting that source get away with saying he would "definitely discuss ibuprofen use" with his patients – because it would be very easy to find other sources who would say it’s far too early to discuss ibuprofen use with their patients.  In fact, a MedPageToday.com story stated that the lead researcher himself said "that it’s too early to make any clinical recommendations based on the observational data, which not only need confirmation in prospective trials but also cannot prove causality."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Welcome to Dear Julia, a weekly column where readers can submit everyday health questions on anything from the science of hangovers to the mysteries of back pain. Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.

What's the difference between Tylenol, Advil, and aspirin? Which is the best to take for pain?

I used to take acetaminophen (usually referred to by its brand name, Tylenol) for the occasional headache or sore muscle, mostly because that's what we used in my house growing up. I didn't think much about whether it was more or less effective than any other type of over-the-counter pain reliever, and I suspect the same is true for many folks. Acetaminophen, after all, is the most popular over-the-counter painkiller worldwide.

So I was surprised when I found out there's a huge gap between how pain researchers think about this drug and how the public does. More specifically, every researcher I contacted for this piece said some variation of what Andrew Moore, a pain researcher at Oxford University, told me: Tylenol doesn't actually work that well for pain. To be more exact, he said, "I can't imagine why anybody would take acetaminophen."

Moore has done a number of systematic reviews on over-the-counter pain medications, looking at all the available evidence to figure out which ones work best for various problems. I asked him to describe the overall success rates for the most common three: acetaminophen (like Tylenol), ibuprofen (like Advil), and aspirin.

Like all good evidence-based medicine thinkers, he was able to provide a very practical answer: "If you’re talking about aspirin in doses of 500 to 1,000 mg or two tablets, 30 percent of people get relief from acute pain. For acetaminophen at doses of 500 to 1,000 mg, about 40 percent have a success. For ibuprofen, in its normal formulation at something around 400 mg or two tablets, about 50 percent have success."

Now, Moore was referring here to acute pain that strikes after a specific event, like a surgery, a cut, or a burn, but his message was simple: Ibuprofen seems to work best, followed by acetaminophen, and then aspirin.

For ongoing (or chronic) pain — a sore lower back, say, or the kind of degenerative arthritis that typically develops with age — ibuprofen still outperforms acetaminophen.

"WE FOUND THAT [TYLENOL] IS INEFFECTIVE ON BOTH PAIN AND DISABILITY OUTCOMES FOR LOW BACK PAIN" A 2015 systematic review of high-quality evidence, published in the BMJ, found that acetaminophen didn't seem to help most sufferers of chronic low back pain, and that it barely alleviates pain in people with osteoarthritis. As the researchers wrote, "We found that [acetaminophen] is ineffective on both pain and disability outcomes for low back pain in the immediate and short term and is not clinically superior to placebo on both pain and disability outcomes for osteoarthritis."

A limitation of the study is that the evidence on acetaminophen was mainly for acute low back pain, but as the University of Leeds's Philip Conaghan explained, "There is very little long-term data [on chronic back pain], and if a drug doesn't work in the acute problem, it seems unlikely to work in the chronic phase — though back pain may be even more complex than osteoarthritis pain."

The study also noted that patients on acetaminophen "are nearly four times more likely to have abnormal results on liver function tests compared with those taking oral placebo."

Other studies, like this well-designed randomized control trial of people with knee pain, have similar conclusions: Acetaminophen doesn't perform as well as ibuprofen, and it's linked to higher rates of liver problems. (Ibuprofen also has potential side effects; more on that below.)

So what about the occasional headache? What works best for that?

It turns out this is another fascinating problem area for pain researchers. Moore has looked at all the evidence for what he calls "infrequent tension headaches" and found "it is surprising how poor [the research] is and how little it tells us." Either the outcomes in studies are badly defined, the studies have too few participants to say anything concrete, or many people in the studies actually seem to have chronic headaches as opposed to the ordinary ones the researchers are allegedly studying.

"Most people would say, if you look at the data, take an ibuprofen tablet," Moore said. "Acetaminophen is just not a very good analgesic [pain reliever], yet it’s the go-to drug because it’s thought to be safe."

And that's where things get even more interesting: Acetaminophen isn't actually that safe.

"We always thought [acetaminophen] was safe, but there are increasing signals of accidental overdose in people who are regularly using it for chronic pain, and some liver toxicity," explained Conaghan, who has studied adverse events data related to this popular drug.

Between 1998 and 2003, acetaminophen was the leading cause of acute liver failure in the US. There are also hundreds of related deaths every year — though keep in mind that millions of people take drugs with acetaminophen, so these more extreme side effects are rare (especially if you're only taking them in small doses occasionally). Still, for the drug's minimal pain-killing benefits, the risks may not be worth it. 



"Don't believe that just because something is over-the-counter, it’s safe," Conaghan added. (He advised people to see their doctor if they're taking any of these painkillers for more than a few days — particularly if they're on other drugs already.)

"[Tylenol] is an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether"

Kay Brune, a professor of pharmacology and toxicology at Germany's Friedrich-Alexander University who has also studied the toxicity of painkillers, was even more direct in his thoughts on acetaminophen: "It's an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether."

Aspirin is safer than acetaminophen, he said, though to be used as a pain reliever it requires much higher doses — which can have side effects like stomach upset. Aspirin also interferes with blood coagulation for days after taking it. "If you take one gram of aspirin," Brune explained, "you're at risk of bleeding for another four days." This is why aspirin has its place as a protective agent against strokes and heart attacks for people at a higher risk.

Ibuprofen doesn't have these two problems — it's less toxic than the others in the doses that give people pain relief. But it has other side effects. "Ibuprofen puts people at risk of bleeds in the gastrointestinal tract and kidney damage — so it's not free of risk," said Brune. Using it in high doses also seems to raise blood pressure and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke — one reason the Food and Drug Administration recently warned people should only use ibuprofen (and other "nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs," or NSAIDS, like naproxen) for short periods of time and in small amounts.



I asked Brune about what he'd suggest for the occasional headache or sore muscle. "Taking 400 mg of ibuprofen won't cause measurable harm," he answered. "Of all drugs we have available, for most indications, it's also the most effective one."

Is acetaminophen good for anything?

If the research community seems to have sided with ibuprofen for pain, is acetaminophen good for anything?



Yes. There are some groups of people with health complications who shouldn't take ibuprofen. For example, patients with kidney, gastric, cardiovascular, or bleeding problems may need to avoid NSAIDS like ibuprofen, so doctors might suggest Tylenol in these cases. 



There's also some evidence that NSAIDS may increase the risk of psychosis and cognitive impairment in the elderly, so doctors may avoid prescribing these drugs for older patients. And Tylenol is generally considered safer than Advil or aspirin for pregnant women.



Fever is another area where acetaminophen can help, said Moore. According to one systematic review, acetaminophen seems to be safe for treating very young kids with fever, and you can give children as young as 3 months old acetaminophen, whereas you need to wait until kids are at least 6 months old to safely treat them with ibuprofen. This may help to explain the popularity of drugs like Tylenol for kids.

But a final caveat here: If your child is older than 6 months, it's not all that clear that acetaminophen outperforms ibuprofen for reducing fevers, and the same is true for adults. So keep that in mind the next time you confront your medicine cabinet.

Send your questions to Julia via the submission form or @juliaoftoronto on Twitter. Read more about Dear Julia here.

Watch: How Americans got stuck with endless drug ads
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Sourcing is a very strong component of the article. The story quotes three pain experts from three different institutions as sources. No conflicts of interest were apparent.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A popular class of blood-pressure medications thought to be safe in the first trimester of pregnancy appear to have caused serious birth defects in about 7 percent of babies whose mothers took them, a new study has found.

ACE inhibitors carry a warning that pregnant women should not use them in the last two trimesters because they can cause kidney damage to the fetus. The number of women taking them early in pregnancy is unknown but probably is small, the study suggests.

ACE inhibitors are the second-most commonly prescribed class of pharmaceuticals in the United States, with 149 million prescriptions dispensed last year. They came on the market 25 years ago.

"It would be important for a pregnant woman and her health-care provider to be aware of this, so they can identify an alternative medicine to treat her hypertension," said William O. Cooper, a pediatrician at Vanderbilt Children's Hospital who headed the study, published in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

Exposure to ACE inhibitors early in pregnancy nearly tripled the risk of birth defects, the study showed. "We all believe that we want to see more data. But this is important enough and impressive enough to tell people about," said Robert Temple of the Food and Drug Administration, who spoke to reporters about the findings.

The agency will consider broadening the "black box" warning against taking ACE inhibitors late in pregnancy, he said. The message is that women trying to get pregnant should switch to a different blood-pressure drug, Temple said.

One-third of the defects involved the heart, one-quarter the limbs or face, and one-tenth the brain or spinal cord, the study found. Many defects, especially the heart problems, are curable with surgery or other treatment. Others, however, cause permanent disability or retardation.

Cooper and his colleagues looked at 29,507 births to women covered by Medicaid in Tennessee between 1985 and 2000.

Of that group, 209 babies were born to women who took an ACE inhibitor, and 18 had birth defects. Among 202 babies born to mothers taking some other blood-pressure medication, four had defects. The fraction of babies with defects was 7.1 percent in the ACE-inhibitor group; 1.7 percent in the other anti-hypertensive group; and 2.6 percent in the group taking no blood-pressure medication.

That such an effect was first noticed a quarter-century after ACE inhibitors arrived on the market points up the lack of data about the effect of drugs in pregnancy.

All new drugs are tested on pregnant animals to see whether they cause malformations, but those tests can be misleading. It's considered unethical to include pregnant women in studies of new drugs unless the medication is intended to treat pregnancy-related conditions.

As a consequence, the labels on nearly all medications carry a statement saying their safety to fetuses has not been established.

"I think it is safe to say that not a lot is known about the options for women in pregnancy," said Sandra L. Kweder of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

Studies of large databases such as Medicare records or registries that enroll pregnant women already taking particular drugs are the chief ways to discover and measure possible risks to the fetus from prescription drugs.

Increasingly, the FDA is seeking such data. It paid for the ACE-inhibitor study with help from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The alternatives that clinicians might want to consider are diuretics, alpha-methyldopa, some beta-blockers, and the calcium-channel blocker nifedipine, according to the FDA officials and an editorial accompanying the study.

Blood pressure often falls slightly in pregnancy, and women with mild hypertension may be able to go without medicines, experts say. Some pregnant women develop hypertension that can be life-threatening to them and their babies.

ACE inhibitors -- the acronym stands for angiotensin-converting enzyme -- have become more popular. A government survey of visits to doctors' offices found that their use doubled from 1995 to 2002.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The sources of information appear to be the journal article, an author of the study and spokespersons from the FDA and its Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Becky Herry has tried nearly every drug available for melanoma.

A few years ago, that would have been a very short list. Until recently, people with advanced melanoma often died within a year of diagnosis, even with chemotherapy.

For the first time, however, patients such as Herry have options.

The Food and Drug Administration approved two new melanoma drugs in 2011 — the first new therapy for the disease in more than a decade — and approved two from GlaxoSmithKline on Wednesday. All improve survival by a few months.

The FDA also has put a Merck melanoma drug, lambrolizumab, on a fast track to approval by designating it a "breakthrough" therapy.

Several other drug companies are also working on melanoma therapies.

Melanoma research will take center stage at the four-day annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, which begins Friday in Chicago. Doctors will present 288 melanoma studies, compared to only 62 a decade ago.

"The number of new melanoma therapies is sort of astonishing," says melanoma researcher Lynn Schuchter, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine. "The pace is unbelievable."

No one can claim to have cured melanoma, the most aggressive form of skin cancer, which is diagnosed in 77,000 Americans a year and kills more than 9,400.

But after decades of failure, the spate of new drugs is helping more patients than ever before, giving people like Herry more time and better quality of life, Schuchter says. Doctors now dare to hope that giving these new drugs in sequence, or in combination, will help people with melanoma live for years while feeling relatively good.

Unlike traditional chemo, which indiscriminately kills growing cells, the new generation of melanoma drugs work in a precise way, based on a better understanding of the specific genes and proteins that drive cancer growth, says Timothy Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation.

"The reason we're seeing these breakthroughs is because we did the basic science research to help us understand how this cancer happens, how it escapes therapy and how it progresses," Turnham says.

Many of the new drugs aim to remove melanoma's "cloaking device," allowing it to be recognized and killed by the immune system, says Roy Herbst, chief of medical oncology at the Yale Cancer Center.

Other drugs — such as the two approved Wednesday, trametinib and dabrafenib — target growth signals within cancer cells.

Herry has tried two of the newer drugs from Bristol-Myers Squibb: ipilumumab, approved in 2011, and an experimental drug called nivolumab.

Although her tumors increased while taking ipilumumab, Herry says a CT scan earlier this year found they had shrunk by half after beginning nivolumab.

The most noticeable side effects from nivolumab have been moderate fatigue and vitiligo, a loss of pigment on some areas of her hands and arms, says Herry, 57, from Santa Cruz, Calif. She's been able to continue working as a registered nurse throughout these latest treatments.

Older melanoma therapies — including interferon, interleukin-2 and five chemo drugs — caused much more serious side effects, leaving her too sick to work, Herry says.

When the new immune therapies work, they often keep cancer at bay for a long time, says Schuchter, who has patients whose cancer has been controlled by ipilumumab for three years.

At the cancer meeting, featured presentations include a study by researcher Mario Sznol, of the Yale Cancer Center, who will discuss long-term results of nivolumab. Researcher Stephen Hodi, of Boston's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, will present the results of combining ipilumumab with an immune-stimulating drug. Doctors from New York's Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center will present research on uveal melanoma, which occurs in the eye, and affects about 1,200 Americans a year.

Other studies released in advance of the conference have shown positive results.

None of the new drugs works for everyone. And none are risk-free.

Ipilumumab can cause severe side effects, created when the immune system attacks the body itself, Schuchter says. Vemurafenib, approved in 2011, can cause non-lethal skin cancers.

"Doctors will say, 'There are side effects, but they are manageable,'" Turnham says. "Well, 'manageable' can mean something different to patients."

Turnham knew a 19-year-old woman with melanoma who "woke up bleeding every morning" because of rashes caused by one of the new drugs, which targets mutations in a gene called MEK. The woman died a year later.

Drugs such as ipilumumab can seem like breakthroughs to doctors because they help 15% of patients. Patients with a limited time to live may not be so positive, Turnham says.

"If you are a patient and someone says, 'There is an 85% chance of you spending $120,000 on a drug, and spending four months of your life being sick, with no benefit,' you're not going to be so excited."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Adequate sourcing, including important contributions in quotes from the executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A nasal spray containing a hormone that is known to make women more maternal and men less shy apparently can help those with autism make eye contact and interact better with others, according to a provocative study released Monday.

The study, involving 13 adults with either a high-functioning form of autism or Asperger syndrome, a mild form of the disorder, found that when the subjects inhaled the hormone oxytocin, they scored significantly better on a test that involved recognizing faces and performed much better in a game that involved tossing a ball with others.

Although more research is needed to confirm and explore the findings, the results are the latest in a growing body of evidence indicating that the hormone could lead to ways to help people with the often devastating brain disorder function better.

"This is the first study that looked at whether oxytocin has an effect on social behavior, which is a major deficit in autism," said Angela Sirigu, who directs the National Center for Scientific Research in France and led the study, published online by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. "It looks like it could be very helpful."

Researchers who were not involved in the study praised the work, saying the findings were promising and could lead to the first effective treatment for the central problems affecting people with autism.

"I think it's going to be a very exciting finding for a lot of people," said Alex Martin, chief of cognitive neuropsychology at the National Institute of Mental Health.

Because oxytocin does not last long in the body and produces its effects for a relatively brief period, some experts said the findings were more likely to encourage drug companies to develop alternative substances that had the same benefits.

"This paper suggests that's worth doing," said Thomas R. Insel, director of the institute. "It adds another brick in the wall that suggests there may be an opportunity to develop treatment for one of the core symptoms of autism. That's been the brass ring."

But Sirigu was among those who said the finding should encourage more research on the potential benefits of oxytocin itself, especially for children. Administering the hormone soon after a child's autism is diagnosed might help him or her develop more normally, she said.

"It's possible it can become a cure, if it's given early when the problems are detected in the little kids," Sirigu said. "We can change the way these patients interact with people from childhood."

Because previous research has indicated that some people with autism might have abnormally low levels of oxytocin, conducting tests to identify those people and administering them the hormone might help as well, said Karen Parker, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Stanford University School of Medicine.

"If you can find someone who appears to have deficits in oxytocin biology, giving them what you might argue would be replacement oxytocin may be helpful," Parker said.

Autism is a baffling disorder that can cause a variety of symptoms, including speech and learning problems and profound, disabling difficulties understanding emotions and social cues when interacting with people. The number of children found to have autism has been increasing for reasons that remain mysterious.

Oxytocin is produced naturally in the bodies of humans and animals. It plays a key role in social interaction, promoting maternal behavior and monogamy in animals. The hormone also heightens social sensitivity, social awareness, generosity and trust in people.

Previous U.S. studies found that people with autism who received the hormone intravenously were less likely to engage in repetitive behavior that is another hallmark of autism and were more likely to be able to identify emotions in voices. Another study being published in the journal Biological Psychiatry found that 16 autistic males in Australia ages 12 to 19 who received the hormone through a nasal spray were better able to recognize other people's facial expressions.

"All the data seem to suggest that manipulating the oxytocin system has a powerful effect on the core symptoms of autism," said Eric Hollander, director of the compulsive, impulsive and autism spectrum disorders program at the Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

While cautioning that more research is needed on children and additional patients to make sure oxytocin is safe and effective, advocates for families with children with autism welcomed the findings. Oxytocin has been in use for several years as an "alternative" therapy for autism.

"Many families are using it with success and reporting improvement," said Wendy Fournier, president of the National Autism Association. "Getting double-blind clinical studies like this one published helps to bring credibility to parental reports."

"We need to be mindful of the fact that the majority of human studies of oxytocin have been conducted using adults, including this study, and only one paper has included individuals between the ages of 12 and 18. We have to be careful about the safety and efficacy of oxytocin on pediatric populations," said Clara Lajonchere, vice president of clinical programs for Autism Speaks.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does use several independent sources apart from the study authors. The study authors themselves declared no conflicts of interest. 
We welcomed the balanced addition of Clara Lanjonchere’s cautionary note in the last paragraph. It provides balance to the story, offsetting the enthusiasm expressed by other sources. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, March 26, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Treatment with blood pressure-lowering drugs known as beta blockers appears to help reduce the spread of breast cancer in women, a team of British and German researchers report.

The drugs are believed to work by preventing stress hormones from stimulating cancer cells. "Beta- blocker drugs compete with stress hormones and bind to the same target receptors [on a cellular level], but unlike stress hormones, do not activate cancer cells," said Dr. Des Powe, a senior healthcare research scientist at Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham University Hospital NHS Trust, in Nottingham, England.

Powe is due to present the findings Friday at the annual European Breast Cancer Conference in Barcelona, Spain.

Powe and his colleagues from the U.K. and Germany evaluated 466 cancer patients: 92 had received blood pressure-lowering medications and 43 of those 92, or nearly half, were on beta blockers at the time of their breast cancer diagnosis.

Those on beta blockers had a substantial reduction in the formation of distant cancers, or metastases, and of local recurrence. They had a 71 percent reduced risk of death from breast cancer during the study compared to those who were either taking other blood pressure drugs or weren't on any blood pressure medications. Those on beta blockers also had a 57 percent reduced risk of getting a secondary cancer.

"Our study was performed retrospectively, using patient notes [from women] that had received treatment in the late 1980s and 1990s," Powe said.

Other experts called the results interesting, but preliminary. "The concept of controlling tumor growth by preventing a stress or inflammatory response is not novel," said Dr. Cathie Chung, a medical oncologist and an assistant professor of oncology at the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, Calif.

For instance, other research has found that women with breast cancer who regularly take aspirin, which is an anti-inflammatory, may have a decreased risk of recurrence.

"I think this study is interesting, but very far from being conclusive," said Chung. It's not known, she said, whether there is a true association or whether it may be due to chance or another factor.

"There is more work to be done before you can say whether this relationship is meaningful and will hold up," agreed Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society.

As in other retrospective studies, he said, more research is needed to verify the potential link.

"There are many other factors that come into play that could explain what happened," Lichtenfeld said. "What if the women who take the beta blockers are more attuned to their health and they may be taking better care of themselves?"

Like Chung, he agreed the proposed association is not far-fetched, just that more study is needed. Previous research, Lichtenfeld said, has found a reduced rate of skin cancer among men who take another type of blood pressure-lowering drug.

Powe said he plans to do another study to validate the results.

To learn more about inflammation and cancer, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A medical oncologist and the deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society provided independent commentary for this story.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is the first time we have been able to regenerate a cornea in humans,” researcher May Griffith, PhD, of the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute and the University of Ottawa tells WebMD. “We are still in the prototype stage, but this shows that regenerating a human cornea is possible.”

Two years after having the corneas implanted, six of the 10 patients had improved vision . Nine of the 10 experienced cell and nerve regeneration, meaning that corneal cells and nerves grew into the implant.

In a newly released study, investigators from Canada and Sweden reported results from the first 10 people in the world treated with the biosynthetic corneas.

Aug. 25, 2010 -- Corneas made in the lab using genetically engineered human collagen could restore sight to millions of visually impaired people waiting for transplants from human donors, researchers say.

Too Few Corneas Available

Acting as the window to the eye, the cornea is made up largely of water and the fibrous protein collagen.

Worldwide, more than 10 million people have impaired vision or blindness as a result of corneal damage, but only a small fraction ever receive transplants from cadaver donors.

A shortage of human donor tissue coupled with the threat of graft rejection from donor corneal transplants has driven the search for other ways of treating corneal damage. Although synthetic corneal replacements made from plastic are available, they have many drawbacks and are considered an option for only a small percentage of people.

It has been 10 years since Griffith and colleagues first reported the development of a material with the potential to grow healthy new tissue in people with damaged corneas.

To make the material, the researchers placed a human gene that regulates the natural production of collagen into specially programmed yeast cells. They then molded the resulting material into the shape of a cornea.

After several years of testing in her lab, Griffith began collaborating with Swedish eye surgeon Per Fagerholm of Linkoping University, who implanted the engineered collagen corneas into the 10 patients in Sweden.

None of the patients experienced graft rejection or required long-term immune suppression -- two potential side effects with human donor corneal transplants. The corneas were sensitive to touch and produced normal tears.

The results were published in the journal Science Translational Medicine. The research was primarily funded by grants from the Canadian Stem Cell Network, the Swedish Research Council, and the Marie Curie International Fellowship. The human collagen used to develop the corneas was provided by biotechnology company FibroGen Inc.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story uses one independent voice. As with many stories of this nature, it waits until the very end to bring in the independent voice of reason. Still, because the researcher’s comments in this story are so cautious, Dr. Walter Stark’s comments only help to bolster the sense that more research is necessary to draw any conclusions about benefits of biosynthetic corneas.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are We Overselling The Sunshine Vitamin?

Dr. Cliff Rosen of Portland, Maine, knows a lot about vitamin D. It's necessary for strong bones, and Rosen is a leading bone specialist. So he was surprised recently when his wife's new physician thought she might be deficient in vitamin D.

"She's a runner. She's in great shape," Rosen says. "She drinks dairy. She gets a lot of sun exposure." Sun exposure is key for vitamin D, known as the sunshine vitamin. When skin is exposed to sun, it makes vitamin D.

Still, the doctor wanted to run a blood test to see if Rebecca Rosen had adequate vitamin D.

"So my wife said, 'Well, why do I need to have a vitamin D [test]?' And the physician said, 'Well, that's part of our measurement for wellness.' "

It's not just Rebecca's doctor, and it's not just in Portland, Maine. Increasingly, doctors all over the country are convinced that checking patients' vitamin D levels is as important as monitoring their cholesterol.

Medicare payments for vitamin D testing, at $40 a pop, nearly quadrupled between 2006 and 2008, to $129 million. A decade ago, Medicare payments were only about $1 million. The figures for 2009 and this year are bound to be higher.

"There's overwhelming evidence ... that increasing your vitamin D intake can make substantial improvement in your overall health and welfare," says Dr. Michael Holick of Boston University. "And there is no downside to increasing your vitamin D intake. As a result I think that most people are now getting on the bandwagon."

Holick is leading the band. Forty years ago, he discovered the active form of the vitamin, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. He has written several popular books on the subject and has another one, The Vitamin D Solution, coming out next month. Its cover calls vitamin D deficiency "our most common health problem."

"In my opinion, everybody should be taking either a vitamin D supplement, take a prescription that the doctor recommends," Holick says. "All adults should be taking at least 1,000 to 1,500 international units a day." Dietary intake, mainly through sources such as vitamin D-fortified dairy products and juice, may add up to 200 to 400 units a day.

Holick is convinced that if people boost their vitamin D levels, they'll be substantially less likely to develop not only osteoporosis but also many types of cancer, heart attack, diabetes (both types), autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, Alzheimer's, autism, even tuberculosis and the flu.

Not so fast, other experts say.

Dr. JoAnn Manson, chief of preventive medicine at Harvard-affiliated Brigham and Women's Hospital, points out that nearly all of the proliferating studies involving vitamin D are what scientists call "observational." That is, they compare people with high and low levels of vitamin D and correlate those levels with whether or not the person has a disease.

But these studies, she points out, are fraught with possible error. People with higher vitamin D levels may be healthier because they exercise more, have better diets, are out in the sun more. Those who are sick may have low levels because they don't have those healthy habits.

"We don't yet have the large-scale, randomized clinical trials showing benefits in terms of prevention of cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, hypertension, cognitive decline, depression, autoimmune disease," Manson says.

Manson and her colleagues are launching such a trial. The National Institutes of Health is devoting $22 million for a five-year study. Twenty-thousand people across the country will be randomly assigned to take daily doses of vitamin D, omega-3 fatty acid — also linked in many studies to lower levels of heart disease — together or alone. Others will be assigned to take inert placebo pills. Neither study subjects nor investigators will know until the end which regimen they are on.

'Promising But Not Yet Proven'

Manson says she thinks there is promising evidence that vitamin D supplements may protect against heart disease and perhaps some cancers. The evidence is strongest for colorectal cancer, she says. The fact that the government is funding the study is an indicator that the idea has traction.

Until those results are in, Manson advises patients and doctors to view vitamin D claims as "promising but not yet proven."

"We need to keep in mind the lessons of history," she says. "It was believed that megadoses of vitamin E, beta-carotene, selenium, folic acid and the B vitamins would confer a large array of health benefits. And in fact, the trials were very disappointing for all those nutrients."

In the case of beta-carotene, scientists were surprised to find that when the results of randomized trials were in, those taking the supplement actually had a higher risk of lung cancer.

Holick and others say there is little or no downside to ingesting even high levels of vitamin D.

"I've been treating patients with 50,000 units of vitamin D once a week for eight weeks followed by 50,00 every other week for over a decade, and I've not seen any untoward toxicity," Holick says.

He says he has seen dramatic results in patients he has treated with vitamin D supplements for disorders such as fibromyalgia, involving generalized muscular aches and pains, and multiple sclerosis. He is convinced that the vitamin D supplements lower patients' risk of cancer and heart disease, although he acknowledges that's harder to show.

How Much Is Enough?

Holick himself takes 3,000 international units of vitamin D every day.

Set by the National Institute of Medicine in 1997, the current recommended intake is 400 units a day for adults ages 50 to 70, and 200 units a day for younger adults. The American Academy of Pediatrics currently recommends 400 units a day for infants.

The recommendations may change soon. An Institute of Medicine panel is working on a vitamin D update, which may come out this summer. The panel may raise the Dietary Reference Intake, which has replaced the old Recommended Dietary Allowance. But the group is not expected to embrace the newer claims being made for vitamin D supplementation.

The Institute of Medicine panel has a difficult task. "We don't know exactly where to draw the line in terms of calling someone deficient in vitamin D," says Manson, who is a member of the committee, as is Rosen, the Maine bone specialist.

Meanwhile, an increasing number of patients are getting their vitamin D levels tested, and more are being told they need to take supplements.

"I've been surprised at the number of patients who are significantly vitamin D deficient," says Dr. Elizabeth Ross, a cardiologist in Washington, D.C., who has been testing patients routinely for the past year. "Whether or not we'll affect the incidence of cardiovascular disease or other diseases remains to be seen. But it appears to be a relatively benign intervention, and we may be benefiting people."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  Several respected experts in the field of vitamin D research and the epidemiology of disease were quoted for this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Older women being treated for the most common form of breast cancer who took drugs called aromatase inhibitors for 10 years rather than the usual five had a lower risk of their cancer returning, particularly in the opposite breast, physicians reported Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

In a randomized controlled trial, 959 women were given the drug and 959 a placebo. Thirteen of the women taking the drug for an additional five years developed breast cancer in the opposite breast during the study, compared with 31 taking the placebo; 55 and 68, respectively, developed a recurrence of cancer in the original breast.

For any individual woman, the odds of developing “contralateral” breast cancer — that is, in the opposite breast — are still lower than 200-to-1 per year.

Still, said Dr. Richard Schilsky, who serves as the chief medical officer of ASCO and who was not involved in the study, “there’s a substantial benefit” to continuing aromatase inhibitors out to 10 years to lower the chance of cancer developing in the other breast.

The study did not continue long enough to discover whether the lower risk of developing cancer in the opposite breast translated into a lower risk of death.

The study, which was also published Sunday in the New England Journal of Medicine, was partially funded by Novartis, which sells letrozole — the aromatase inhibitor used in the trial — as the branded drug Femara. Several of the authors have received speaking fees or consulting payments from Novartis, AstraZeneca (which makes letrozole), and Pfizer (maker of the aromatase inhibitor exemestane).

Letrozole is available as a generic for less than $100 a month.

The trial included 1,918 postmenopausal women who had what’s called hormone-receptor positive breast cancer, in which the hormones estrogen or progesterone fuel the proliferation of cells. About two-thirds of breast cancers are hormone-receptor positive, and they have a good prognosis. Aromatase inhibitors block an enzyme that the body needs to produce estrogen.

The women had taken another breast cancer drug, tamoxifen, for several years and then were started on an aromatase inhibitor, which doctors usually prescribe for five years.

After following the women for a median of just over six years, found Dr. Paul Goss of Massachusetts General Hospital and his colleagues, 95 percent of those taking letrozole for the additional five years remained free of breast cancer (meaning the disease had not returned in the original breast or developed in the opposite one). Of those taking an inert pill, or placebo, 91 percent did.

Put another way, the risk of cancer returning in the original or the opposite breast was 34 percent lower in women on 10 years of letrozole compared with those who stopped after five. There was no difference in survival, however: 100 women in each group died during the study.

“The reason this is a milestone trial is that it’s the first to show that 10 years [on letrozole] is better than five,” said Dr. Nicholas Robert, an oncologist with Virginia Cancer Specialists and a co-author of the study. But because the absolute benefits were not huge, and because the drug did cause side effects, it makes sense to consider this for women at the highest risk of a recurrence of breast cancer, he said.

Aromatase inhibitors cause side effects in some women, especially night sweats, hot flashes, and sexual dysfunction. Women receiving five more years of letrozole also had greater loss of bone in their hip, worse osteoporosis, and more fractures.

Experts said the study was significant because some women and their doctors choose to continue aromatase inhibitors past the standard five years. There had been no research on whether that was beneficial.

Dr. Debra Patt, a breast cancer specialist at Texas Oncology who was not involved in the study, called the difference of a few percentage points in the risk of recurrence (95 percent vs. 91 percent) “substantial. If you can tolerate the side effects, I think many women will opt to take the extra years of letrozole, so this study is practice-changing.”

Dr. J. Leonard Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society cautioned, however, that “one has to be cautious in interpreting these results,” partly because “based on what they show, there is no overall change in survival.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Kudos here, too. Dr. Richard Schilsky was interviewed as an independent source. Conflicts of interest were also disclosed: The study was funded by Novartis which sells letrozole, and several of the study authors are connected to pharmaceutical companies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A team of researchers from Cleveland Clinic, Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center, Kaiser Permanente Northwest, and other clinical sites have demonstrated that a new blood test known as IsoPSA detects prostate cancer more precisely than current tests in two crucial measures - distinguishing cancer from benign conditions, and identifying patients with high-risk disease.

By identifying molecular changes in the prostate specific antigen (PSA) protein, the findings, published online last month by European Urology, suggest that once validated, use of IsoPSA may substantially reduce the need for biopsy, and may thus lower the likelihood of overdetection and overtreatment of nonlethal prostate cancer.

The research team, led by Cleveland Clinic's Eric Klein, M.D., conducted a multicenter prospective study of 261 men scheduled for prostate biopsy at five academic and community centers in the U.S. enrolled between August 2015 and December 2016.

"Despite criticism, PSA has transformed the landscape of early detection, screening, and management of prostate cancer in the last few decades," said Dr. Klein, chair of Cleveland Clinic's Glickman Urological & Kidney Institute. "Unfortunately, PSA is tissue-specific but not cancer-specific, leading to overdiagnosis and overtreatment of biologically insignificant cancers, which is widely recognized as a key limitation in its clinical utility."

The study directly compared the clinical performance of a new test based on PSA, called IsoPSA, to PSA itself with patients already scheduled for prostate biopsy. IsoPSA proved significantly superior to PSA in two key indications: discriminating between prostate cancer and benign conditions; and identifying patients with high-grade disease. The former indication is potentially useful for using IsoPSA for screening by primary care physicians, while the second is helpful for urologists in identifying patients who would benefit from curative intent therapy and other applications.

The results show that if validated and adopted clinically, IsoPSA could significantly reduce the rate of unnecessary biopsies by almost 50 percent. "The methodology used in the IsoPSA assay represents a significant departure from conventional ways to define biomarkers in blood, and may be applicable to improving other cancer biomarkers," said Dr. Klein.

"Due to its inherent simplicity, requiring only a blood draw and presenting information to the physician in familiar context using a single number - just like PSA itself - we are quite hopeful in IsoPSA's future utility after further validation studies," said Mark Stovsky, M.D., co-author and staff member, Cleveland Clinic Glickman Urological & Kidney Institute.

The IsoPSA test was developed by Cleveland Diagnostics, a company co-founded by Cleveland Clinic, in which it has financial interest. Dr. Klein has no personal financial interest in the company. Dr. Stovsky has a leadership position (Chief Medical Officer) and investment interest in Cleveland Diagnostics, Inc.

Cleveland Clinic is a nonprofit multispecialty academic medical center that integrates clinical and hospital care with research and education. Located in Cleveland, Ohio, it was founded in 1921 by four renowned physicians with a vision of providing outstanding patient care based upon the principles of cooperation, compassion and innovation. Cleveland Clinic has pioneered many medical breakthroughs, including coronary artery bypass surgery and the first face transplant in the United States. U.S. News & World Report consistently names Cleveland Clinic as one of the nation's best hospitals in its annual "America's Best Hospitals" survey. Among Cleveland Clinic's 51,000 employees are more than 3,500 full-time salaried physicians and researchers and 14,000 nurses, representing 140 medical specialties and subspecialties. Cleveland Clinic's health system includes a 165-acre main campus near downtown Cleveland, 10 regional hospitals, more than 150 northern Ohio outpatient locations - including 18 full-service family health centers and three health and wellness centers - and locations in Weston, Fla.; Las Vegas, Nev.; Toronto, Canada; Abu Dhabi, UAE; and London, England. In 2016, there were 7.1 million outpatient visits, 161,674 hospital admissions and 207,610 surgical cases throughout Cleveland Clinic's health system. Patients came for treatment from every state and 185 countries. Visit us at clevelandclinic.org. Follow us at twitter.com/ClevelandClinic. News and resources available at newsroom.clevelandclinic.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The IsoPSA test was developed by Cleveland Diagnostics, which also funded, designed and conducted the study. The principal investigator is a co-founder and chief medical officer of Cleveland Diagnostics and has investment interest in the company.
Since the news release disclosed these facts, we give it a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 7, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Feeding children lots of fatty, sugary and processed foods may lower their IQ, while a diet rich in vitamins and nutrients appears to boost it, British researchers say.

This is particularly true during the first three years of life when the brain is developing rapidly, the study authors explained. They speculate that good nutrition may promote brain growth and cognitive development.

"We have found some evidence to suggest that a diet associated with increasing consumption of foods that are high in fat, sugar and processed foods in early childhood is associated with small reductions in IQ in later childhood," said lead researcher Kate Northstone, a research fellow in the department of social medicine at the University of Bristol.

A more health-conscious diet was associated with small increases in IQ, she said.

Children should be encouraged to eat healthy foods from an early age, she said. "We know this is important for physical growth and development, but it may also be important for mental ability," she added.

For the study, published online Feb. 7 in the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Northstone's team collected data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children on 3,966 children born in 1991 and 1992.

The children's parents had answered questions about their kids' diets at age 3, 4, 7 and 8.5 years. The children's IQs were measured using the standard Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children when they were 8.5 years old.

The researchers identified three basic diets: "processed," crammed with fats, sugar and convenience foods; a "traditional" diet high in meats and vegetables; and a "health conscious" diet with lots of fruit, vegetables, salads, fish, rice and pasta.

Children who ate a diet high in processed foods at age 3 had a lower IQ at 8.5 years than kids with a healthy diet. For every one point increase in processed foods consumption, they lost 1.67 points in IQ. Conversely, every one point increase in healthy eating translated into a 1.2 point increase in IQ, the researchers found.

The key seemed to be the diet at age 3, since diet at 4 and 7 seemed to have no effect on IQ, the research team noted. However, to truly understand the effect of diet on children's intelligence, further studies are needed, they said.

Commenting on the study, Samantha Heller, a dietitian, nutritionist and exercise physiologist in Fairfield, Conn., said that "most of us do not realize that the foods we eat have direct consequences on brain growth, function and performance."

When a child's diet consists primarily of high-calorie foods that are low in the nutrients they need (such as healthy fats, vitamins and minerals), their brains don't get the compounds necessary to develop and function properly, Heller said. "This can have a series of deleterious effects, including decreased cognitive ability, poor behavior and social skills," she said.

"Fast and junk food seem like an easy and affordable option for busy parents, but defaulting to high-fat, high-sugar, high-calorie foods is putting their children's health and future at risk," Heller said.

Cooking easy, healthy meals for the family will give "children's brains a boost in essential nutrients needed for healthy development and improved cognitive skills," she added.

For more information on healthful eating for kids, visit the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included comments from an dietitian who spoke about the potential detrimental effects of poor nutrition on cognitive development. It would have been helpful to hear from an expert on neurodevelopment, who could have commented on the size of the effects observed and their relevance to real world performance.  A comment from a pediatrician about counseling families on healthy diets also would have been helpful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Although Vicks VapoRub is often used to fight colds and congestion, there has never been proof of how well it works. Now, new research reported in the journal Pediatrics finds, the combination of camphor, menthol and eucalyptus oils actually does ease cold symptoms and help children suffering from upper-respiratory infections sleep.

In the study, funded by an unrestricted research grant from Procter & Gamble, makers of Vicks, researchers took 138 children between the ages of 2 and 11, with symptoms like cough, congestion, runny nose and restless sleep that lasted seven days or more. Only children with moderate cough and severe stuffy nose were eligible, and those were divided into three groups.

Some were treated with Vicks, some with a placebo consisting of petroleum jelly and others got no treatment at all. Parents were surveyed the day before treatment about the severity of their child's symptoms. That night, 30 minutes before bedtime, Vicks or petroleum jelly was rubbed onto the child's chest and neck. The next day parents were questioned about their child's symptoms overnight.

Children in all three groups got better, but those treated with the VapoRub saw the greatest improvement, and parents in this group also had improved sleep, the study found.

"The American Academy of Pediatrics says the currently available oral cough and cold medications are not effective for children and have the potential for side effects, " said Dr. Ian Paul, principal investigator and associate professor of pediatrics and public health sciences, Penn State College of Medicine. "This was based in part on some of the studies that we have conducted at Penn State. The current study shows that Vaporub is more effective than placebo."

Paul is on Procter & Gamble's advisory board but holds no stock in the company and will not profit financially.

Where's the line between research and marketing?

Twenty of the 44 children in the vapor rub group suffered mild side effects including skin irritation and burning sensation of the eyes and nose. There were no side effects in the two other groups.

Dr. Jennifer Shu, a practicing pediatrician and CNNHealth's Living Well expert, uses Vicks for her family. "I have found that when used properly it can be a good option for parents who want to relieve some cold symptoms in their children. Parents get frustrated with the FDA recommendations not to use cold medicines in kids under the age of 4 because they are left with few options. Vicks is used topically on the skin, it's not ingested and is not included in these FDA guidelines."

Shu says when used properly, Vicks appears to be safe. But as with any product, parents need to read the instructions carefully and keep medicines out of the reach of children. Vicks VapoRub is not recommend for children under the age of 2.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


The story does include a comment from an independent pediatrician, and the story notes that she works for CNN. It also points out that funding for the trial came from the company that sells VapoRub and that the lead researcher is an advisor to the company.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 10, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Offering your baby a special formula when weaning off breastfeeding may offer some protection against the development of the antibodies associated with type 1 diabetes, if you have a family history of the disease, new research suggests.

When Finnish researchers randomly assigned 230 babies at high risk of type 1 diabetes to receive either a regular infant formula, or one that was extensively hydrolyzed -- which means the proteins in the formula are already partially broken down and more readily available for digestion -- they found that the extensively hydrolyzed formula cut the rate of developing diabetes-linked antibodies in the blood by about half.

"We observed that early dietary intervention [with extensively hydrolyzed formula] decreased the frequency of diabetes-associated autoantibodies, which are markers of an ongoing disease process, by about 50 percent by the age of 10 years," said the study's lead author, Dr. Michael Knip, a professor of pediatrics at the Hospital for Children and Adolescents in Helsinki, Finland.

The results of the study were published in the Nov. 11 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease, which means the body's immune system mistakenly turns against healthy insulin-producing cells in the pancreas, instead of a foreign material, such as bacteria. No one knows for sure what causes this process to begin, but some research suggests that the initial autoimmunity may begin early in life.

Five immune system autoantibodies have been linked to type 1 diabetes. Having one of these antibodies isn't a guarantee that you'll develop type 1 diabetes, but it does indicate an increased risk for the disease. People who have two or more type 1 antibodies have between a 50 and 100 percent risk of developing type 1 diabetes, according to background information in the study.

Previous research has suggested that breastfeeding may offer some protection against the development of these antibodies, possibly because breastfeeding delays the introduction of infant formula, which contains complex proteins. Formula may somehow trigger the development of autoantibodies as these proteins are broken down for digestion.

The current study was randomized and double-blind (meaning neither the parents nor the researchers knew who was getting what), and compared regular baby formula to one that was made easier for babies to digest because the proteins were broken down (extensively hydrolyzed).

Babies were offered the formula during the first 6 to 8 months of life, any time breastfeeding wasn't available. They were then followed till they were about 10 years old, according to the study.

After adjusting the data to try to account for the duration of exposure to one of the study formulas, the researchers found that the extensively hydrolyzed formula reduced the risk of having one diabetes autoantibody by 49 percent, and the risk of having two or more autoantibodies by 53 percent.

How the highly hydrolyzed formula might reduce the risk of developing diabetes-predictive antibodies is unknown, but the researchers speculated that it might contribute to reduced gut permeability or changes in gut microflora, among other things.

According to Knip, the take-home message from the study is that "it is possible to reduce considerably the initiation of the diabetes disease process in at-risk children in a simple and safe way: weaning to an extensively hydrolyzed formula." He added that, "based on the current results, we think that it is justified to recommend weaning to a highly hydrolyzed formula for babies in families with a member affected by type 1 diabetes."

Not everyone agreed with that notion, however.

"The data in this study is not sufficiently strong to support recommending any changes for parents," said the author of an accompanying editorial, Dr. David Harlan, co-director of the Diabetes Center of Excellence at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center in Worcester.

"I think the authors designed this study to address their hypothesis that proteins present in non-hydrolyzed formula might incite an immune response, and by breaking them down, you might eliminate the immune response. But, there are quite a few steps between that and how the immune system or diabetes are triggered," added Harlan's editorial co-author, Dr. Mary Lee, a professor of pediatrics and cell biology and chief of the pediatric endocrine division at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center.

"I think this is an important study because we need to understand what causes type 1 diabetes," said Harlan, who added the caveat: "In this study, while there is an apparent signal, there are also some causes for withholding complete faith in the conclusion that the formula caused diabetes."

Both Lee and Harlan stressed that there is currently no definitive evidence to suggest that the use of standard cow's milk formulas leads to an increased incidence of diabetes compared to breastfeeding. The hydrolyzed formula is also considerably more expensive than standard formula, experts point out.

Learn more about type 1 diabetes from the American Diabetes Association.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes several clinical experts who provide explanation of the results and put these into context with current formula recommendations.  Study authors are cited as well as clinical experts who feel the research is noteworthy, but should not change recommendations for a hydrolyzed formula to prevent Type 1 diabetes.   Affliations of all sources are listed in the story postscript.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Fennel extract, herbal tea and sugar water relieved colic in some infants better than a placebo, according to a new study that reviewed clinical trials of alternative remedies for colic.

But parents shouldn't get their hopes up too high. All of the trials reviewed had "major limitations," such as having too few patients, relying on parental reports of symptoms, or the study design (such as not being double-blinded).

"The notion that any form of complementary and alternative medicine is effective for infantile colic currently is not supported from the evidence from the included randomized clinical trials," the researchers from the United Kingdom wrote. "Additional replications are needed before firm conclusions can be drawn."

But because fennel extract, certain herbal teas and sugar water are generally safe, and because the research does suggest babies may benefit, pediatricians said they would feel comfortable recommending them to parents.

"It's reasonable for parents to consider those kinds of interventions for which there is some suggestion of benefit but no known risks," said Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York.

The study, published in the April print issue of Pediatrics, appears online March 28.

Colic usually starts when a baby is about three weeks old, said Dr. Ari Brown, a pediatrician in Austin, Texas, and author of the Expecting 411 book series. Colic is usually defined as excessive and inconsolable crying for at least three hours a day for more than three days a week over more than three weeks.

"It's miserable for both baby and the parents," Brown said. "And although we've been studying it for years, no one has figured out what the cause is, which makes it all the more difficult to treat."

In the United States, between 5 and 19 percent of infants are estimated to have colic, according to background information in the article.

Because pediatricians can't offer parents much help with it -- for the most part, babies grow out of colic in time -- desperate parents often turn to alternative or complementary treatments, according to the study.

In the review, the study authors searched various databases of medical research and chose 15 randomized clinical trials involving alternative treatments for colic. The studies were published between 1991 and 2008, came from 10 different countries and included a total of 944 children.

Several studies looked at spinal manipulation by a chiropractor. In three of those studies, parents reported their children cried significantly less afterwards. But those studies were small and flawed, so no conclusions can be made about the technique, according to the new review.

Three studies looked at herbal supplements. One found improvement in infants given fennel extract compared to infants given a placebo; another found that infants given a tea containing chamomile, vervain, licorice, fennel and balm-mint seemed to work; while a third found infants given a tea containing fennel, lemon balm and chamomile cried less than infants given a placebo.

Fennel, an intestinal "antispasmodic," may increase the speed at which food moves through the intestine, Brown said. This may help if the underlying cause of colic is cramping or discomfort due to an immature digestive tract, although that is just a theory, Brown added.

Two studies looked at giving babies solutions of sugar water, which some researchers believe has pain-killing properties. The parents of babies given sugar water reported significantly less crying. (If parents want to try it, they could deliver sugar water in a dropper, or put a small amount in a bottle, Adesman said.)

A study of probiotics, which are reputed to help digestion, found that 95 percent of infants given L. reuteria probiotics seemed to reduce their average crying time compared to 7 percent of babies given simethicone, which is marketed to relieve gas under the brand names Mylicon and PediaCare Infants' Gas Relief.

"This is pertinent given that simethicone is considered the best available and most commonly prescribed treatment for colic, although it previously has been shown to be no more effective than the placebo," according to the authors.

Brown said the strength of that finding suggests L. reuteria is worth further study.

One study found no difference in improvement of symptoms between infants whose parents were taught to do infant massage compared to infants put in a crib that vibrated. Nor did soy-enriched formula seem to help.

A small study of babies given reflexology showed some improvement, but there was no difference in whether the reflexology targeted the feet, which are considered to be therapeutic for colic, or other parts of the body.

This implies the improvement may "have more to do with the therapeutic effect of touch than the actual therapy itself," Dr. Edzard Ernst, of the department of complementary medicine at Peninsula Medical School, Universities of Exeter and Plymouth, in the United Kingdom, and colleagues wrote in the report.

The Nemours Foundation has more on colic.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story tapped two independent experts: Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief, developmental and behavioral pediatrics at the Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children’s Medical Center of New York and Dr. Ari Brown, an Austin pediatrician and co-author of Baby 411. Both provided good context and words of caution for concerned parents.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Data published by Alzheon in the Journal of the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease is the first report to associate efficacy of an amyloid-targeted drug with the number of APOE4 alleles

FRAMINGHAM, Mass., October 24, 2016 - Results published today in The Journal of the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease (JPAD) describe analyses of Phase 3 data for the investigational amyloid-targeted drug, tramiprosate, in patients with Mild to Moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD). These efficacy analyses evaluated patient subgroups based on the number of ε4 alleles of apolipoprotein E (APOE4), a major genetic risk factor in up to 65 percent of patients with AD. The published results showed a gene-dose effect at the high dose of tramiprosate (150 mg, twice daily), with patients with two APOE4 alleles (APOE4/4 homozygotes) showing the largest clinical benefit, those with one APOE4 allele (APOE4 heterozygotes) showing an intermediate benefit, while APOE4 non-carriers showed no benefit from tramiprosate. The results published in JPAD are the first evidence from a large clinical trial to associate efficacy of an amyloid-targeted agent with APOE4 status in AD patients.

The manuscript, titled "Clinical Benefits of Tramiprosate in Alzheimer's Disease Are Associated with Higher Number of APOE4 Alleles: The 'APOE4 Gene-Dose Effect'," is featured in the advanced online publication of The Journal of the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease (JPAD) with lead authors from Alzheon, Inc., a biopharmaceutical company focused on treatments for neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders. Based on the analyses in the publication, Alzheon is developing ALZ-801, an optimized oral prodrug of tramiprosate, and has refined the design of the pivotal clinical trial to evaluate ALZ-801 as a potential disease-modifying agent in symptomatic AD patients who are APOE4/4 homozygotes.

Anton P. Porsteinsson, MD, Professor of Psychiatry at the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry and Director of the Alzheimer's Disease Care, Research and Education Program at the University of Rochester in Rochester, NY, and an investigator in the North American Phase 3 clinical trial, commented: "The genetically-defined population of APOE4 carriers has an 8-12 fold increased risk of developing AD and has more rapidly progressive disease, usually becoming symptomatic a decade earlier than non-carriers of the APOE4 genotype. These analyses with tramiprosate in the APOE4 subgroups are compelling, and suggest a meaningful clinical benefit, on top of the existing symptomatic AD treatments, in Alzheimer's patients who are in great need of new treatments. We can apply these insights about the therapeutic response of APOE4 carriers to refine patient selection and potentially improve the success rate of new Alzheimer's medicines."

The efficacy and safety analyses with tramiprosate published in JPAD reveal a therapeutic effect in patients who are carriers of APOE4 after segmenting them from the larger, non-genetically-defined study population in the Phase 3 clinical program, involving more than 2,000 AD patients in North America and Europe. In the overall Mild and Moderate AD study population with baseline MMSE of 16-26 (and any APOE genotype), the North American study did not demonstrate a significant benefit with either of two tramiprosate doses (100 mg BID and 150 mg BID), compared to placebo, during the 78-week study period. As a result, the European study was terminated before completion, and the results were not previously published.

"To our knowledge, this is the first time that the clinical benefits of an amyloid-targeted agent have been associated with the number of APOE4 alleles in Alzheimer's patients. This new insight shows how we can apply a precision medicine approach in AD and develop this drug for the right patients, namely patients with the APOE4 genotype, which carries the highest risk as well as the earliest onset and faster disease progression," said Martin Tolar, MD, PhD, Founder, President and CEO of Alzheon. "These newly-published findings form the basis for the design of our Phase 3 program, and further support our company's commitment to advance ALZ-801 into pivotal studies in APOE4/4 homozygous AD patients who represent up to 15% of AD patients1. We are preparing to advance ALZ-801, a promising new treatment for Alzheimer's disease, into confirmatory clinical studies in 2017."

The observed gene-dose effects of tramiprosate in APOE4 carriers are consistent with the prevalence of amyloid pathology in AD patients. Amyloid imaging in AD clinical trials has shown the highest prevalence of positive amyloid scans in APOE4/4 homozygotes, and the lowest prevalence in APOE4 non-carriers. As one of the few orally-administered amyloid-targeted agents, tramiprosate blocks the aggregation of beta amyloid monomers into toxic oligomers, and was developed to show efficacy in patients with amyloid pathology and an accurate diagnosis of AD.

Efficacy Results in APOE4/4 Homozygous Patients from the JPAD Phase 3 Analyses

The published results showed the largest clinical benefit in the Alzheimer's APOE4/4 homozygous AD patients, who represent approximately 15 percent of patients in the study.3 APOE4/4 homozygous patients who received the high dose of tramiprosate showed efficacy benefit compared to placebo on both cognitive and functional measures in the Phase 3 analyses. The effects on the ADAS-cog cognitive outcome were significant at Week 65 (LS means difference from placebo: 3.47, nominal p = 0.007) and Week 78 (2.60, nominal p = 0.043), and corresponded to 66 percent and 40 percent benefit from tramiprosate compared to placebo. These effects were supported by functional benefits on the CDR-SB that showed a positive trend at Week 65 (LS means difference from placebo: 0.79, nominal p = 0.063) and were numerically in favor of tramiprosate at Week 78 (0.54, nominal p = 0.21).

"APOE4/4 homozygous AD patients are especially challenging since they are known to have the highest burden of amyloid pathology in cerebral cortex and blood vessels, which explains their susceptibility to ARIA-E with some amyloid-targeted treatments. In these new subgroup analyses, the high dose of tramiprosate showed promising clinical effects in APOE4/4 homozygous AD patients already receiving maximal standard of care, and this dose was not associated with any events of vasogenic edema," said Susan Abushakra, MD, Chief Medical Officer of Alzheon and lead author on the JPAD publication. "Replication of these findings in Alzheon's planned Phase 3 study would provide a meaningful therapeutic advance for AD patients with the APOE4/4 genotype, and we are now preparing to carry forward these results into the development of ALZ-801."

The safety profile of tramiprosate in 2,025 AD patients across the two studies was favorable and similar in the APOE4 carriers and non-carriers. The main adverse events were gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting and weight loss), which were mild or moderate in severity.

New ARIA-E safety analyses were reported in the JPAD publication. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evaluations in 426 patients were conducted during the Phase 3 studies and did not reveal any events of vasogenic brain edema (ARIA-E or amyloid-related imaging abnormalities-edema) on either dose of tramiprosate. Vasogenic edema (or brain swelling) is a side effect observed in clinical studies with some injectable anti-amyloid antibodies, which requires MRI monitoring and can occasionally be serious.

About Tramiprosate and the New Prodrug ALZ-801

In 2013, Alzheon obtained the license to tramiprosate and the associated portfolio of drug compounds, along with the historical clinical dataset, and applied new insights to the existing data. This led to the development of an optimized oral, amyloid-targeted drug candidate, ALZ-801. Alzheon developed ALZ-801 as a novel oral prodrug of tramiprosate, designed to improve the pharmacokinetic and gastrointestinal tolerability profile, while retaining tramiprosate as the active agent in ALZ-801. Phase 1 studies in more than 170 subjects, including healthy elderly, showed that ALZ-801 provides consistent plasma levels of tramiprosate, with very low inter-subject variability. The rate of nausea and vomiting was also lower than with tramiprosate tablets. ALZ-801 at the dose of 265 mg provided equivalent systemic plasma exposures to tramiprosate 150 mg tablets. Alzheon is advancing ALZ-801 into pivotal Phase 3 studies in the genetically-defined APOE4/4 homozygous patients with Alzheimer's disease.

Apolipoprotein E, or APOE, is a gene that provides a predictive window into an individual's Alzheimer's disease prognosis. APOE encodes for a protein called apolipoprotein E, which combines with fats to form lipoproteins that can be moved throughout the body. In the brain, apolipoprotein E helps shuttle cholesterol to neurons to support their normal function. There are three forms, or alleles, of the APOE gene, called ε2, ε3 and ε4. The ε4 allele has been found to correlate with high risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. People who inherit one copy of the ε4 allele, APOE4 heterozygotes, have an increased chance of developing the disease; those who inherit two copies of the allele, APOE4 homozygotes, are at even greater risk and tend to have more aggressive disease. The ε4 allele is significantly overrepresented in the Alzheimer's disease population compared to the general population: up to 65 percent of Alzheimer's patients carry one or two copies of the ε4 allele compared to about 25 percent of the general population.

Alzheon, Inc. is committed to developing innovative medicines by directly addressing the underlying pathology of devastating neurodegenerative disorders. Our lead Alzheimer's clinical candidate, ALZ-801, is a Phase 3-ready, first-in-class, small molecule oral inhibitor of amyloid aggregation and neurotoxicity - hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease. ALZ-801 is a novel prodrug that builds on the safety and efficacy profile of the active compound tramiprosate, which has been evaluated in clinical trials involving over 2,000 Alzheimer's patients. Our clinical expertise and technology platform is focused on developing drug candidates using a precision medicine approach based on individual genetic and biological information to advance therapies with the greatest impact for patients.

1 Ward et al. Neuroepidemiology; 2012; 38:1-17 

2 Sevigny et al. Nature; 2016; 537, 50-56 

3 Abushakra et al. J Prev Alz Dis 2016;3(4):219-228. Advanced online publication: http://www. 

4 Aisen et al, Arch Med Science; 2011; 7, 1: 102-111 

5 Degenhardt et al. Psychosomatics; 2016, 57:208-216 

6 Sperling et al. Alzheimer's & Dementia 7; 2011, 367-385
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release is clearly labeled as written on behalf of Alzheon, the manufacturer of the compound. The release further identifies the sources quoted as either employees of Alzheon or as investigators at one of the study’s research sites.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Better known as an anesthetic or as an illicit hallucinogenic drug, ketamine has also long been noted for alleviating depression. But ketamine has not been tested in a large clinical trial, and all evidence of its antidepressant effects has come from anecdotes and small studies of fewer than 100 patients. Now, in the largest study of its kind, researchers at Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences at University of California San Diego mined the FDA Adverse Effect Reporting System (FAERS) database for depression symptoms in patients taking ketamine for pain. They found that depression was reported half as often among the more than 41,000 patients who took ketamine, as compared to patients who took any other drug or drug combination for pain.

The study, published May 3 in Scientific Reports, also uncovered antidepressant effects for three other drugs typically used for other purposes -- Botox, the pain reliever diclofenac and the antibiotic minocycline.

"Current FDA-approved treatments for depression fail for millions of people because they don't work or don't work fast enough," said senior author Ruben Abagyan, PhD, professor of pharmacy. "This study extends small-scale clinical evidence that ketamine can be used to alleviate depression, and provides needed solid statistical support for wider clinical applications and possibly larger scale clinical trials."

Abagyan led the study with pharmacy students Isaac Cohen and Tigran Makunts, and Rabia Atayee, PharmD, associate professor of clinical pharmacy, all at Skaggs School of Pharmacy.

The FAERS database contains more than 8 million patient records. The research team focused on patients in the database who received ketamine, narrowing their study population down to approximately 41,000. They applied a mathematical algorithm to look for statistically significant differences in reported depression symptoms for each patient.

"While most researchers and regulators monitor the FAERS database for increased incidences of symptoms in order to spot potentially harmful drug side effects, we were looking for the opposite -- lack of a symptom," Cohen said.

The team found that the incidence of depression symptoms in patients who took ketamine in addition to other pain therapeutics dropped by 50 percent (with an error margin less than 2 percent) compared to the patients who took any other drug or drug combination for pain. Patients who took ketamine also less frequently reported pain and opioid-associated side effects, such as constipation, as compared to patients who received other pain medications.

According to Abagyan, it is possible that another factor common to patients taking ketamine was driving the antidepressant effect, such as the fact that ketamine also relieves pain. That's why they compared ketamine patients with patients taking other pain medications. That control group eliminated the possibility that people who take ketamine have less depression because they have less pain. Abagyan says it's still possible, though unlikely, the effect could be due to a still unidentified confounding factor.

Three other drugs with previously under-appreciated antidepressant effects also emerged from this analysis: Botox, used cosmetically to treat wrinkles and medically to treat migraines and other disorders; diclofenac, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID); and minocycline, an antibiotic.

After the diclofenac finding, Abagyan and team went back and looked at ketamine patients who did not also take NSAIDs and compared them to patients who took any other combination of drugs for pain except NSAIDs. Depression rates in patients taking ketamine remained low.

The researchers hypothesize that the antidepressant effects of diclofenac and minocycline may be due, at least in part, to their abilities to reduce inflammation. For Botox, the potential mechanism for reducing depression is less clear. The team is now working to separate Botox's beauty effects (which could indirectly make a person feel better emotionally) and its antidepressant effects. To do this, they are first using FAERS data to determine if collagen fillers and other cosmetic treatments similarly affect depression rates.

According to the World Health Organization, more than 300 million people experience depression worldwide. If not effectively treated, depression can become a chronic disease that increases a person's risk of mortality from suicide, heart disease or other factors. Depression is currently treated with five classes of antidepressants, most commonly serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

For financial and ethical reasons, ketamine has never been tested for its safety and effectiveness in treating depression in a large-scale clinical trial, but it reportedly works much more rapidly than standard antidepressants. Ketamine is relatively inexpensive and is covered by most health insurance plans if three other antidepressants fail.

"The approach we used here could be applied to any number of other conditions, and may reveal new and important uses for thousands of already approved drugs, without large investments in additional clinical trials," Makunts said.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release names the funder, not in the release text itself but on the EurekaAlert! website which hosts the news release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SACRAMENTO, Calif. (Aug. 22, 2017) - A study led by researchers at Cedars-Sinai and NeuroVision Imaging LLC provides the scientific basis for using noninvasive eye imaging to detect the pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's. The experimental technology, developed by Cedars-Sinai and NeuroVision, scans the retina using techniques that can identify beta-amyloid protein deposits that mirror those in the brain.

Accumulations of neurotoxic beta-amyloid protein can be detected with positron emission tomography, or PET scans, and analysis of cerebrospinal fluid, but these are invasive, inconvenient and costly, making them impractical for routine screening and follow-up evaluation.

"This is the first study demonstrating the potential to image and quantify retinal findings related to beta-amyloid plaques noninvasively in living patients using a retinal scan with high resolution. This clinical trial is reinforced by an in-depth exploration of the accumulation of beta-amyloid in the retina of Alzheimer's patients versus matched controls, and a comparison analysis between retina and brain pathologies. Findings from this study strongly suggest that retinal imaging can serve as a surrogate biomarker to investigate and monitor Alzheimer's disease," said Maya Koronyo-Hamaoui, Ph.D., an associate professor of Neurosurgery and Biomedical Sciences and a research scientist at the Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute at Cedars-Sinai, and a co-founder, inventor and scientist at NeuroVision. She is the senior leading author of an article in JCI Insight published online Aug. 17.

"As a developmental outgrowth of the central nervous system that shares many of the brain's characteristics, the retina may offer a unique opportunity for us to easily and conveniently detect and monitor Alzheimer's disease," said Keith L. Black, M.D., chairman of NeuroVision, chair of the Department of Neurosurgery and director of the Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute at Cedars-Sinai. "We know that Alzheimer's begins as many as 10 or 20 years before cognitive decline becomes evident, and we believe that potential treatments may be more effective if they can be started early in the process. Therefore, screening and early detection may be crucial to our efforts to turn the tide against the growing threat of this devastating disease."

Steven Verdooner, NeuroVision CEO, said the imaging system leverages the company's expertise in autofluorescence imaging of the retina using a specialized ophthalmic camera and sophisticated image processing software. "It's exciting to see these studies demonstrating the power of the technology applied to the Alzheimer's field. Our goal is to develop a product that is easy to use, affordable and widely accessible. We look forward to the potential of retinal imaging playing a vital role in solving the problem of Alzheimer's, both in identifying and monitoring those who may be affected by the disease. Our next step is to continue with clinical trials, building upon the existing pharmaceutical company collaborations, to ensure our technology is ready for the medical community to help manage this disease."

The study's first author, Yosef Koronyo, a research associate at Cedars-Sinai and a scientist and inventor at NeuroVision, said the latest findings cap a decade of study that has produced several landmark discoveries. "In 2010, our research group published an article providing the first evidence for the existence of Alzheimer's-specific plaques in the human retina, and we demonstrated the ability to detect individual plaques in live mouse models using a modified ophthalmic device."

After adapting the technology for human application, the researchers initiated several ongoing clinical trials in the United States and Australia to determine the feasibility of detecting and quantifying beta-amyloid plaques in patients with the disease.

In the new article, the researchers report on a 16-patient clinical trial to demonstrate the feasibility of identifying beta-amyloid in the eye using autofluorescence imaging. They also provide detailed analyses and several new findings on Alzheimer's pathology in the retina, results of research with donated eyes and brains of 37 deceased patients, 23 with confirmed Alzheimer's disease and 14 controls.

Among key findings, the researchers report a 4.7-fold increase in retinal plaque burden in patients with Alzheimer's, compared to controls, and they provide observations regarding geometric distribution and layer location of amyloid pathology in the retina. With the imaging technology's ability to detect autofluorescence signal related to retinal beta-amyloid, these findings may lead to a practical approach for large-scale identification of the at-risk population and monitoring of Alzheimer's, the researchers say.

The article provides new insights into the disease's manifestations in the retina and information on the optical imaging system. Here are several highlights:
• The first histologic quantitative analysis of retinal plaque clusters, or "hot spots," containing the most toxic forms of beta-amyloid with specific distribution patterns in superior peripheral regions that were previously unexplored.
• The first report of certain Alzheimer's-related pathologies in the retina, including vascular amyloid pathology.
• The demonstration of a significant correlation between retinal and brain plaques, and coexistence of neuronal loss.
• The first feasibility study for noninvasively detecting presumed amyloid deposits in retinas of living patients.
• The demonstration of a fully automated calculation quantifying retinal autofluorescence that showed a 2.1-fold increase in patients with Alzheimer's, compared with controls.

Researchers from NeuroVision, Cedars-Sinai, the Doheny Eye Institute, Retina Vitreous Associates Medical Group, Retinal Consultants Medical Group, Sutter Neuroscience Institute, UCLA, Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, and the University of Southern California contributed to the research and article. Koronyo-Hamaoui, Verdooner, Koronyo and Black are founding members of NeuroVision.

Funding was provided by a National Institutes of Health/National Institute on Aging (NIA) award (AG044897; Koronyo-Hamaoui, NVI), The Saban Family Foundation and The Marciano Family Foundation (Koronyo-Hamaoui).

NeuroVision was formed in 2010 and is headquartered in Sacramento, California. Dr. Keith Black, the company's chairman and co-founder, is an internationally recognized neurosurgeon, researcher and thought leader in areas of brain and blood-brain barrier function, enhancing the therapeutic effects of treatments in the brain, and optical imaging of the brain. He is the chair of Cedars-Sinai's Department of Neurosurgery. Steven R. Verdooner, NVI's CEO as well as a company director, is an experienced medical technology industry veteran who has successfully developed, commercialized and marketed ophthalmological imaging and measurement systems for other diagnostic applications.

Clinical trials were approved by Quorum Review, Seattle, Washington, (IRB00003226) and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (FWA00019841). Human tissues were obtained from the USC Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC) Neuropathology Core, Los Angeles, CA (IRB protocol: HS-042071).

Animal studies were approved by the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and the Division on Laboratory Animal Medicine (DLAM) at UCLA.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Everyone quoted in the release is affiliated with the company that makes the diagnostic tool that is being tested, and that is made clear. The funding sources are also made very clear. And we were also happy to see this level of detail about the study:
Clinical trials were approved by Quorum Review, Seattle, Washington, (IRB00003226) and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (FWA00019841). Human tissues were obtained from the USC Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC) Neuropathology Core, Los Angeles, CA (IRB protocol: HS-042071).
Animal studies were approved by the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and the Division on Laboratory Animal Medicine (DLAM) at UCLA.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 20, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Stem cell transplants may halt the progression of aggressive multiple sclerosis (MS) in nearly half of those with the debilitating disease, but picking the right patients for the treatment is key, a new study suggests.

Specifically, younger patients with a relapsing form of MS who were not severely disabled and who hadn't found relief with other treatments fared better than others over five years, the international team of researchers found.

However, in some cases the treatment proved fatal, the researchers reported.

"Stem cell transplantation cannot be considered a cure for MS. However, it can be considered a concrete option for patients showing aggressive MS who have not responded to approved treatments," said study co-author Dr. Riccardo Saccardi. He's from the cell therapy and transfusion medicine unit at Careggi University Hospital in Florence, Italy.

Using patients' own stem cells to reboot the immune system is a way to halt the advance of the disease. But the treatment can be risky because the patient's immune system has to be wiped out before the stem cells are transplanted, the researchers said.

In fact, nearly 3 percent of the patients died shortly after receiving the transplant, and those deaths were directly related to the transplant, the researchers reported.

Those deaths are a major concern, one neurologist said, because MS is not in itself life-threatening.

In effect, those patients gambled with a treatment that could be fatal for a disease that isn't, said Dr. Michael Racke, a professor in the department of neurology at Ohio State University.

Racke pointed out that stem cell transplants were first used to treat deadly diseases, such as leukemia, lymphoma and other cancers.

"There may be a population of MS patients that could be identified that might do well with transplant," he said. "It's important to select patients in such a way that they actually get well with the transplant."

A trial that compares stem cell transplants with other therapies to see whether stem cell transplants can become a treatment for patients who have progressive MS is about to start, added Racke, who co-authored an editorial that accompanied the study.

More than 2 million people in the world suffer from MS, in which the body attacks the central nervous system, according to the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.

MS can cause many symptoms, including blurred vision, loss of balance, poor coordination, slurred speech, tremors, numbness, extreme fatigue, problems with memory and concentration, paralysis and blindness.

These symptoms can come and go, or persist and worsen over time. Most people are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 50, although individuals as young as 2 and as old as 75 have developed the disease, the society says.

Medications can slow the progression of MS and help patients manage symptoms, but there's no cure.

To see how patients did over the long term after stem cell transplants, Saccardi and colleagues followed 281 patients from 13 countries who received stem cell transplants between 1995 and 2006.

The researchers found that 46 percent of the patients experienced progression-free survival at five years after transplant.

Within 100 days of transplant, however, eight patients died (nearly 3 percent). Those deaths were related to the transplants, Saccardi said.

The researchers think these deaths were most likely due to the transplant technology used before 2006, which has since improved.

The report was published online Feb. 20 in the journal JAMA Neurology.

Dr. Paul Wright is chair of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., and Long Island Jewish Medical Center, in New Hyde Park, N.Y. He said, "As neurologists battle with current therapies that are limited for progressive MS in younger patients, this study provides a possible new avenue for treatment."

Visit the National Multiple Sclerosis Society for more on MS.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes input from one independent source (who highlighted the ethical concerns regarding treatment-related deaths for a nonfatal disease). He does not appear to have any relevant conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - There may be a seed of truth amidst the many health claims for pomegranate juice, researchers from Israel said Thursday, at least for kidney patients on dialysis.

They found that such patients who gulped a few cups of the tart liquid every week lowered their chances of infections, the second-leading killer of the more than 350,000 Americans on dialysis.

The findings were presented at the American Society of Nephrology’s meeting in Denver — aka Renal Week — and have not yet been vetted by independent experts.

“It’s a very intriguing study,” said Dr. Frank Brosius, who heads the nephrology division at the University of Michigan Health System and was not involved in the research.

“I certainly don’t know of anything else that would have such a profound effect,” he told Reuters Health, cautioning at the same time that the study needed to be replicated by other centers.

The results come in the wake of a U.S. crackdown on allegedly false advertising by POM Wonderful, which claims its pomegranate products can help everything from heart disease to prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction.

The Israeli researchers, led by Dr. Batya Kristal of Western Galilee Hospital in Nahariya, did not use POM juice, but a brand sold by Naturafood.

In lab tests, Kristal told Reuters Health, that brand ranked highest in polyphenol antioxidants, which can reduce cell damage caused by so-called free radicals.

Antioxidants are found in different levels in fruits and vegetables, such as blueberries or broccoli.

“Pomegranate juice was shown in the last three years to contain the highest levels of polyphenols among a variety of products,” Kristal said. “Much higher than red wine, for instance.”

The researchers figured an antioxidant-rich diet might help patients with kidney failure, because the level of free radicals in their blood increases as the blood circulates through the dialysis device. That, in turn, may rev up inflammation in their tissues.

In the study, funded by the Israeli Ministry of Health, 101 patients were randomly assigned to either a concoction without pomegranate juice, or the real thing.

After downing about half a cup three times a week over a year, those who drank the real thing had a reduction of inflammatory molecules in their blood.

They also made fewer trips to the hospital.

“We found significant reductions in hospitalization due to infections, with more than 40 percent reduction in the first hospitalization and 80 percent in the second,” said Kristal.

However, the researchers were only able to rule out chance as the cause of the reduction in the second visit to the hospital.

According to the findings, among 50 patients drinking pomegranate juice for a year, about two would have to go to the hospital at least twice. By comparison, that number would be nearly 11 in patients not drinking the juice.

The researchers say they don’t know if their results extend to other brands as well, and suggest squeezing your own juice. A 16-oz bottle of POM Wonderful sells for about $4.

She said her team had found no side effects, but added that kidney patients should be aware of the high potassium content in the juice, given the delicate balance of nutrients in their blood, and talk to their doctor if they consider drinking it.

Brosius was skeptical of the benefits, although he said the juice was unlikely to cause harm.

“I would prefer to see this validated at other centers before we come out and say this is the thing to do,” he said. Even if the findings hold up, he said, it is still unclear what accounts for them. “Who the heck knows what the active ingredients are?”

Marion Nestle, a nutrition expert at New York University, said the effects might not be unique to pomegranate juice.

“This study does not demonstrate anything special about pomegranate juice,” she told Reuters Health in an e-mail. “The effects of juice were compared to a placebo, not to any other kind of juice that might have exactly the same effect.”

“The pomegranate people are spending millions to prove what I could have told them in the first place,” she added. “Pomegranate juices — like most if not all fruit and vegetable juices — have antioxidant activity. Does this make pomegranates better than any other fruit? Investigators have yet to show this.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Quotes from two skeptical independent experts made this a solid piece.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Montreal, March 22, 2016 — The proportion of older adults with age-related vision loss is estimated to be as high as one in three over the age of 50. In Canada, that’s roughly 3.6 million people. Many of these individuals turn to adaptive devices designed to magnify objects and text, but these devices can be prohibitively expensive, uni-functional and bulky.

Enter the iPad: a technological device that’s relatively cheap, serves many purposes, is smaller than most books, and — according to new research from Concordia University in Montreal — is just as effective a visual aid as traditional devices.

A study recently described in Good Times Magazine provides the first experimental evidence that the Apple iPad is as good as technology traditionally used in reading rehabilitation for individuals with visual impairment.

And that could help with stigmatization of the elderly and disabled.

For the study, the Concordia-based research team recruited 100 participants who ranged in age from 24 to 97. A little over half the participants had age-related macular degeneration, a disease characterized by the deterioration of the small central portion of the retina that is normally responsible for fine detailed vision tasks such as reading.

The researchers used questionnaires and tests to gauge participants’ visual ability, and then compared the Apple iPad versus two traditionally used magnification devices, to see if reading rates varied across devices.

“Unsurprisingly, we found that most participants found it hard to read small and medium text, while nearly a quarter of them reported that reading large text was much easier,” says Elliott Morrice, an MA student in Concordia’s Department of Psychology and the study’s first author.

“What was interesting to note was that it didn’t matter what technology was used to do the magnification: an iPad worked just as well as a traditional device like a closed circuit television system (CCTV),” he says. “When we took previous experience into account, we found that participants who had used iPads before read on average 30 words per minute faster than those who were using the iPad for the first time. But there were no significant differences in the reading rates of participants who had previous experience using the CCTV, compared to the reading rates of first-time CCTV users.”

Another benefit is that many older adults feel stigmatized by using the traditional devices, because they identify them as having an impairment or disability.

“Tablet computers offer many of the same benefits while being socially acceptable,” says Aaron Johnson, the study’s senior author, and an associate professor in the psychology department, and a member of the Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Rehabilitation of Greater Montreal (CRIR).

“What’s more, compared to the devices currently used by those with low vision, iPads are multi-functional, allowing the user to go online, check email, make video calls — and they cost less than the traditional devices,” he says. “This cost saving can be both to the individual, and if appropriate, to the insurance companies that may provide individuals with assistive devices.”

Partners in research: This work was supported in part by the Vision Health Research Network, the Fonds de recherche du Québéc - Santé, the Antoine Turmel Foundation, CRIR, and the MAB-Mackay Foundation. The study's third co-author is Julie-Andrée Marinier, from the Centre de recherche interdisciplinaire en réadaptation du Montréal métropolitain and École d'optométrie at the Université de Montréal.

Walter Wittich is a member of CRIR, an assistant professor in l’École d'optométrie at Université de Montréal and an affiliated faculty member of the Department of Psychology at Concordia University.

Related links:Department of PsychologyCentre de recherche interdisciplinaire en réadaptation du Montréal métropolitainÉcole d'optométrie at the Université de MontréalMAB-Mackay Rehabilitation Centre
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release names several sources of funding.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Diet High In Fiber May Help Protect Against Breast Cancer

If the advice to eat more fiber seems easy to ignore, you're not alone. Most Americans don't get the 25 to 38 grams a day that's recommended, depending on age and gender.

But if you're skimping on fiber, the health stakes are high, especially if you're a teenage girl.

A study published Monday in the journal Pediatrics concludes that eating lots of fiber-rich foods during high school years may significantly reduce a woman's risk of developing breast cancer.

The findings are based on a long-term study of 44,000 women who were surveyed about their eating habits in high school. The women also completed detailed questionnaires about their dietary habits every four years.

The researchers found that women who consumed high levels of fiber (28 grams per day, on average) had a 24 percent lower risk of developing breast cancer before menopause, compared with women who ate low levels of fiber (14 grams per day, on average). For the women on the high-fiber diet, the lifetime risk of developing breast cancer was also cut by 16 percent.

Of course, the idea that high-fiber diets can help keep us healthy is not new. It's well-known that fiber can prevent constipation and keep the bowel moving by making stools bulkier and absorbing water. Prior studies have shown dietary fiber can protect against colorectal cancer and may lower the risks of diabetes and heart disease. There's also a growing body of evidence linking fiber to weight management.

This new study provides some evidence of yet another potential benefit.

"This is a really important study ... [suggesting] that the more fiber you eat during your high school years, the lower your risk is in developing breast cancer," says Kimberly Blackwell, a breast cancer specialist at the Duke Cancer Center.

In a commentary accompanying the study in Pediatrics, Blackwell writes, "There is longstanding evidence that dietary fibers may reduce circulating estrogen levels." And this may help explain the reduced risk of breast cancer.

The authors point to other possible explanations, too. For instance, high-fiber diets may reduce the risk of breast cancer by improving insulin sensitivity, since fiber can slow down the absorption of sugars and help keep blood sugar levels more stable.

Maryam Farvid, a fellow at the Harvard School of Public Health who is lead author of the study, says the influence of fiber on cancer risk may be time-sensitive. Adolescence is "a period when breast cancer risk factors appear to be particularly important," she says.

One limitation of this new study is that it relies on data from women who had to recall what they ate during high school. They were in their 30s and 40 when asked, so there could be "recall bias" — the women's memories may be foggy.

"The recollection of dietary habits more than a decade earlier must be questioned," writes Blackwell. On the other hand, she says, "people's dietary habits don't really change a lot. ... In general, what you eat as a teenager is really formative as to what you eat later in life."

So, how might the message of this new study linking high-fiber diets to a lower risk of breast cancer be communicated to teenagers?

This is a question Kristi King, a dietitian at Texas Children's Hospital, has thought about a lot.

She says it can be hard to get the attention of teenagers about healthy eating. "Unfortunately for teenagers, they're [into] instant gratification," and they're not necessarily focused on how their actions today will influence their future health, she says.

But, she says, explaining that dietary choices may influence their risk of breast cancer may grab their attention. "Most teenage girls do know someone that has been affected by breast cancer," says King. "So I feel like that touches a nerve with them."

Given the known benefits of high-fiber diets and the growing evidence that fiber may play a role in preventing disease, the government's Dietary Guidelines for Americans also say most people need to consume more.

Women are advised to consume 25 grams a day. Men are advised to consume 38 grams a day.

So, how best to reach these targets? "Add fiber at each meal," says King, in the form of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, beans, nuts or seeds. Pears are a great bet with 7 grams of fiber apiece.

And check out fiber-rich snacks, like popcorn and edamame.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story only quotes two researchers in regard to the study. One was the study’s lead author, and the other was the author of a commentary on the study that was published in the same issue of Pediatrics. A third source is quoted in regard to what can be done to get teens to eat more fiber, but that source doesn’t address the study in question. We’ll give the story credit for reaching beyond the authors of the study, but we think the story would be much stronger if it had incorporated more expert analysis on the study itself.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Still, the findings could help smooth the way for regulatory approval, wider use of the drugs by doctors and possibly reimbursement by insurers.

The drugs, evolocumab from Amgen and alirocumab from Sanofi and Regeneron, inhibit a protein in the body called PCSK9 that helps regulate cholesterol. In the studies detailed on Sunday, both drugs reduced the bad cholesterol by about 60 percent, to about 50 milligrams per deciliter from about 120 at the start of the studies. In many cases such big reductions were achieved even though the patients were already taking statins.

Both drugs could win approval from the Food and Drug Administration by this summer. Analysts say the drugs will have billions of dollars in annual sales and will be taken by millions of people who cannot lower their cholesterol enough using statins alone or cannot tolerate statins. (However, the PCSK9 drugs are taken by injection every two weeks or four weeks, which could deter some users.)

Statins reduce cardiovascular risk and scientists believe it is because they decrease low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, the so-called bad cholesterol. But merely looking at cholesterol levels can be misleading. The drug niacin did not protect against heart attacks and strokes even though it raised so-called good cholesterol and modestly lowered bad cholesterol.

Insurers in particular might demand proof that the PCSK9 drugs stave off heart attacks, strokes, deaths from coronary disease and procedures to open arteries before agreeing to pay for them for many patients. Executives at CVS Health, a leading pharmacy benefits manager, recently said that PCSK9 inhibitors might cost $7,000 to $12,000 a year and would strain health care budgets because so many people might use them.

“Managed care pharmacy, indeed the health care system, has never seen a challenge like this to our resilience in absorbing costs,” they wrote in the Health Affairs blog.

Whether the results from these two small studies will be persuasive enough remains to be seen.

The study of Amgen’s evolocumab involved 4,465 patients with various degrees of risk, two-thirds of whom were randomly chosen to get the drug in addition to the medication they were already taking. After one year, 0.95 percent of those in the group that received the drug had suffered a heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular problem, compared with 2.18 percent in the group that did not take the drug. By a measure known as the hazard ratio, the risk of cardiovascular events was reduced by 53 percent.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted two independent doctors – Dr. Steven E. Nissen and Dr. Sanjay Kaul – both of whom pointed out the limitations in the studies. The piece also did an excellent job in disclosing potential conflicts of interest, since pharmaceutical companies often finance the development and research of their drugs. The article stated that lead study authors “Dr. Sabatine and Dr. Robinson have been paid consultants to the companies sponsoring the trials they led.” It also made clear the fact early in the story that these studies were “sponsored by manufacturers.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You don’t need to go to a doctor in person for lifestyle counseling that can lower your blood pressure. Online lifestyle counseling works well, too, according to research presented Saturday at the American College of Cardiology’s 66th Annual Scientific Session and Expo in Washington.

Systolic blood pressure — the higher number in blood pressure readings — declined more for participants in the study who received Web-based lifestyle counseling than for those who were part of a Web-based control intervention, the study found. Over the 12 month period, systolic blood pressure of people in the Web-based lifestyle counseling group decreased by 10 mmHg, while it decreased by 6 mmHg for the other group.

The study also measured changes in risk scores of developing heart disease and stroke in the next 10 years, diastolic blood pressure, dietary changes, smoking cessation, cholesterol levels excluding the good cholesterol (HDL) and pulse pressure, which is the difference between the higher and lower (diastolic) numbers on the blood pressure reading.

Results showed some gender-based disparities. Women in the treatment group had an average diastolic blood pressure reduction of 6 mmHg while men in the same group had an average 4 mmHg reduction.

“The electronic counseling (e-Counseling) intervention had an effect similar to that of adding an additional blood-pressure-lowering medication,” said Robert P. Nolan, the lead author of the study, a senior scientist at the Peter Munk Cardiac Center at the University Health Network and an associate professor at the University of Toronto.

The randomized, double-blind study included 264 participants with an average age of 58, of whom 58 percent were women. The participants were divided into two groups, one of which received weekly emails with generic information about healthy living that is good for the heart and for reducing high blood pressure, and the other group received weekly emails with links to interactive tools and online multimedia, such as videos of people diagnosed with high blood pressure who made lifestyle changes. These tools were carefully chosen to increase in knowledge about and motivation to maintain a heart-healthy lifestyle.

“In the e-Counseling intervention we tried to replicate the experience of going through face-to-face lifestyle counseling for a year,” Nolan said.

High blood pressure affects 1 in every 3 adults in the United States, according to a fact sheet by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In 2013, high blood pressure was the major cause behind 360,000 deaths in the United States. Reduction in high blood pressure has added health benefits because it can potentially reduce the likelihood of heart attacks, strokes, chronic heart failure and kidney disease.

Engaging patients in such a way could be a very powerful tool in promoting behavioral change, Nolan said.

“I am so happy to see this on the agenda for three main reasons. In part, most of the studies here today show what to do — not how to achieve it,” said Eric Peterson, a professor at Duke University School of Medicine and an associate editor of the Journal of the American Medical Association, during the conference. “Secondly, we only look at the trade-off between efficacy and safety, but your study is looking more at efficacy and effectiveness and practicality, issues that are also very important. And finally, this is a very real world study.”

The study was received well by the audience. “No one should die of hypertension. The study is very useful in telling and confirming that we should talk to the patients, no matter how we do it,” said Bernard Wong, a cardiologist based in Hong Kong.

One of the caveats of the study was that participants were highly motivated people looking for ways to cope with and decrease their blood pressure. Participants were also largely white and well-educated, with most having a postsecondary education, so the results of the study might not be generalize well to other groups.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes quotes from two experts who spoke at the conference session where this research was presented. They do not appear to have any conflicts of interest. However, it’s unclear if the reporter interviewed the sources directly, or used statements they made to the entire audience at the session. The former is more suitable for obtaining comments that pertain to a lay audience like the Post’s.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
BOSTON (June 11, 2018) -- A new study conducted at the University of California, Davis found that two cups of mangos a day had beneficial effects on systolic blood pressure among healthy postmenopausal women. Mango consumption helped relax blood vessels in as little as two hours after intake. Additionally, some of the participants showed favorable changes in the production of breath methane, an indication of the potential influence on gut fermentation.

"This is the first study to demonstrate positive vascular effects of mango intake in humans," said lead researcher Robert Hackman, with the UC Davis Department of Nutrition. He presented the findings today at the American Society for Nutrition annual meeting, Nutrition 2018, in Boston. "Our results build on previous animal and cell studies that point to the potential benefits of mangos to promote health."

Mangos contain a mix of polyphenols, including mangiferin, quercetin, gallotannins, and gallic acid, that have been the focus of previous investigations exploring the potential health-protecting properties of mangos. Li and colleagues believe the concentration of these bioactive compounds in mangos may be responsible for the favorable response.

In the study, 24 healthy postmenopausal women consumed 330 grams (2 cups) of mango daily for 14 days. The honey mango (also referred to as Ataulfo) was chosen for the study due to the high concentration of polyphenols in this popular variety.

Following the 14 days of mango consumption, the study participants resumed their normal daily diet but eliminated mango intake for 13 days. Measurements were taken during each visit, including heart rate and blood pressure, blood samples and breath samples, which are increasingly used in nutrition studies to evaluate gut health status.

At the start of the study, blood pressure was not significantly different between the study visits. Yet once mango was consumed, systolic blood pressure was significantly lower two hours after mango intake compared to baseline values. Pulse pressure was also significantly reduced two hours after eating mango.

Systolic blood pressure (the upper number in blood pressure readings) indicates how much pressure your blood is exerting against your artery walls when the heart beats. Pulse pressure is the difference between systolic and diastolic (bottom number) in blood pressure readings. Pulse pressure can be used as an indicator of heart health.

Breath levels of hydrogen and methane were measured, which reflect the amount of these gases that were produced due to microbial fermentation in the intestinal tract. Some study participants produced hydrogen, some produced methane, and others produced both gases or neither of them. Six of the 24 participants produced methane, and of these six, three shown significant reduction after consuming mango, which is considered a favorable outcome for gut health.

The researchers conclude that mangos may be a heart-healthy fruit that may help play a role in reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease. Longer-term studies involving other population groups are warranted.

The research was supported in part by funds from the National Mango Board and USDA.

Source: Li X, Vanness MA, Holt RR, Horn WF, Keim NL, Keen CL, Hackman RM. Effects of two weeks of daily mango fruit intake on vascular function, blood pressure and gut fermentation in healthy adult women. The FASEB Journal, June 2018.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly notes that the research was partially funded by the National Mango Board. We were unable to access the published study to check whether any conflicts of interest were disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Giving school children access to chilled, self-serve water may help chip away at childhood obesity, a new study of more than one million New York City school students suggests.

The study, published in JAMA Pediatrics, analyzed data collected from 1,227 elementary and middle schools across New York City - some with and some without "water jets." The large, clear, electrically cooled jugs with a push lever for fast dispensing were placed in 483 school cafeterias, about 40 percent of schools during the 2008-2009 and the 2012-2013 school years.

Schools with water dispensers saw a modest weight drop among students, according to the study by researchers from NYU Langone Medical Center, New York University's Institute for Education and Social Policy, and the Center for Policy Research at Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs.

"We associated these water dispensers with almost a one percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being overweight for boys and a little over a half a percentage point reduction for girls," said lead researcher Brian Elbel, an associate professor of population health and health policy at NYU School of Medicine.

"Even a small, straightforward, relatively inexpensive policy intervention was associated with a small but statistically significant drop," Elbel told CBS News.

Water jets also were linked with a decrease in the amount of half-pints of milk students bought, which could be a potential mechanism of weight reduction, the researchers found.

Modern water dispensers may be more effective than old-fashioned water fountains since water quality and cleanliness may deter kids from using older fountains, and they're not as efficient at serving large numbers of children, experts noted in an accompanying editorial.

The editorial, entitled "Power of a Simple Intervention to Improve Student Health: Just Add Water," said the study's findings are significant.

"Sometimes, a very simple intervention can have a powerful effect," wrote Lindsey Turner, of Boise State University, in Idaho, and Erin Hager, from the University of Maryland School of Medicine, in Baltimore.

"The study by Schwartz and colleagues in this issue of JAMA Pediatrics adds to a growing body of evidence supporting the importance of providing drinking water access in schools. In this study, the findings demonstrate that water access in schools can promote healthy weight outcomes among students," Turner and Hager said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: No conflicts of interests were reported in the original journal article. The study was funded by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
The CBS report only quoted comments from the study’s lead researcher and then excerpts from the accompanying JAMA Pediatrics editorial. Technically, these editorial comments are sufficient to clear our bar, but we’d note that the thrust of the quote is mainly to confirm what the researchers are reporting. We would have liked to have seen a quote from someone willing to provide a more critical perspective on the study, such as the significance of its limitations and their impact on the research.
While we give the benefit of the doubt here as we always do, the story didn’t really fulfill the spirit of this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
BOSTON (Sept. 11, 2017)--Adding 48 minutes of moderate exercise per week is associated with improvements in overall physical functioning and decreases in risks of immobility in older adults who are sedentary, finds a new study led by researchers at the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging (USDA HNRCA) at Tufts University.

In the study, published in PLOS ONE on Aug. 18, the researchers evaluated how different doses of exercise for adults age 70-89 would impact the benefits. While the researchers saw improvements in all participants who added some physical activity to their routine, those who got more exercise saw greater changes. The work is part of the Lifestyle Interventions and Independence for Elders (LIFE) study.

"These are people who want to live healthy, independent lives and are at risk for losing that. Maintaining functional independence for older adults is an important public health issue. In our first LIFE study, we confirmed that regular exercise can help improve physical function and prevent mobility loss. Now we see that small increases can have big impacts," said first and corresponding author Roger A. Fielding, senior scientist and director of the Nutrition, Exercise Physiology, and Sarcopenia Laboratory at the USDA HNRCA.

For the LIFE study, the researchers analyzed data from 1,635 men and women age 70-89 over an average of 2.6 years. Half were randomly assigned to a program of walking and walking-based strength, flexibility and balance training; half participated in health education workshops. All had low levels of physical functioning at the start and reported fewer than 20 minutes per week of regular physical activity in the month prior to starting the study. Participants were evaluated at baseline, six, 12, and 24 months. The researchers relied on movement monitors and self-reporting to measure physical activity outside study sessions.

Changes in activity were significantly greater in the physical activity intervention group than the health education group from baseline through 24 months. There was a continuous, graded effect with the greatest benefits seen in the participants who engaged in at least 48 minutes of physical activity per week. The greater differences were also associated with prevention of major mobility loss.

"Our goal was to have participants walking up to 150 minutes per week. To see benefits at 48 minutes is encouraging. We wanted the physical activity sessions to include exercise that participants could do outside of the study, and we hope that learning of these results might motivate others to try to make safe, incremental changes to their activity levels. Reducing muscle loss, functional decline, and loss of independence are important to anyone, at any age, and at any physical ability," said Fielding.

The researchers acknowledge limitations of this study, including examining the different quantities of exercise participation achieved in the LIFE study participants and not specifically prescribing different amounts of exercise to different study groups. In addition, there were differences in the measured absolute amounts of exercise performed when comparing objective activity monitoring using a wearable "device" and self-report of physical activity.

Additional authors on this study are Jack M. Guralnik of the University of Maryland School of Medicine; Abby C. King of Stanford University Medical School; Marco Pahor of the University of Florida College of Medicine; Mary M. McDermott of Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine; Catrine Tudor-Locke of the University of Massachusetts Amherst, and Pennington Biomedical Research Center; Todd M. Manini of the University of Florida College of Medicine; Nancy W. Glynn of the Center for Aging and Population Health, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh; Anthony P. Marsh of Wake Forest University; Robert S. Axtell of Southern Connecticut State University; Fang-Chi Hsu of Wake Forest School of Medicine; and W. Jack Rejeski of the Center for Aging and Population Health, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh.

The Lifestyle Interventions and Independence for Elders Study is supported by a National Institutes of Health/National Institute on Aging Cooperative Agreement (U01AG22376) and a supplement from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (3U01AG022376-05A2S), and sponsored in part by the Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The research is partially supported by the Claude D. Pepper Older Americans Independence Centers at the University of Florida (1P30AG028740), Wake Forest University (1P30AG21332), Tufts University (1P30AG031679), University of Pittsburgh (P30AG024827), and Yale University (P30AG021342) and the NIH/NCRR CTSA at Stanford University (UL1RR025744). Tufts University is also supported by the Boston Rehabilitation Outcomes Center (1R24HD065688-01A1). Dr. Roger Fielding (Tufts University) is partially supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, under agreement No. 58-1950-4-003. Any opinions, findings, conclusion, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. For conflicts of interest disclosure, please see the study.

Fielding, R.A., Guralnik, J.M., King, A.C., Pahor, M., McDermott, M.M., Tudor-Locke, C., et al. (2017, August 18) Dose of physical activity, physical functioning and disability risk in mobility-limited older adults: Results from the LIFE study randomized trial. PLOS ONE 12(8): e0182155. https:/

About the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University

For three decades, the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University has studied the relationship between good nutrition and good health in aging populations. Tufts research scientists work with federal agencies to establish the Dietary Guidelines, the Dietary Reference Intakes, and other significant public policies. The Gerald J. and Dorothy R. Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy at Tufts University is the only independent school of nutrition in the United States. The school's eight degree programs,¬ which focus on questions relating to nutrition and chronic diseases, molecular nutrition, agriculture and sustainability, food security, humanitarian assistance, public health nutrition, and food policy and economics¬ are renowned for applying scientific research to national and international policy.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release is clear that the research was supported by the National Institutes of Health.
While some of the researchers disclosed pharma funding in the published study, that funding wasn’t relevant to this research and we agree with the decision not to include it in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 15, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- People who take drugs called bisphosphonates to prevent bone loss may also reduce their risk of developing colorectal cancer by almost 60 percent compared to those not on the drugs, a new study suggests.

Bisphosphonates include such common drugs as Fosamax (alendronate), Boniva (ibandronate), Actonel (risedronate) and Reclast (zoledronic acid). These drugs work by increasing bone thickness, thereby reducing the risk of fractures, the researchers said.

In prior studies, bisphosphonates have already been shown to be associated with a reduced odds for breast cancer.

"These [new] findings are meaningful because they point to a possible protective effect of this class of drugs being relevant to prevention of many different cancers," said lead researcher Dr. Gad Rennert, from the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Faculty of Medicine and chairman of the department of community medicine and epidemiology at the Carmel Medical Center of Clalit Health Services in Haifa, Israel.

"This is [similar] to the effect that we and others have shown for [cholesterol-lowering] statins," he said, noting that "bisphosphonates and statins share the same metabolic pathway."

The results of the U.S. National Cancer Institute-supported study are published in the Feb. 14 issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

For the study, Rennert's team collected data on almost 1,900 postmenopausal women who took part in the Molecular Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer study, which is a population-based trial in northern Israel.

The researchers found that taking bisphosphonates, mostly Fosamax, for at least a year was associated with a significant 59 percent reduction in relative risk for colorectal cancer.

"The magnitude of the reduced risk is less important because this is an association study; however, it is very significant after controlling for a dozen other known risk factors," Rennert said.

They took into account factors such as family history, ethnic background, diet, physical activity, weight, vitamin D consumption and the use of other drugs such as aspirin, statins and hormone replacement therapy.

The findings in this study show that bisphosphonates are associated with a reduced risk of developing colorectal cancer, but they cannot confirm a causal effect -- that is, the study doesn't prove that the use of bisphosphonates is responsible for the lower risk of colorectal cancer.

However, the lowered risk of colorectal cancer seen with bisphosphonates may be due to the way the drug acts in the body, which is similar to how cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins work, according to Rennert. These same researchers also found in another study that statin use also reduced the risk of colorectal cancer, he noted.

"We also found a similar effect last year with risk of breast cancer, which has already been replicated by three other groups," Rennert added.

A randomized trial is need to prove that bisphosphonates are protective against colorectal cancer, Rennert said. "It should be relatively easy, as it seems that all that is needed is a year of treatment to see the effect," he said.

The researchers noted, however, that the risks of using bisphosphonates include the possibility, in rare cases, of osteonecrosis of the jaw (destruction of the jawbone or jaw tissue). Bisphosphonates used for osteoporosis have also been linked to a rare fracture of the thigh, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

"The adverse effects profile is of major importance if bisphosphonates are going to be recommended for cancer prevention in healthy people," the study authors cautioned.

Commenting on the study, Eric Jacobs, Strategic Director of Pharmacoepidemiology at the American Cancer Society, said that "the lower risk of colorectal cancer risk seen among bisphosphonate users in this study is intriguing."

However, these results should be interpreted with caution and require confirmation by additional studies, he said. "Results from the only other study of bisphosphonate use and colorectal cancer, a recent large study from the United Kingdom, do not support an important protective effect," Jacobs noted.

Fortunately, there are other proven ways to help lower risk of colorectal cancer, he said. "In particular, all Americans, 50 or older, should get a screening test so that precancerous polyps can be detected and removed before they turn into cancer."

For more information on colon cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Both stories quoted the exact same sources: the lead author and Eric Jacobs, Strategic Director of Pharmacoepidemiology at the American Cancer Society. But both stories used their comments in very different ways. The Reuters Health story did not allow Rennert to run wild with enthusiasm. The HealthDay story did. For example, when the story notes that “A randomized trial is needed to prove that bisphosphonates are protective against colorectal cancer, Rennert said.” It follows that sobering bit of news up immediately with, “It should be relatively easy, as it seems that all that is needed is a year of treatment to see the effect,” he said. Should be relatively easy? Ask any drug company how much time it takes and what it costs to bring a drug to market and no one will tell you that clinical trials are easy. This is especially troubling given that a previous study just last year showed no benefit, and, remember, we are talking about just 41 women who appear to have staved off cancer by taking these drugs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New research shows that resistance training protects the brain in persons with multiple sclerosis, which may delay the development of the disease

In the past, multiple sclerosis patients were advised not to exercise for fear of exacerbating the illness. However, it is now known that physical training can relieve many of the symptoms, including the excessive fatigue and mobility impairments that are often seen. New research now shows that resistance training may protect the nervous system and thus slow the progression of the disease.

This is the main finding of a study conducted by a research partnership between Aarhus University, Aarhus University Hospital, the University of Southern Denmark and the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, that has just been published in Multiple Sclerosis Journal.

The study shows that resistance training has a number of positive effects on the brain, which go beyond what can be achieved through effective disease specific medication.

"Over the past six years, we have been pursuing the idea that physical training has effects on more than just the symptoms, and this study provides the first indications that physical exercise may protect the nervous system against the disease," says one of the researchers behind the study, Associate Professor Ulrik Dalgas from the Department of Public Health at Aarhus University.

"For the past 15 years, we have known that physical exercise does not harm people with multiple sclerosis, but instead often has a positive impact on, for example, their ability to walk, their levels of fatigue, their muscle strength and their aerobic capacity, which has otherwise often deteriorated. But the fact that physical training also seems to have a protective effect on the brain in people with multiple sclerosis is new and important knowledge," says Ulrik Dalgas.

In the study, the researchers followed 35 people with multiple sclerosis for six months. Half of the group engaged in resistance training twice a week, while the other half continued to live their lives normally without systematic training.

Prior to and following the six-month period, the test subjects had their brains MR-scanned, and the researchers could see that there was a tendency for the brain to shrink less in those patients who undertook resistance training.

"Among persons with multiple sclerosis, the brain shrinks markedly faster than normal. Drugs can counter this development, but we saw a tendency that training further minimises brain shrinkage in patients already receiving medication. In addition, we saw that several smaller brain areas actually started to grow in response to training," says Ulrik Dalgas.

The researchers behind the study are still unable to explain why training has a positive effect on the brain in people with multiple sclerosis. A bigger and more in-depth on-going study will help to clarify this, and may also lead to improved treatment options, says Ulrik Dalgas. However, he stresses that the aim is not to replace medication with physical training.

"Phasing out drugs in favour of training is not realistic. On the other hand, the study indicates that systematic physical training can be a far more important supplement during treatment than has so far been assumed. This aspect needs to be thoroughly explored," says Ulrik Dalgas.

It is not yet clear whether all people with multiple sclerosis can benefit from this type of exercise, as it has not been sufficiently tested in the more severely affected patients. Therefore, Ulrik Dalgas is not recommending that all multiple sclerosis patients throw themselves into intensive physical training regimes without first seeking professional advice.
• Multiple sclerosis is an incurable disease of the central nervous system.
• There are about twice as many women as men with multiple sclerosis.
• Eighty per cent of people with multiple sclerosis live with the disease for more than 35 years.
• The disease is found in both aggressive and more benign forms.
• The cause of the illness is unknown, but both genetic and environmental factors play a role.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release names the study’s funders in a sidebar on the EurekAlert! website as the Augustinus Foundation, Hestehandler Ole Jacobsens Mindelegat and Biogen Idec. We encourage news release writers to include funders in the text of the release as well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two existing drugs, in combination, have shown significant promise in promoting weight loss, according to a new report.

The drugs, phentermine and Topamax, in combination with lifestyle and weight-loss counseling were associated with a 18-22 pound weight loss in trial participants, compared with a three-pound weight loss in patients who received counseling alone.



 The drug also appears to have reduced other obesity-related indicators, such as blood pressure, cholesterol and inflammation levels.

By comparison, the only approved long-term prescription weight loss medication available on the market today, Xenical, is associated with a seven-pound weight loss when combined with diet and exercise.

The study was funded by the pharmaceutical company Vivus, which combined the two drugs into one pill called Qnexa, and petitioned the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for approval in October 2010. The Food and Drug Administration denied the request, asking for more safety data from the company before moving forward.

According to the report, there were specific concerns about each drug's safety individually; specifically Topamax, which is reported to cause some psychiatric and cognitive side effects and may cause clef palate birth defects if taken while pregnant.

According to the manufacturer's study, the two drugs, when taken together, and at controlled-release doses, were very safe. Participants in the trial reported minor side effects such as dry mouth and constipation, however at higher doses, some participants did complain about some psychiatric side effects.

Among the 2,487 study participants, nine became pregnant, and none of their children were born with cleft palates, the report said.

The drug could be a good option for some people, but it's most likely not a silver bullet, said Dr. Melina Jampolis, CNNHealth's physician nutrition expert, who is not connected with the study.

"This might be a good tool in the short term to get someone motivated, and that's great," she said. "But unless it's paired with aggressive lifestyle changes, it may not be great in the long term."

Phentermine is commonly used as a short-term weight loss treatment, and was previously paired with fenfluramine to make the successful but now-discontinued weight loss drug Fen-phen. Fen-phen was removed from the market in 1997 amid concerns about the drug's heart risk, but phentermine has been used successfully for short-term appetite suppression since then with no major safety concerns.

Topamax is commonly used to treat migraines and seizures.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story turned to “Dr. Melina Jampolis,  CNNHealth’s physician nutrition expert, who is not connected with the study.”  We wish the story had given us some background on her expertise.
It also stated that “The study was funded by the pharmaceutical company Vivus.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A one-time treatment with Luxturna, the first US Food and Drug Administration-approved gene therapy for an inherited disorder, will cost $425,000 per eye.

Spark Therapeutics Inc., the Philadelphia-based maker of voretigene neparvovec, announced Wednesday in a statement that it reached an agreement in principle with Harvard Pilgrim and affiliates of Express Scripts to make the one-time treatment available to patients with a rare genetic defect that often leads to blindness.

The mutation affects both eyes, usually at the same pace, so most patients would need treatment for both eyes, a Spark Therapeutics spokeswoman said.

In some cases, the gene therapy will be available under an "outcomes-based rebate arrangement." The company also stated that its proposal to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the government program that covers about 100 million Americans, would allow installment payments for the drug.

"For a one-time therapy, like Luxturna, a non-traditional payment and distribution model is necessary to ensure needs of all parties -- patients, payers and providers -- are addressed," said Jennifer Luddy, a spokeswoman for Express Scripts.

At least one patient advocate disagrees.

"The new payment models announced today are merely a way to disguise a price that is simply too high," David Mitchell, president and founder of Patients For Affordable Drugs, said in a statement . "Spark Therapeutics is charging as much for Luxturna as they think they can get away with."

One-time-only treatments for rare genetic disorders are still unique, he noted.

The drug is intended for patients with retinal dystrophy due to a mutation of the RPE65 gene. This rare genetic defect causes severe visual impairment beginning in infancy and can eventually lead to blindness. The company believes the total "population in the US, Europe and select additional markets in the Americas and Asia/Pacific is up to approximately 6,000 individuals" who have the mutation targeted by Luxturna, explained Monique da Silva, a spokeswoman for Spark Therapeutics.

The drug will be available in the United States in early spring, with an estimated 1,000 to 2,000 people in the US standing to benefit from this treatment, according to Spark.

Luxturna is only the third gene therapy approved for use in the United States; two others were also approved in 2017. This is the first to correct an inherited genetic mutation.

Luxturna is a liquid that is injected directly into the eye with a microscopic needle during a surgical procedure. The drug supplies a third gene -- a normal RPE65 gene -- to cells in the retina, a layer of tissue lining the back of the eye. This third version of the gene does not remove or replace the two mutated genes causing the disease, which remain inside the cells. However, the normal gene delivered by the treatment is able to function within the retinal cells and correct vision problems.

In the phase 3 clinical trial, 27 out of 29 participants -- 93% -- who received the gene therapy demonstrated a gain in functional vision as assessed by a mobility test performed in a maze, according to the company. Risks of the treatment include cataracts, elevated eye pressure, retinal tears and holes and inflammation.

The company's offer of unusual payer models, including rebates and installment payments, will "help ensure patients' individual financial situation does not hinder access to treatment," da Silva said.

"New technologies such as gene and cell therapies hold out the potential to transform medicine," FDA Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb said in a statement announcing the August approval of Kymriah, considered to be the first gene therapy to be approved for the US market.

Kymriah is a leukemia treatment made by pharmaceutical giant Novartis. Similar to Luxturna, Kymriah is a one-time treatment, and its price tag is $475,000. However, Novartis said this price will not be charged to patients who do not respond within a month of treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story squeaked by on this criterion, because it quoted a news release by the Patients for Affordable Drugs group that provides important counterbalance to the drug company’s claims. The story would have been stronger if it had contained more input from an independent medical expert who could comment on the veracity of the evidence itself.
[Editor’s note: This criterion was updated on 1/11/18 to reflect the correct rating. It was previously rated “Not Satisfactory.” This change does not affect the overall rating.]
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
London, England (CNN) -- Researchers hope a new treatment developed in the United Kingdom will prove vital in controlling future flu pandemics such as H1N1 (swine) flu, bird flu as well as ending the need for annual flu jabs.

Developed by scientists at Oxford University, the new vaccine works by targeting protein cells inside the influenza A virus, instead of current vaccines that attack proteins on the outside of the flu virus.

According to Sarah Gilbert, head of the project at Oxford's Jenner Institute, this method is effective because proteins inside the virus are far more similar across all the influenza strains and are less likely to mutate.

In the first successful trial on humans, 11 healthy people were vaccinated and infected with the seasonal flu strain along with 11 non-vaccinated volunteers.

The results, say Gilbert, are important in developing a new form of protection that researchers hope could spell the end of flu vaccination supply problems.

The most recent global pandemic was the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic, in which the estimates of deaths ranged as high as 12,500 in the U.S. alone, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 

 

 Gilbert explained: "With the swine flu pandemic it took four months before the first doses of the vaccine were available and there was only a small amount available," Gilbert explained. "It took a further six months before it was possible to vaccinate a large number of people.

"With this type of vaccine, you would at least be able to start using the vaccine as soon as you knew a new pandemic was starting. You could stockpile the vaccine and wouldn't have this wait to make a new pandemic-specific vaccine," she said.

The vaccine would be an important step in treating seasonal flu, not just pandemics.

"Flu kills every year. It's not just swine flu. Normally it's the very old or very young that die from flu, but every year there are deaths from influenza A," said Gilbert.

In the U.S alone it's believed about 36,000 people die from seasonal flu-related causes in an average year, according to the CDC.

The initial results are positive, says Peter Palese, professor and chair of microbiology at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, but more research is needed before the new treatment is approved.

"I think it's a very interesting and very elegant approach and the data so far looks very, very good," he said.

"But although the vaccine has been give to humans, unfortunately there is no evidence presented to say if it really results in protection against infection."

Gilbert agrees more work is required before the vaccine becomes available, estimating a wait of at least five year, but says the results are a fundamental next step in the treatment of flu.

"It's fairly certain flu vaccines are going to change a lot in the next few years," she said.

"Whether it's this vaccine or another one someone else develops, I don't think we'll be continuing with the type of flu vaccines that we have at the moment."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- Marcia Gilbert has spent most of her life in Charlotte, North Carolina, but for the end of summer, she decided to make a special trip.

Gilbert, 56, spent the weekend before Labor Day in New York City. She roamed from Chinatown to the Upper East Side, went sightseeing in Central Park and painted the town with her husband of 33 years, their two 20-something children and assorted friends.

One evening, they found themselves at Del Posto, a chic Italian restaurant. Glancing at her watch, over the sparkle of conversation, wine glasses and half-eaten dessert, Gilbert marveled at the time: just a few minutes to midnight.

"It was awfully late for me," she laughed as she told the story. "It was just a great moment to know that I was holding up enough to be there, to feel great and make memories."

Late-night hours, any hours, are especially precious to Gilbert, who could have been forgiven for feeling just a bit weary. For 15 years, she's been fighting breast cancer.

After years of ups and downs, Gilbert is doing well and gives most of the credit to her most recent medicine: bevacizumab, better known by its brand name, Avastin. But gratitude is tinged with worry, because the Food and Drug Administration is considering the unusual step of revoking its approval of Avastin as a treatment for metastatic breast cancer.

"It's disheartening, and it's a scary thought," says Gilbert. "Until just recently, I didn't know it was so precarious."

Avastin, which works by cutting off a tumor's blood supply, was first approved as a cancer treatment in 2004 as a therapy for colon cancer. Since then, it has also been approved as a treatment for certain types of lung, kidney and brain cancer.

In 2008, the FDA granted Avastin what's known as accelerated approval as a therapy for metastatic breast cancer. The move was based on preliminary studies that found the drug increased the time that patients went without symptoms getting worse. As a condition of the approval, the company that makes Avastin -- Genentech -- agreed to conduct more extensive research.

The results of those two larger trials, known as RIBBON-1 and AVADO, were made public this year, and to some, they were disappointing. In RIBBON-1, time without symptoms getting worse, known as progression-free survival, or PFS, improved by less than three months.

In AVADO, it improved by just 24 days. In neither study did patients actually live longer, and there was a high rate of side effects, including high blood pressure and internal bleeding.

In July, an FDA advisory panel voted 12-1 to recommend revoking the preliminary approval. The FDA promises a final decision by September 17.

Gilbert had just passed her 40th birthday when she felt a lump in her breast. It was cancer.

She had it removed, went through a round of radiation and chemotherapy, and was symptom-free for the next nine years.

"I almost describe it as the little c," is how she tells it today. "When I got the recurrence, it was the Big C. It was a real surprise when it came back again."

This time, the signal was pain underneath her armpit. Tests revealed several small tumors in the bone.

Doctors told Gilbert she'd be lucky to be alive in five years, but with chemotherapy and radiation, she fought off the cancer, again. A year later, she watched her daughter Neely perform her senior dance recital, and not long after, walk across the stage to collect her high school diploma.

"All those things you take for granted," Gilbert says. "I was just so blessed to see her graduate."

But chemotherapy took a toll. At one point, Gilbert was hospitalized several days with a low white blood cell count and high fevers.

A few years later, she felt chest pains, and doctors thought she was having a heart attack. As it turned out, Gilbert had no heart damage, but there were days she was so exhausted she couldn't leave the house.

Late last spring, tests at Duke University found signs of cancer in her liver. Dr. Kimberly Blackwell, a breast cancer specialist at Duke, put her on Avastin, along with Navelbine, another chemotherapy drug. Gilbert says the combination stopped her illness in its tracks.

Because Avastin is approved to treat other cancers, losing the breast cancer indication would not, technically, remove it from a doctor's toolkit. But here's the catch: Avastin costs more than $8,000 a month. At that price, insurance coverage is crucial, and patients and doctors fear that an FDA reversal will lead to most insurers no longer signing the checks.

Susan Pisano, a spokeswoman for the Association of Health Insurance Plans, the largest trade group, said insurers would wait for guidance from the FDA, but adds, "If the FDA pulls back its approval for this particular indication, it would trigger a review of plan policies. Policies get reviewed whenever there is additional information."

The issue has split advocates for breast cancer patients. Susan G. Komen For the Cure, the largest group, issued a statement in support of Avastin and has helped to circulate a petition asking that it still be made available. But Fran Visco of the National Breast Cancer Coalition says Avastin should not have been approved in the first place.

"There was a delay in progression of the tumor, but it had no effect on quality of life, or survival," Visco says. "I favor a strong FDA. We need some oversight body to say whether something is effective. You can't rely on industry to do that, or individual physicians."

Visco says the new studies on Avastin, AVADO and RIBBON-1, should settle the issue.

"It's got no impact on survival, and there are troubling side effects. We're supposed to be excited about a delay in tumor progression, for a month? That's sad."

But Blackwell, the Duke oncologist, says the medicine can be used safely as long as patients are carefully monitored. Marcia Gilbert has had no significant side effects since starting on Avastin. If it's not available, Blackwell says, "I'm going to have to give older drugs with the exact same toxicity. And they've never been shown to improve overall survival, either."

Blackwell says the FDA risks setting the bar too high. "If the [Avastin] label is not upheld, it sets a new standard. We're not going to see another first-line drug for another 10 years, at least."

Another breast cancer specialist, Dr. Edith Perez, deputy director of the Mayo Clinic Cancer Center in Jacksonville, Florida, says many chemotherapy drugs, such as Gemzar -- which is substantially less expensive than Avastin -- have previously been approved without showing they can lengthen survival.

The issue has been taken up by critics of the health care overhaul signed into law last year. In late July, Sen. David Vitter, R-Louisiana, wrote a letter to the FDA saying that there are no new safety concerns and that "the [FDA advisory] committee's concerns appear to have been based on cost-effectiveness." Vitter went on to say that removing the breast cancer indication would be "cost-rationing."

The FDA says it does not consider cost when evaluating the safety or effectiveness of a drug. But some physicians, including Perez, say the issue is getting harder to ignore. In cancer care, many drugs are used "off-label," for therapies beyond those formally reviewed by the FDA.

"When they're less expensive, those drugs get approved by insurers," Perez says. When they cost more, "I'm spending more and more time justifying even treatments that do have regulatory approval."

In some states, insurers may not have the last word. Gilbert has a policy from Blue Cross/Blue Shield of North Carolina. According to Dr. John Fong, the company's vice president and senior medical director, a state law requires that insurers pay for cancer treatment that is listed in certain catalogs of acceptable treatments, compiled by government agencies or professional organizations.

Of course, given the debate over Avastin, those lists could become another source of controversy.

Asked whether she has a Plan B, if insurance no longer pays for Avastin, Gilbert's voice gets a little quiet. "I've learned with cancer to take it one day at a time, and not look too far ahead. I'm not going to think about it until I have to."

The morning after her midnight meal, Gilbert was on the pavement again, window-shopping with daughter Neely in Soho and Chinatown. Gilbert glows when she talks about the adventure.

"Years ago, on some of the different chemos, I wouldn't have had the energy to spend a weekend there. I just wouldn't have had the stamina."

By e-mail, she adds, "How do you put a dollar value on that?"
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes interviews with individuals who are for and against revoking Avastin’s approval, providing some counterbalance; however, the focus on the personal success story of one patient tips this balance.  Because of the strong comments by people like Fran Visco and some of the physicians quoted, we’ll give this story a satisfactory score on this criterion. 
However, if you’re going to play the personal anecdote game, we think you have an obligation to balance the glowing positive story with the more representative story of people who didn’t benefit. The plural of anecdote is not data. 
Also, from a balance perspective, why wasn’t the statement of Senator David Vitter – who has politicized breast cancer a number of times without showing a concern for evidence – balanced by a statement from a politician who is more evidence-based?  Again, if you’re going to play the politics game, how about leveling the playing field a bit? 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers hope that a simple brain scan performed in infants and toddlers can presage the development of autism, leading to early detection and early intervention.

The test involved using functional MRI to measure brain responses to spoken words in sleeping children.

"We're focusing on this earliest time period, when the brain is still developing and still changing," explained study author Lisa Eyler, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Diego. "If we could use this with other markers, we could probably identify people early on and, if we could do that, we'd have a much better chance of helping to make sure that their language development is normal."

The finding is slated to be presented Wednesday at the International Meeting for Autism Research in Philadelphia.

But another expert pointed out that the study is still extremely preliminary.

"It's a very early study. They have a long way to go before they're actually able to implement a test like this," said Keith Young, vice chairman of research in psychiatry and behavioral science at the Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine in Temple.

Before bringing it to clinics, researchers need to make sure this test isn't detecting other developmental delays such as dyslexia, he noted.

"I wouldn't want to be telling people your kid has autism when the problem is that they're dyslexic," Young said.

And when it is ready for prime time, it probably won't be applicable to all children with autism.

"This is probably not going to be used for wide-scale screening but it could be used for children who we have some sense that they have autism and want to gather more information," said David Amaral, president of the International Society for Autism Research and research director of the University of California Davis MIND Institute. "There are many, many different types of autism. There are some children with autism who don't have these specific abnormalities in brain function."

Right now, experts have little to go by in detecting autism other than carefully monitoring the regular developmental milestones in children, Young said.

"We do need something," he said.

"One of the hallmark features of autism is deficits in language acquisition," Eyler explained. "Whereas the typical developing kid will have an explosion of their language ability starting at about 12 months in both comprehension and production, kids in autism delay don't start comprehending or producing until later, and they don't ever have that kind of explosion. About 50 percent of kids with autism never develop language," she noted.

"We were interested in what was going on in the earliest period of life that could account for these differences," she continued.

For this study, Eyler and her colleagues monitored the brain activity of 30 children with an autism spectrum disorder (aged 14 months to 46 months) and 14 "typical" children of roughly the same age.

Children slept in the MRI machine while researchers read them bedtime stories. This allowed the investigators to see which parts of the brain were being activated in typical children versus children with autism.

"We were looking for areas of the brain that are more responsive during listening to bedtime stories than when they're not hearing that," Eyler said.

In the typically developing children, both sides of the brain involved in language processing were activated. In the youngest children, the activation was about equal in both the right and left hemisphere, while in the older children, activity became more pronounced on the left side, which is similar to adult patterns and to be expected, Eyler explained.

But in the autistic children, there was slightly more right hemisphere response than left hemisphere, and there was no change in activity across the age range.

"We didn't see that growth of the left hemisphere [in the children with autism]," Eyler said.

"We now feel pretty confident that, in many children with autism, there are alterations either in structure growth or connectivity of the brain, but we really don't understand the implications of that for core features of autism, one of which is problems with communication," Amaral said. "This provides more evidence for abnormal connectivity in the brain."

The Autism Society of America has more on this disorder.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The idependent sources were well chosen and well quoted. The researchers themselves are given the proper context, for the most part, too. The story does not identify conflicts of interest. One could see if one of the researchers had an interest in an fMRI machine manufacturer, but everyone involved and not involved seems to agree that we are a long way from a marketable product.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Before Starting A Statin, Talk It Over With Your Doctor

A study published Monday is pushing back against the notion that up to 40 percent of Americans should be taking statin drugs to reduce the risk of heart disease. The study, in the Annals of Internal Medicine, argues that current medical guidelines haven't adequately considered the risks from these widely used drugs.

"Some harms are mentioned, but it's entirely unclear how they were considered when coming up with the recommendations," says Milo Puhan, a physician and epidemiologist at the University of Zurich and senior author of the new study. "In our approach we very explicitly considered the harms."

It's important to note that statin drugs are generally safe, and harms are uncommon. On the other hand, the benefits aren't that great, either. Anywhere from 50 to 200 healthy people need to take a statin daily to prevent a single heart attack for five years, so even small harms may outweigh the potential benefits, the Swiss scientists say.

The most common side effect of these drugs is muscle pain, which usually goes away if patients stop taking the medicines. People taking statins are also at a higher risk of developing diabetes, which is harder to reverse.

Puhan also found that some statins were more effective than others, with atorvastatin (the generic name for Lipitor) being the best of the bunch. He notes that physician guidelines don't generally compare the relative value of these drugs, which are all available as inexpensive generics.

He also finds that benefits fade compared with harms as people get older. "The elderly do not benefit as much as previous studies might have thought," he says.

"One size doesn't fit it all," he concludes. "That's a very important message."

Puhan says, based on his assessment, perhaps 15 to 20 percent of older adults should be taking statins – far less than the 30 or 40 percent suggested by current medical guidelines.

"I think for me, as a physician," says Ilana Richman, an internist at the Yale School of Medicine, "this kind of data suggests that if we give more weight to the potential for adverse events, then maybe it's reasonable to hold off for lower-risk patients."

She co-wrote an editorial about the paper and came away from it thinking that doctors need to spend more time talking about the plusses and minuses of statin treatment, personalizing their recommendations more than they do now. She says it's a challenge to convey these sophisticated concepts in the short amount of time doctors have to spend with their patients.

Yet that kind of dialog is increasingly the expectation. In mid-November, the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology published new guidelines calling for more nuanced conversations around who would most benefit from statins.

Scott Grundy, a physician at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center who chaired the guidelines committee, says the new recommendations urge people in this gray area to get a special kind of CT scan that looks for calcium deposits in heart arteries, a signal for clogs that could cause trouble.

"If you have no coronary calcium, then your chances of having a heart attack over the next 10 years are very low," he says.

And it turns out that perhaps 40 percent of people who are identified as candidates based on their risk factors such as cholesterol levels and age actually have clear heart arteries, Grundy says. "That means a lot of people are going to be treated unnecessarily if they don't have the calcium scan."

But that test, which Grundy says is available for about $100, is controversial among some physicians. They worry that it will trigger overtreatment of conditions that the scan will pick up, but which don't require urgent attention.

And it is only useful as a screening test for people who haven't had heart disease. Statins are routinely prescribed for people who have already had a heart attack or stroke. For those patients (who weren't included in the Swiss analysis), the benefits are so clear "it's almost mandatory to be on a statin drug," Grundy says.

He disagrees with a lot of the particulars in the Swiss study. So does cardiologist Roger Blumenthal, who heads the Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease at Johns Hopkins. "The harms [analyzed in the paper] can be dealt with by a smart clinician," he says.

Yet both the new guidelines and the latest study agree on an important point: Doctors and patients should spend more time reviewing the benefits and risks of statins, with attention paid to each person's particular circumstances.

You can contact NPR science correspondent Richard Harris at rharris@npr.org.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This story includes sources that weren’t involved in the study. The study’s authors reported no conflicts of interest.
The story could have acknowledged the influence of pharmaceutical companies in creating guidelines for statin use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With just a drop of blood doctors may one day be able to detect pancreatic cancer in its early stages, before it has become deadly, a new study suggests.

An international team of researchers was able to identify 100 percent of patients with late-stage pancreatic cancer, as well as those with earlier stage disease, by looking for a protein in the blood that is made in abundance by tumor cells.

That protein turns up in tiny virus-sized particles, called exosomes, which are excreted by all of the body’s cells, according to the study published in Nature. But, by good fortune, the protein turns up in exosomes only when there is cancer, so its presence could be an early, and testable, marker for the disease.

It’s rare to discover pancreatic cancer early, said study coauthor Dr. Raghu Kalluri, professor and chairman of the department of cancer biology at the MD Anderson Cancer Center. “People don’t feel any symptoms that make them want to go to the clinic until their cancer is stage 3 or stage 4,” he added. “Using this test we were 100 percent accurate at identifying all cancer patients.”

In 2015 48,960 Americans will be diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, according to estimates by the National Cancer Institute. And an estimated 40,560 will die from the disease. It is the most deadly cancer with just 7.2 percent surviving five years.

For perspective, over the course of a lifetime, 1.5 percent of Americans will develop pancreatic cancer.

While quite promising, the new findings will need to be verified and validated by other studies, experts told NBC News. And even if it passes muster, it will take some time before a test could be developed to screen for the disease.

Kalluri and his colleagues examined serum samples from 190 patients with pancreatic cancer, 32 patients with breast cancer and 100 healthy volunteers. They found levels of the protein in exosomes correlated with the severity of the disease — so there was more in patients with more advanced disease. It was not present in the healthy volunteers.

Even more promising are the findings from the seven patients with early pancreatic cancer that were detectable through their protein levels. Further, levels dropped when patients had surgery to remove their tumors, so the marker could also be used to follow the progression of the disease, Kalluri said.

Kalluri says that a screening test might be available in as little as a year. But, he said, “this is just a speculation based on the current strength of the study.”

Had such a test been available, it might have save the life of Dr. Teresa Flippo-Morton, a prominent breast surgeon from Charlotte, N.C.

“She was an expert in oncology,” said Dr. Derek Raghavan, a colleague and president of the Levine Cancer Institute where Flippo-Morton worked. “She did all the things you are supposed to do. She wasn’t a smoker. She lived a healthy lifestyle. She had a good work-life balance. She exercised. She took vacations. It is a good example of how this disease sneaks up on people and gives no warning.”

A test for pancreatic cancer could save lives, perhaps even Flippo-Morton’s, Raghavan said.

“If this study is confirmed, this will make a difference because it’s one of the cancers we don’t have any reliable screening test for,” he added. “It kills people and it kills them quickly.”

A screening test could have a huge effect, said Dr. Timothy Donahue, an associate professor of surgery and molecular and medical pharmacology and chief of pancreas and gastrointestinal surgery at the University of California, Los Angeles.

“Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in this country and it’s predicted, if the current prevalence and survival rate continues, that it will become number two within the next five to 10 years,” Donahue said. “Something like this could potentially flatten that curve and change the epidemiology of pancreatic cancer.”

Still, Donahue said, the method needs to be “heavily vetted and validated. But it’s as good of an academic start as I’ve ever seen. It now needs to be taken over by some diagnostic corporation before it can launch into something for widespread use.”

What needs to be determined is “what the sensitivity and specificity would be in a screening population of 100,000 people,” said Dr. Brian Wolpin, of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute. “In this study the patients were known to have cancer or not to have cancer. In this kind of sample sensitivity and specificity tend to look good.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We give the story a pass here because there are multiple voices in the piece. But it should be noted that there was only one dissenting opinion, at the very end, from Dr. Brian Wolpin, of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute. He brought up the point that should have been in the second paragraph of the story: “In this study the patients were known to have cancer or not to have cancer. In this kind of sample sensitivity and specificity tend to look good.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have identified two new biological markers of cystic fibrosis (CF), a genetic disease which affects children and young adults, leaving them with lifelong health complications including digestive problems and persistent lung infections.

The findings, published in the journal ACS Central Science, shed new light on the underlying mechanisms of CF and could lead to improved prognosis and better therapies for a disease which is quite variable, affecting different children in different ways, say researchers.

"There are chemical signatures in sweat that tell us an infant has CF," says Philip Britz-McKibbin, lead author of the study and a professor in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at McMaster University. "We set out to discover whether there were chemical indicators detected in sweat that could complement the gold standard for CF diagnosis: the sweat chloride test."

The test is commonly used in universal newborn disease-screening programs and measures the concentrations of salt. Elevated sweat chloride confirms that an infant actually has CF.

But there are some obstacles that complicate clinical decision-making, explains Britz-McKibbin, because sweat chloride can result in ambiguous diagnoses in some borderline cases and does not reveal how the disease might progress for individual patients.

"Sweat contains lots of information related to human health that researchers have not fully analyzed and we found some unexpected chemicals associated with CF," he says.

Using a specialized technique developed at McMaster, scientists collected and analyzed sweat samples from infants in CF clinics at the McMaster Children's Hospital and the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto.

They identified several unknown chemicals beyond chloride that were consistently associated with babies who had CF, including two different drug and environmental compounds the infants secreted in sweat at much lower concentration levels.

Testing for these biomarkers could be done in cases in which the chloride sweat test result is unclear, say researchers. The biomarkers also point to other underlying mechanisms that contribute to the progression of CF and could lead to better therapeutic interventions earlier in life.

"The easier it is to detect CF, the earlier it can be diagnosed, and the better people's chances are at living a longer, healthier life", says Joanna Valsamis, Chief Healthcare, Research and Advocacy Officer at Cystic Fibrosis Canada. "CF Canada invests heavily in research that aims to improve the lives of people living with CF, and findings such as those from Dr. Britz-McKibbin are crucial to our understanding of the disease."

In Canada, one in every 3,600 children are diagnosed with CF. But life expectancy rates have risen dramatically in recent decades with the median age of survival now over 50 years, due to better treatments to improve lung function, better nutrition and lung transplants. Further benefits are expected with the advent of newborn screening programs that have resulted in early detection.

The research was funded in part by Cystic Fibrosis Canada. Since 1960, CF Canada has invested more than $244 million in leading CF research and care.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding source is clearly marked and there does not appear to be a conflict of interest. However, it’s not clear whether the “specialized technique developed at McMaster” is being patented for use in the marketplace, or if it is being made freely available to other researchers. Either way, that would be a valuable point to make in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 7, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An investigational drug called pridopidine seems an effective and safe treatment for people with the progressive movement disorder Huntington's disease, researchers report.

Huntington's patients have an imbalance in the signaling chemical dopamine. The new drug stabilizes dopamine signaling in areas of the brain that control movement and coordination.

According to the study authors, this is the first drug shown to improve patients' loss of ability to move their muscles voluntarily. The only drug currently approved for Huntington's is tetrabenazine, which treats only involuntary movements and can cause serious side effects.

The results of the phase 3 clinical trial, conducted by Spanish researchers led by Dr. Justo Garcia de Yebenes, of the department of neurology, Hospital Ramon y Cajal in Madrid, appear in the Nov. 7 online edition of The Lancet Neurology.

The study included 437 Huntington's disease patients from eight European countries. The participants took either pridopidine (45 milligrams once daily or 45 mg twice daily) or a placebo for 26 weeks.

After six months of treatment, patients taking the higher dose of pridopidine showed improvements in motor function -- specifically in eye and hand movements, involuntary muscle contractions (dystonia), and gait and balance -- compared with patients taking the placebo.

More than 70 percent of the patients taking the higher dose of the drug showed a significant benefit, according to the researchers. Side effects among patients taking the drug were similar to the placebo group.

"Pridopidine has the potential to complement available treatments by improving a different range of motor deficits. Its lack of severe side-effects . . . suggests that pridopidine might be useful even for those patients who are treated at sites that are not centers of excellence for Huntington's disease," the researchers concluded.

One U.S. neurologist agreed that the drug seems promising against a disease with few treatment options.

"There has been a great deal of attention for this drug, as it is one of the few molecules that in preliminary studies was found to have some efficacy in Huntington's disease," said Dr. Alessandro Di Rocco, professor in the department of neurology and chief of the division of movement disorders at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.

"However, this is the first large study to show evidence of a positive result in treating the motor symptoms of this devastating disease. And, though the compound is apparently well tolerated without significant side effects, the benefit is modest and limited to the motor symptoms of the disease and it is unknown how long the improvement observed could last," he added.

Still, pridopidine does not get at the underlying cause of Huntington's disease, Di Rocco said.

"Unfortunately, Huntington's is a progressive disease and this drug is not a treatment of the disease itself but only improves some of its symptoms," he explained. "Nevertheless, it is a welcome addition because there is very little else yet available to treat the symptoms. The challenge for scientists and clinicians is to discover therapies that actually slows or halts the progression of the disease."

Another expert agreed that new treatment options for patients are sorely needed.

"A well-tolerated drug that produces even small benefits for patients with Huntington's disease would be a very welcome addition to the currently available treatments for this debilitating disorder," Andrew Feigin, from The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research in New York City, wrote in an accompanying commentary.

The study was funded by European pharmaceuticals company NeuroSearch A/S.

We Move has more about Huntington's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Dr. Alessandro Di Rocco from NYU Langone Medical Center is used as an independent source. The story also adds that the study was funded by European pharmaceuticals company NeuroSearch A/S.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 8, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Deep brain stimulation, a technique used to treat Parkinson's disease and certain psychiatric disorders, appears to provide some memory-enhancing benefits, researchers report.

Using electrical impulses to stimulate a part of the brain critical for memory function significantly improved patients' navigational ability, reflecting improved spatial memory, the small study from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) suggests.

Although the results are still preliminary, the method may potentially hold promise for boosting memory in patients with early Alzheimer's disease, the researchers said.

"The thing to bear in mind is that it's a first, important step," said Suzanne Haber, a brain researcher and professor of pharmacology and physiology at University of Rochester Medical Center in New York, who wasn't involved in the study. "I think it was exciting that they were really able to show that stimulating that area was important for a certain kind of learning. It raises more questions, and many more experiments that can be done."

Seven patients awaiting possible surgery for the seizure disorder epilepsy had electrodes implanted in their brains to pinpoint the origin of their convulsions. The researchers followed them and found they were better able to recognize landmarks and to navigate routes more quickly in a video game featuring a taxi cab, virtual passengers and a cyber city. Patients played the role of cab drivers who picked up passengers and delivered them to one of six requested shops in the city.

Stimulation of the entorhinal cortex -- a region considered crucial to transforming daily experience into lasting memories -- produced the improvement, the researchers said.

The study is published Feb. 9 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

During the video game task, participants learned their way around a virtual town with and without five-second periods of deep brain stimulation, and were tested for their ability to reach predetermined landmarks. Six patients showed a 64 percent reduction in "excess path length" -- the ideal path between destinations, which indicated better performance -- for locations that had been learned during periods of deep brain stimulation.

For five patients, navigation to each of the three stores learned during stimulation was faster and shorter than navigation to the three stores learned without stimulation, indicating a consistent effect, the study said. Stimulating the hippocampus -- a brain region next to the entorhinal cortex which helps form and store memories -- produced no effect during this experiment, however.

"Critically, it was the stimulation at the gateway into the hippocampus, and not the hippocampus itself, that proved effective," senior study author Dr. Itzhak Fried, a professor of neurosurgery at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, said in a university news release.

"Our preliminary results provide evidence supporting a possible mechanism for enhancing memory, particularly as people age or suffer from early dementia. At the same time, we studied a small sample of patients, so our results should be interpreted with caution," Fried added.

Currently, deep brain stimulation is used to control the tremors associated with Parkinson's, symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder and some other psychiatric conditions, including depression.

Haber noted that the brain damage that occurs with epilepsy, which can produce memory problems, is different than that resulting from Alzheimer's disease, in which the formation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are believed to contribute to nerve cell deterioration. So it's difficult to generalize this study's results to other diseases that affect memory, she said, and the research didn't show if effects of temporary deep brain stimulation last beyond the study period.

"In these types of studies you think of things like this," Haber said, "but how real it is, is something we're going to have to see. I think just trying to work out that there is some similarity in very simple learning [processes in the brain] is important."

To learn more about deep brain stimulation, visit the American Association of Neurological Surgeons.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes an independent source. Although it does not mention whether the researchers have any conflicts of interest, the authors reported no conflicts in the disclosure forms posted online by the New England Journal of Medicine.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cancer cells can be destroyed more effectively and selectively with a unique new reusable treatment, activated with a substance found in stinging nettles and ants - thanks to new research by the University of Warwick.

Cancer cells can be destroyed more effectively and selectively with a unique new reusable treatment, activated with a substance found in stinging nettles and ants - thanks to new research by the University of Warwick.

Led by Professor Peter J. Sadler from Warwick's Department of Chemistry, researchers have developed a new line of attack against cancer: an organic-osmium compound, which is triggered using a non-toxic dose of sodium formate, a natural product found in many organisms, including nettles and ants.

Named JPC11, it targets a metabolic process which cancer cells rely on to survive and multiply. It does this by converting a key substance used by cancer cells to provide the energy they need for rapid division (pyruvate) into an unnatural lactate - leading to the cells' destruction.

Uniquely, this chemo-catalyst treatment can be recycled and reused within a cancer cell to attack it repeatedly.

This unprecedented functional ability to recycle and reuse the compound within cancer cells could lead to future anticancer drugs being administered in smaller, more effective, and potentially less toxic doses - decreasing the side-effects of chemotherapy.

The researchers have been focusing on the potential to use this compound on ovarian and prostate cancers.

Ovarian cancers are becoming increasingly resistant to existing chemotherapy drugs (such as the platinum drug, cisplatin). Since this new research functions in a totally new and unique way, it may overcome this acquired resistance and widen the spectrum of anticancer activity.

Importantly, the development opens up a possibility for a more selective cancer treatment as JPC11 was observed to specifically target the biochemistry of cancer cells, leaving healthy cells largely untouched - another improvement compared to existing platinum-based drugs, which can also attack non-cancerous cells.

"This is a significant step in the fight against cancer. Manipulating and applying well-established chemistry in a biological context provides a highly selective strategy for killing cancer cells.

"We have discovered that chemo-catalyst JPC11 has a unique mechanism of action - and we hope that this will lead to more effective, selective and safer treatments in the future."

Professor Peter Sadler, a medicinal chemist at the University of Warwick commented:

"Platinum compounds are the most widely used drugs for cancer chemotherapy, but we urgently need to respond to the challenges of circumventing resistance and side-effects. Our lab is focussed on the discovery of truly novel anticancer drugs which can kill cells in totally new ways. Chemo-catalysts, especially those with immunogenic properties, might provide a breakthrough.

"It will take time to progress from the lab to the clinic, but we are fortunate to have a talented enthusiastic, international team working with colleagues in Warwick Cancer Research Centre across the borderlines of chemistry, cell and systems biology and cancer medicine who are determined to succeed."

Professor Martin Wills, catalyst specialist at the University of Warwick, commented:

"Although asymmetric catalytic hydrogenation processes are well developed in the materials industry, this research provides the first ever example of it being achieved inside cells using a synthetic catalyst."

Handedness (molecular asymmetry) is critical to the function of bio-molecules in the body. Proteins, enzymes and our DNA, for example - are handed. Only the correct hand works, in the same way that a right hand does not fit a left-hand glove.

In this case, the osmium compound JPC11, with sodium formate, can selectively produce a molecule of a specific 'handedness' - thus manipulating how cancer cells grow.

"The 'handedness' of molecules is critical in the body. Our hands are near-identical, but are mirror images of each other. The same can be true of molecules, and in some cases, having the wrong handed molecule can have profound biological consequences.

"We believe that manipulation of the 'handedness' of molecules in cells could provide a new strategy for fighting diseases."

The research, 'Asymmetric transfer hydrogenation by synthetic catalysts in cancer cells', is published in Nature Chemistry. DOI: 10.1038/NCHEM.2918

It is co-authored by Dr Isolda Romero-Canelón, Dr Carlos Sanchez-Cano, Dr Guy J. Clarkson and Dr Abraha Habtemariam.

It was funded by the European Research Council, Science City (Advantage West Midlands and the European Regional Development Fund), The University of Warwick, Bruker Daltonics, the Engineering and Physical Research Council and Cancer Research UK.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes the sources of funding for the study. The release does not explicitly state that there are no conflicts of interests, but there do not appear to be competing interests here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) In the future, a new class of anti-inflammatory drugs could be used to treat depression, say University of Cambridge researchers.

Drugs such as aspirin and ibuprofen treat inflammation, the body's immune response to infections or pathogens. During an inflammatory response, immune cells flood the bloodstream with proteins known as cytokines.

Drugs to counteract these cytokines are the newest generation of anti-inflammatories. Some are so new, clinical trials are still testing their efficacy and safety for human use.

These trials form the basis of the Cambridge research that was published Tuesday in the journal Molecular Psychiatry

Based on previous findings about depression, the team looked at the side effects experienced by patients given anti-cytokine drugs in 20 separate studies. All the participants had chronic autoimmune inflammatory diseases, which occur when healthy cells are mistaken for infected cells, causing the immune system to attack the body and leading to inflammation.

Anti-cytokine drugs "dampen down inflammation by blocking the actions of specific inflammatory cytokines ... with 'surgical precision' and are now routinely used for treating patients who respond inadequately to standard treatments for inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and Crohn's disease both in the US and Europe," explained Dr. Golam Khandaker, a clinical lecturer in Cambridge's department of psychiatry and lead author of the new study.

Using data from the 20 studies, Khandaker and his colleagues found that anti-cytokine drugs improved symptoms of depression, regardless of whether they lessened the symptoms of physical illness.

"The findings suggest that inflammation may contribute to the pathogenesis of depression," Khandaker said. The findings also suggest that "anti-inflammatory drugs may be helpful in treating patients with depression who are chronically inflamed."

The immune system acts like a thermostat, turned down low most of the time but cranked up when we have an infection, according to Khandaker. In some people, the thermostat is always set slightly higher, behaving as if they have a persistent low-level infection.

For the current report, Khandaker and his colleagues looked at studies of drugs blocking specific cytokines.

Khandaker said that five of the 20 studies focused on one specific cytokine. All five showed the same result, that blocking the action of this cytokine to reduce inflammation lessened symptoms of depression.

Two clinical trials examined by Khandaker focused on another drug blocking the action of a different cytokine, and both studies showed it improved symptoms of depression.

Looking to the future

"Evidence at this point suggests that cytokine antagonists -- which are much more specific in their anti-inflammatory effects than drugs like aspirin -- show modest antidepressant effects in individuals with depression and increased inflammation," said Raison, who did not participate in in Khandaker's research.

Though it's still too early to prescribe these drugs to depressed patients, Khandaker believes that anti-inflammatory drugs may offer hope to people who find current antidepressants ineffective.

"We need more studies," he said, particularly research involving patients with depression who are inflamed but healthy to investigate the effect of these drugs on depression. Their potential side effects also must be investigated, Khandaker said, adding that "we and other research groups from both sides of the Atlantic are currently planning and conducting such randomized control trials."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The CNN story offers a quote from a source not associated with the research; and it offers links to websites and other sources where readers could find out more about funding and sponsorship of the study. This is a strong point of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The idea that alcohol might be good for our hearts and blood vessels is a popular one, right up there with the notion that chocolate is a health food.

But before you pour your next cocktail, beer or glass of wine, you should know this: the science suggesting a benefit has never been conclusive. And some experts believe the evidence is getting thinner all the time.

"In health as elsewhere, if something looks too good to be true, it should be treated with great caution," says an editorial published this week in the medical journal BMJ. Mike Daube, professor of health policy at Curtin University in Australia, writes that the once-touted benefits of moderate drinking "are now evaporating."

His editorial accompanies a British study that finds death rates among moderate drinkers and non-drinkers are not different enough to suggest any real health benefits for drinkers. The only possible exception: women over age 65.

Also, a recent Swedish study found that middle-aged people having more than two drinks a day – just above the moderate level for men — had a markedly increased stroke risk.

Studies will continue, and not everyone has given up the idea that moderate drinking — up to two drinks a day for men and one day for women — might have some cardiovascular benefits.

Here's what U.S. experts say you need to know for now:
• Any benefits are unclear. "I cannot prove and I don't think anyone can prove that alcohol consumption can prevent anyone from dying or prevent heart attacks," says Kenneth Mukamal, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, Boston. But he says some studies show moderate drinking can boost levels of "good" HDL cholesterol and a hormone key to blood sugar control. Some studies following moderate drinkers and non-drinkers for decades find lower death rates and fewer heart attacks and strokes in the drinkers, he says. But those studies do not prove alcohol is the reason for the differences. One theory, backed by the new British study: the results are skewed by the fact that some non-drinkers are former drinkers with health problems.
• The risks are real. For some people, even moderate drinking is clearly risky. Those include people taking blood-thinning medicines and those with uncontrolled high blood pressure, says Curtis Rimmerman, a cardiologist at Cleveland Clinic. Alcohol raises blood pressure and thins blood, he say. It's also a source of "non-essential liquid calories," a big concern in an overweight nation, he says. And heavy drinking is not good for anyone: It has long been linked with stroke, heart failure and many non-cardiovascular hazards, including car crashes.
• Gender matters. Women are advised to drink less than men, partly because they tend to be smaller. But that's not the only reason, says Lori Mosca, a professor of medicine at Columbia University Medical Center and a spokesperson for the American Heart Association. "Our blood vessels have a different hormonal milieu," she says and women are more vulnerable to the anti-clotting effects of alcohol – something that could raise the risk of bleeding strokes. Another consideration: even light drinking is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, according the National Cancer Institute.
• Age matters too. There's no evidence drinking in your 20s or 30s has any health benefits. "At those ages, any benefit we get from moderate drinking is only to the extent that someone who is moderately drinking is not heavily drinking," Mukamal says.
• There's probably nothing special about wine. "About a decade ago, there was this myth that red wine was better than white wine and wine was better than beer and spirits," Mosca says. Studies have failed to prove any difference.

"I don't want to be a killjoy," Mosca says. "But I would never recommend alcohol as a preventative intervention."

"There may be some evidence that perhaps one glass with a meal is OK," says Demetrius Lopes, a neurological surgeon at Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, and another spokesperson the heart association. "But it's a slippery slope to saying 'OK, maybe two is better.' I do think people don't know the dangers."

No health agency or major medical group recommends drinking for health. But, if you do drink, groups including the American Heart Association and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend:
• No more than two drinks a day for men.
• No more than one drink a day for women (and none for pregnant women).
• 1.5 ounces of 80-proof spirits or 1 ounce of 100-proof spirits.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article interviewed four solid sources at reputable academic centers – an associate professor at Harvard Medical School, a cardiologist at Cleveland Clinic, a professor of medicine at Columbia University Medical Center, and a neurological surgeon at Rush University Medical Center.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The delivery virus, carrying a good version of the human gene for the clotting agent known as Factor IX, was prepared by researchers at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis. The patients had been recruited and treated with the virus in England by a team led by Dr. Amit C. Nathwani of University College London; researchers at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia monitored their immune reactions.

Hemophilia B is caused by a defect in the gene for Factor IX. Fatal if untreated, the disease occurs almost only in men because the Factor IX gene lies on the X chromosome, of which men have only a single copy.

Women who carry a defective gene on one X chromosome can compensate with the good copy on their other X chromosome, but they bequeath the defective copy to half their children. About one in 30,000 of newborn boys have the disease, with about 3,000 patients in the United States.

Dr. Nathwani and his team reported that they treated the patients by infusing the delivery virus into their veins. The virus homes in on the cells of the liver, and the gene it carries then churns out correct copies of Factor IX. A single injection enabled the patients to produce small amounts of Factor IX, enough that four of the six could stop the usual treatment, injections of Factor IX concentrate prepared from donated blood. The other two patients continued to need concentrate, but less frequently.

Treating a patient with concentrate costs $300,000 a year, with a possible lifetime cost of $20 million, but the single required injection of the new delivery virus costs just $30,000, Dr. Katherine P. Ponder of the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis notes in her commentary in The New England Journal of Medicine, calling the trial “a landmark study.”

The patients have continued to produce their own Factor IX for up to 22 months, said Dr. Edward G. D. Tuddenham, director of the Hemophilia Center at the Royal Free Hospital in London. One patient, a geologist, had a good response at first, but his level of Factor IX has declined to 1 percent of normal, the level at which the disease kicks in.

“We attribute this to the fact that he had an inflammation, and although we treated it promptly, we should have been quicker off the mark,” Dr. Tuddenham said.

The patient cannot be injected again with the same virus because his immune system is now primed to attack it. “He’s very philosophic about it, but he’s a scientist, and his motivation is to help the science,” Dr. Tuddenham said.

Twenty more patients will be treated to assess the best dose of the virus, the goal being the highest dose that does not set off an immune system attack, Dr. Tuddenham said. “We are pretty close to the sweet spot,” he said. If all goes well, a genetic treatment for hemophilia B “could be available for widespread use in a couple of years.”

In a trial in 2006, a patient injected with a corrective gene produced his own Factor IX but only for 10 weeks. The designer of that treatment, Dr. Katherine A. High of Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, said the new therapy had worked because the delivery virus had been made more efficient and because the research team had treated the patients with steroids to suppress immune system attacks on the virus.

“I think it’s incredibly exciting, and I say that even though these people are my competitors,” she said. Dr. High is listed as a co-author of the report because her laboratory helped monitor the patients and provided proof for regulators that the virus would not insert its human gene into the patients’ sperm and make the change hereditary.

A serious problem with other delivery viruses is that they insert themselves randomly into chromosomes, sometimes disrupting a gene. The virus used by Dr. Nathwani’s team, known as adeno-associated virus-8, generally stays outside the chromosomes, so it should not present this problem. Still, patients will need to be monitored for liver cancer, a small possibility that has been observed in mice.

“I don’t think it’s a showstopper, but it’s a critical safety issue that has to be assessed,” Dr. High said.

Patients have little or no immunity to the adeno-associated virus, which infects rhesus monkeys. The virus has a propensity for making liver cells its target, which is good for the therapy because these cells are the natural producers of Factor IX. However, liver cells do not live forever and slowly replenish themselves, possibly limiting how long the therapy will last.

About 80 percent of hemophilia cases are of the type known as hemophilia A, which is caused by defects in a different blood-clotting agent, Factor VIII. Researchers have focused on hemophilia B, in part, because the Factor IX gene is much smaller and easier to work with.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes an editorial writer calling the trial “a landmark study.”  But that editorial writer had much more to say in that editorial – including raising specific concerns on potential harms.
The one independent expert quoted only called it a “terrific advance” but wasn’t quoted giving a specific analysis of the research – what it means or what it may not mean.
A second external voice was included – but that was a researcher who, although a competitor, was nonetheless listed as a co-author of the paper because her lab helped monitor the patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For Headaches, A Lifestyle Change May Be Better Than A Doctor Visit

Terri Bradford has suffered debilitating headaches all her life. Some days the pain is so bad, she says, "By 11 o'clock in the morning, I'm on the couch in a darkened room with my head packed in ice."

Over the years, Bradford, who is 50 years old and lives in Bedford, Mass., has searched desperately for pain relief. She's been to the doctor countless times for countless tests. "Everything I've had, I've had twice," she says. "I've had two spinal taps; I've had so many nerve blocks I've lost count."

Bradford is not alone. It's estimated that every year 12 million Americans go to the doctor seeking help for headaches. Nearly one quarter of the population suffers from recurrent severe tension headaches or migraines.

People who go to the doctor for headaches are increasingly likely to be sent for advanced testing and treatment, a study finds. That testing is expensive, it may not be necessary and it could even be harmful, says lead researcher Dr. John Mafi, of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston.

Mafi looked at the rates of advanced imaging like CT scans and MRIs in people with headaches, as well as referrals to other doctors, presumably specialists. He found that from 1999 to 2010, the number of diagnostic tests rose from 6.7 percent of all doctor visits to 13.9 percent. At the same time, referrals to other doctors increased from 6.9 percent to 13.2 percent. In other words, almost double what it was a decade ago.

Mafi says this isn't because more people are suffering headaches. The headache rate has remained virtually the same over the past decade. But what has changed is supply and demand. Today there are a lot more advanced diagnostic machines than there were a decade ago, and more patients are asking to be tested.

"Patients are more assertive than ever before," Mafi says. "They do research online, are more informed and sometimes go to the doctor demanding, 'I think I need an MRI.' "

And while an informed patient is a good thing, Mafi says sometimes the patient gets it wrong. "I think there's a subconscious perception that more is better, and that fancier, more expensive tests are better and that equals better care."

Mafi's study did not include patients with tumors or other serious problems that can cause headaches. He only looked at otherwise healthy patients who suffered chronic headaches. And in these cases, repeated diagnostic testing can lead to further unnecessary procedures like biopsies.

On top of that, exposure to radiation in tests like CT scans adds up over time and can increase the risk of certain cancers.

For Terri Bradford, the years of searching for effective treatment proved futile. "I've been to four neurologists. A lot of them have given up on me because I haven't gotten any better," she says.

Eventually Bradford ended up at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, where neurologist Carolyn Bernstein directs the Comprehensive Headache Center. Bernstein says she sees lots of desperate patients like Bradford. "The majority of them have really been suffering a number of years and they're really miserable with the pain," Bernstein says. They say, " 'I hope you have a magic pill,' and of course there is no magic pill."

There is just no single reason why people get chronic headaches, although we do know that migraines have a genetic component and usually a trigger. "If you are a migraine sufferer and I expose you to the right trigger, you're going to have a migraine," Bernstein says.

But the triggers are different for different people. They can include poor diet, too much sugar or certain types of alcohol. Problems sleeping, stress, lack of exercise or a combination of any number of these things can cause chronic headaches.

At the headache center, patients receive a thorough medical history that includes headache patterns, disability and mood assessments. Then the center works with patients to try to identify what triggers their headaches and how they can avoid those triggers in the future.

Some people find relief through exercise. "I write an exercise prescription probably as often as I write a prescription for medication," Bernstein says. She acknowledges it's sometimes difficult to encourage a patient with cracking head pain to get up and exercise. But even a little can help, and according to Bernstein it doesn't have to be jogging for miles and miles. It can be yoga, tai chi or even just a little stretching.

A big lifestyle adjustment worked for Terri Bradford. She started exercising and changed her diet, giving up gluten, dairy and sugar. And she learned how to meditate to reduce stress. All these changes, she says, have made a huge difference. She has far fewer headaches and when she does have them, they're far less severe. "I'm finally healing," she says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It’s not clear whether either of the clinical sources in this story have any conflicts of interest or particular agendas. But in both cases they are commenting on areas where they couldn’t be considered objective. In one case, the source discusses a study that he coauthored, and in the other case, the source discusses the treatment of one of her patients. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt, because the second source speaks mainly about headaches in general rather than the patient discussed in the story. Ideally, a completely independent expert would have been tapped to question and evaluate the evidence presented.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Sept. 7, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Pancreatic cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy after surgery don't see improved long-term survival with the drug gemcitabine, compared with patients receiving a chemotherapy regimen consisting of fluorouracil and folinic acid, new research suggests.

The finding, reported in the Sept. 8 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, stems from work conducted by Dr. John P. Neoptolemos, of the Cancer Research U.K. Liverpool Cancer Trials Unit at the University of Liverpool in England, and colleagues.

The study authors noted that, currently, the prognosis for pancreatic cancer is very poor, with a five-year survival rate of less than 5 percent. Surgery to remove cancerous tissue can boost the odds to as much as 10 percent, however, and there is active search underway to improve a patient's chances even more by adding in additional chemotherapy following surgery.

The pool of nearly 1,100 patients that the researchers focused on were part of the large European Study Group for Pancreatic Cancer trial that took place across 159 pancreatic cancer centers located in Europe, Canada, Australasia and Japan.

Between 2000 and 2007, the participants were divided into one of two six-month chemotherapy groups: one receiving fluorouracil and folinic acid post-surgery and the other receiving gemcitabine.

After nearly three years of treatment, the researchers found almost no difference between survival rates in the two groups.

Those who received fluorouracil and folinic acid chemotherapy had lived an average of 23 months. At the one- and two-year markers, survival rates for that group was approximately 78.5 and 48 percent, respectively.

At the three-year mark, patients on the gemcitabine regimen achieved an average survival rate of 23.6 months. One- and two-year survival rates were 80 and 49 percent, respectively, the investigators found.

"In conclusion, gemcitabine did not result in improved overall survival compared with fluorouracil plus folinic acid in patients with [surgically removed] pancreatic cancer," the authors concluded in their report.

However, the team did observe one appreciable difference: patients on gemcitabine were less likely to experience serious side effects as a result of their chemotherapy treatment than those on the fluorouracil/folinic acid treatment (7.5 percent versus 14 percent).

Dr. Michael Choti, a professor of surgery and oncology at the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, described the study as "important," but he does not believe it will alter the current approach to post-surgical chemotherapy.

"Really in the scope of things following major surgery, both are fairly tolerable regimens, and this study doesn't necessarily change the pattern of use in terms of choosing post-operative therapy," Choti said.

"But the point is that pancreatic cancer is a terrible disease, and really just a minority of patients are candidates for surgery. And even for those, unfortunately 75 to 80 percent of those will go on to recur even after the surgery appears to be successful. So, indeed, there has been a strong interest in giving the best additional therapy possible," Choti added.

"So this is not a revolutionary finding, but it's part of an effort to look at what we have and even to find newer regimens with more combinations of drugs," he noted. "And that's exactly what's already underway, as we search for more aggressive and more successful treatments."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more information on pancreatic cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent source provides important big picture points about pancreatic cancer. More sources might have provided more context and filled in some of the holes.
The associations of the lead author and independent source were provided. The study authors themselves did not disclose any financial relationships.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Eric P. Winer, chief of women’s cancers at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, said that even women who completed their five years of tamoxifen months or years ago might consider starting on the drug again.

Tamoxifen blocks the effect of the hormone estrogen, which fuels tumor growth in estrogen receptor-positive cancers that account for about 65 percent of cases in premenopausal women. Some small studies in the 1990s suggested that there was no benefit to using tamoxifen longer than five years, so that has been the standard.

About 227,000 cases of breast cancer are diagnosed each year in the United States, and an estimated 30,000 of them are in premenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive cancer and prime candidates for tamoxifen. But postmenopausal women also take tamoxifen if they cannot tolerate the alternative drugs, known as aromatase inhibitors.

The new study, known as Atlas, included nearly 7,000 women with ER-positive disease who had completed five years of tamoxifen. They came from about three dozen countries. Half were chosen at random to take the drug another five years, while the others were told to stop.

In the group assigned to take tamoxifen for 10 years, 21.4 percent had a recurrence of breast cancer in the ensuing 10 years, meaning the period 5 to 14 years after their diagnoses. The recurrence rate for those who took only five years of tamoxifen was 25.1 percent.

About 12.2 percent of those in the 10-year treatment group died from breast cancer, compared with 15 percent for those in the control group.

There was virtually no difference in death and recurrence between the two groups during the five years of extra tamoxifen. The difference came in later years, suggesting that tamoxifen has a carry-over effect that lasts long after women stop taking it.

Whether these differences are big enough to cause women to take the drug for twice as long remains to be seen.

“The treatment effect is real, but it’s modest,” said Dr. Paul E. Goss, director of breast cancer research at the Massachusetts General Hospital.

Tamoxifen has side effects, including endometrial cancer, blood clots and hot flashes, which cause many women to stop taking the drug. In the Atlas trial, it appears that roughly 40 percent of the patients assigned to take tamoxifen for the additional five years stopped prematurely.

Some 3.1 percent of those taking the extra five years of tamoxifen got endometrial cancer versus 1.6 percent in the control group. However, only 0.6 percent of those in the longer treatment group died from endometrial cancer or pulmonary blood clots, compared with 0.4 percent in the control group.

“Over all, the benefits of extended tamoxifen seemed to outweigh the risks substantially,” Trevor J. Powles of the Cancer Center London, said in a commentary published by The Lancet.

Dr. Judy E. Garber, director of the Center for Cancer Genetics and Prevention at Dana-Farber, said many women have a love-hate relationship with hormone therapies.

“They don’t feel well on them, but it’s their safety net,” said Dr. Garber, who added that the news would be welcomed by many patients who would like to stay on the drug. “I have patients who agonize about this, people who are coming to the end of their tamoxifen.”

Emily Behrend, who is a few months from finishing her five years on tamoxifen, said she would definitely consider another five years. “If it can keep the cancer away, I’m all for it,” said Ms. Behrend, 39, a single mother in Tomball, Tex. She is taking the antidepressant Effexor to help control the night sweats and hot flashes caused by tamoxifen.

Cost is not considered a huge barrier to taking tamoxifen longer because the drug can be obtained for less than $200 a year.

The results, while answering one question, raise many new ones, including whether even more than 10 years of treatment would be better still.

Perhaps the most important question is what the results mean for postmenopausal women. Even many women who are premenopausal at the time of diagnosis will pass through menopause by the time they finish their first five years of tamoxifen, or will have been pushed into menopause by chemotherapy.

Postmenopausal patients tend to take aromatase inhibitors like anastrozole or letrozole, which are more effective than tamoxifen at preventing breast cancer recurrence, though they do not work for premenopausal women.

Mr. Peto said he thought the results of the Atlas study would “apply to endocrine therapy in general,” meaning that 10 years of an aromatase inhibitor would be better than five years. Other doctors were not so sure.

The Atlas study was paid for by various organizations including the United States Army, the British government and AstraZeneca, which makes the brand-name version of tamoxifen.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Excellent use of sources.  A variety of researchers, clinicians, and a patient were represented.
The story clearly stated that AstraZeneca, which makes a form of tamoxifen, helped finance the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
June 2, 2010 (San Francisco) -- A quick spray of a new drug may help men who suffer from premature ejaculation last nearly six times longer, new research suggests.

The numbers aren't huge. Men who sprayed the head of their penis with PSD502 five minutes before sex lasted an average of just over three minutes after three months of treatment, compared with just over 30 seconds before.

Nonetheless, doctors like Irwin Goldstein, MD, director of San Diego Sexual Medicine at Alvarado Hospital in San Diego, tell WebMD they're excited because this is the first time a drug is being rigorously tested for men with really serious premature ejaculation problems.

Up to 30% of men suffer some degree of premature ejaculation, defined as ejaculation that occurs within one minute of vaginal penetration. It's the No. 1 sexual health problem in men.

Premature ejaculation can be devastating for both a man and his partner, triggering anxiety, depression, and relationship problems, says Goldstein, who heard the results presented at the annual meeting of the American Urological Association.

Not all men with premature ejaculation suffer to the same degree as the men in the study, says researcher Ira Sharlip, MD, clinical professor of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. He consults for Shionogi Pharma Inc., which makes the spray and funded the work.

"Yet I think a substantial number of [men with premature ejaculation] would use it," he tells WebMD, alternatives being unproven products with names like "Stay Erect" and "Play Longer."

At the meeting, Sharlip presented the pooled results of two pivotal studies of PSD502 involving 530 men with premature ejaculation.

A total of 358 of the men gave themselves three quick sprays of PSD502 to the head of the penis five minutes before sex and then wiped it off right before penetration.

PSD502, which contains two common topical painkillers, lidocaine and prilocaine, is "slightly oily, but not objectionably so," Sharlip says.

The rest of the men used a placebo spray. All used the product for three months, for a total of 23,000 doses.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One researcher’s financial links to the drug company were disclosed.  One independent expert was interviewed. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - A protein in urine could be a strong indicator of prostate cancer risk, according to British scientists who say their findings could one day be developed into a quick and simple test for the disease.

Scientists from the Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute and the Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) said the protein, called microseminoprotein-beta or MSMB, is found at reduced levels in men diagnosed with the disease and are also lower in men with more aggressive forms of the cancer.

“The protein is easy to detect because it is found in urine and would potentially be a very simple test to carry out on men to identify those most at risk of developing the disease,” said Hayley Whitaker of the Cambridge institute, who led the study.

Whitaker said that while it could be around five years before the results of this study are translated into a test for doctors to use in clinics, she hoped it would then also help them to determine which patients have aggressive tumors.

Prostate cancer killed an estimated 258,000 men around the world in 2008 and is the second most common cause of cancer death in men in the United States. In Britain, around 35,000 men are diagnosed with it and some 10,000 die from the disease.

The most effective screening tests currently available are based on a single biomarker called prostate specific antigen (PSA). But PSA testing is problematic because it has low specificity, which generates high false positive rates and leads to unnecessary surgical and radiotherapy treatment.

A U.S. study published last year found that routine PSA prostate screening has resulted in more than one million American men being diagnosed with tumors who might otherwise have suffered no ill effects from them.

“At the moment, PSA testing is the best method we have to detect prostate cancer but it has significant limitations, so there is an urgent need to find new biomarkers such as MSMB that could be used in screening and diagnosis,” said Rosalind Eeles of the ICR and The Royal Marsden Hospital, who also worked on the study.

The protein — which regulates prostate cell death — is produced by normal prostate cells.

The scientists took tissue and urine samples from around 350 men both with and without prostate cancer to test MSMB levels.

The results, published in the Public Library of Science (PLoS) ONE journal, showed that MSMB is found at significantly lower levels in the urine of men diagnosed with prostate cancer than those without the disease. They also showed men with aggressive tumors were also likely to have lower levels of the protein in their urine.

Commenting on the study, Kate Holmes of the UK’s Prostate Cancer Charity, said they could prove very valuable in future.

“Given the known limitations of the PSA blood test, finding a technique to accurately diagnose prostate cancer is the Holy Grail of research into the disease,” she said in a statement.

“An accurate, reliable urine test for prostate cancer would be an invaluable tool if it is proven to be successful on a large scale.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  The story included comments from two individuals involved with the study reported on as well as an individual with expertise in the field without links to that study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
AMHERST, Mass. - Results of a new study from epidemiologists at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health suggest that long-term, high intake of vegetable protein from such foods as whole grains, soy and tofu, may protect women from early menopause and could prolong reproductive function.

Consuming enriched pasta, dark bread and cold cereal were especially associated with lower risk, while they observed no similar relation to eating animal sources of protein.

"A better understanding of how dietary vegetable protein intake is associated with ovarian aging may identify ways for women to modify their risk of early onset menopause and associated health conditions," write first author and then-graduate student Maegan Boutot, with her advisor, professor Elizabeth Bertone-Johnson. Details appear in the current early online edition of the American Journal of Epidemiology.

Early menopause, the cessation of ovarian function before age 45, affects about 10 percent of women and is associated with higher risk of cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis and early cognitive decline, the authors note. Few studies have evaluated how protein intake is associated with menopause timing, they add, and to their knowledge this is the first to look specifically at early menopause.

Boutot, Bertone-Johnson and colleagues in the School of Public Health and Health Sciences at UMass Amherst, with others, evaluated the relationship between diet and risk of early menopause among members of the Nurses' Health Study II (NHS2), an ongoing prospective study of 116,000 women aged 25-42 when they entered it in 1989.

Participants were asked to report how often they ate a single serving of 131 foods, beverages and supplements over the previous year, from "never or less than once a month" to "6+ per day." They observed that women consuming approximately 6.5 percent of their daily calories as vegetable protein had a significant 16 percent lower risk of early menopause compared to women whose intake was approximately 4 percent of calories.

For a woman with a 2,000 calorie per day diet, the authors explain, this is equal to three to four servings of such foods as enriched pasta, breakfast cereal, tofu and nuts, or about 32.5 grams a day. They adjusted for age, smoking, body mass index and other possible confounding factors.

Boutot and Bertone-Johnson add, "Though relatively few women in our study consumed very high levels of vegetable protein and our power for analyses of more extreme intake levels was limited, women consuming 9 or more percent of their calories from vegetable protein had a hazard ratio of 0.41 (95 percent confidence interval = 0.19-0.88)" compared to those eating less than 4 percent.

Others on the study team were from Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School. The study was supported by a grant from NIH's Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

For the NHS2, follow-up questionnaires have assessed nurses' lifestyle behaviors and medical conditions every two years. Nearly 90 percent have continued to participate in followup. Diet was assessed five times over the 20-year study, allowing the researchers to capture within-person variation in changes in food and nutrient intake over times, Boutot explains. Participants in the study contributed more than 1 million person-years of follow-up, during which 2,041 women experienced early menopause.

Boutot and Bertone-Johnson suggest that more prospective studies of their findings are warranted, including studies that compare soy-based and non-soy vegetable proteins.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the study was supported by a grant from NIH’s Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. The researchers reported no conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pill That Hits A Cause Of Cystic Fibrosis Beats Expectations

More than 20 years after the gene behind cystic fibrosis was identified, a pill that could fix the problem in some people is getting closer to reality.

The experimental medicine, taken twice a day, goes by the code name VX-770. Now there are some promising results from a study in 161 people with a specific genetic mutation that affects about four percent of cystic fibrosis patients.

Lung function got 10 percentage points better, on average, in people who got the drug compared with those taking a placebo. The improvement at six months was still present almost a year after the study's start.

That much improvement is "a big deal for CF patients," Robert Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation told Shots. "It is larger than any other clinical intervention we've ever had in cystic fibrosis." Beall said there were no significant side effects.

The foundation has championed the development of drugs, including VX-770, and has provided $75 million to Vertex to get the medicine this far. If the drug makes it to market, the foundation will receive royalties from sales.

This pill, for people with the G551D mutation of the cystic fibrosis gene, helps a defective protein in cell membranes do a better job moving things around. Lisa Jarvis has more details on that at the Haystack blog. But a key takeaway is that the medicine gets at a root cause of cystic fibrosis in some people rather than just relieving their symptoms.

Now, to be perfectly clear, all we know about the latest data is from press releases. And the drug hasn't been submitted for review by the Food and Drug Administration, though Vertex expects to do that later this year.

But these results, even with plenty of caveats, suggest the drug is on the right track. Vertex's shares jumped 15 percent Wednesday as investors figured VX-770 looks even better than they'd expected.

"Wow!" wrote Dr. Mark Schoenebaum, a biotech and drug analyst ISI Group, in a note to investors. The effectiveness of VX-770 looks "best case," he wrote. Ultimately, the drug might be used by around 3,000 patients worldwide, if approved, and Schoenebaum expects it would be command a very high price, perhaps $250,000 a year.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Includes interview with CF Foundation president – not the most independent of sources since they have funded this work – but the story appropriately notes that the foundation will receive royalties from sales if the drug makes it to market.
The story also interviewed a biotech and drug analyst.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Physicians should consider blood testing of female adolescents for iron deficiency within a few years of starting menses, according to two studies by Penn State College of Medicine researchers.

The researchers used data from more than 6,000 women 12 to 49 years old who took part in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) between 2003 and 2010. As part of the survey, female participants had blood testing for iron deficiency as well as hemoglobin testing to identify anemia.

Women are typically tested some time in their teens for anemia -- the severe form of iron deficiency -- using a quick and affordable hemoglobin test. However, iron deficiency can develop years before anemia and can be missed by hemoglobin testing alone.

"If you think about your car, you have to run your gas tank all the way down before the red light goes on, and that's similar to the way we're screening for iron deficiency," said Deepa L. Sekhar, physician and associate professor of pediatrics. "We're basically waiting until their red light goes on. You have to be really low on your iron storage before you're going to flag as anemic."

Iron deficiency without anemia has been associated with lower standardized math scores, attention deficit disorder and restless leg syndrome in children and adolescents. Among iron-deficient adolescent women there is a future risk of maternal iron deficiency and negative effects on infant health.

Blood tests for iron deficiency without anemia have been developed but they are more costly and difficult to obtain in the doctor's office compared to hemoglobin testing for anemia. Sekhar and colleagues hoped to determine risk factors for iron deficiency without anemia that could pinpoint which women could benefit most from this more costly testing.

In the first study, when the researchers analyzed the NHANES study data, 9 percent of females who were 12 to 21 years old had iron deficiency without anemia. The researchers then looked at potential iron deficiency risk factors in this group, including the age when they started menstruating, as well as their race and ethnicity, poverty status, food insecurity, tobacco or nicotine use, dietary information, body mass index (BMI) and physical activity.

All of these factors have been associated with iron deficiency anemia in women in prior studies. However, the only risk factor significantly associated with iron deficiency without anemia in young women in this study was having had a period for more than three years. The research was recently published in the journal PLOS ONE.

In a second study, the researchers next looked at whether a specially developed questionnaire could better predict iron status. Questions were included on depression, poor attention and daytime sleepiness, symptoms which all have been associated with iron deficiency or iron deficiency anemia, but were not captured in the prior NHANES analyses. This questionnaire was compared to the currently recommended four iron deficiency anemia-risk questions in the Bright Futures Adolescent Previsit Questionnaire, a survey recommended for physician use by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

Ninety-six female adolescents participated in this study, published in The Journal of Pediatrics. The Bright Futures questions alone did not predict iron deficiency or anemia. Yet, the researchers' risk assessment questionnaire was equally poor.

Taken together, the studies suggest that risk factors and assessments should not be used to determine which young women should receive testing for iron deficiency.

"The questions aren't predictive," Sekhar said. "I think we need to establish the optimal timing for an objective assessment of adolescent iron deficiency and anemia."

Sekhar believes the appropriate age may be 16 years old, when most females will have been menstruating for at least three years.

In addition to timing, further research will be needed to determine which blood test for iron deficiency without anemia is accurate, cost-efficient and practical for routine doctor's office use. This test should be given with hemoglobin testing to catch all young women on the spectrum of iron deficiency, Sekhar said.

Iron deficiency can be corrected with dietary changes and supplementation, Sekhar added.

Other researchers on the study in PLOS ONE were Laura E. Murray-Kolb, in the Department of Nutritional Sciences, Allen R. Kunselman in the Department of Public Health Sciences, Carol S. Weisman in the Departments of Public Health Sciences and Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Ian M. Paul in the Departments of Pediatrics and Public Health Sciences, all at Penn State.

This research received $62,500 of federal funding from The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the National Institutes of Health (grant number K12HD055882), which funded 100 percent of the project.

Murray-Kolb and Paul also worked on the study in The Journal of Pediatrics, along with Eric W. Schaefer, a biostatistician in the Department of Public Health Sciences. Non-government funding from Sackler Institute for Nutrition Science of the New York Academy of Sciences provided 100 percent of funding for this research project.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release identifies the source of grant funding for both journal articles referenced. We wish it had also said “there are no conflicts of interest.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON -- Consuming soy foods (such as soy milk, tofu and edamame) and cruciferous vegetables (such as cabbages, kale, collard greens, bok choy, Brussels sprouts, and broccoli) may be associated with a reduction in common side effects of breast cancer treatment in breast cancer survivors, say a team of scientists led by Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center.

In the study, published in Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, higher intake of cruciferous vegetables and soy foods were associated with fewer reports of menopausal symptoms. Higher soy intake was also associated with less reported fatigue. The breast cancer survivors studied included 173 non-Hispanic white and 192 Chinese Americans including US-born Chinese and Chinese immigrants.

Researchers say breast cancer survivors often experience side effects from cancer treatments that can persist months or years after completion of treatment. For example, because many treatments designed to prevent breast cancer recurrence inhibit the body's production or use of estrogen, the hormone that can fuel breast cancer growth, breast cancer patients often experience hot flashes and night sweats, among other side effects.

The lead author on the study, Sarah Oppeneer Nomura, PhD, of Georgetown Lombardi, said that while further research is needed in larger study populations and with more detailed dietary data, this project addresses an important gap in research on the possible role of lifestyle factors, such as dietary habits, in relation to side effects of treatments.

"These symptoms can adversely impact survivors' quality of life and can lead them to stopping ongoing treatments, she says. "Understanding the role of life style factors is important because diet can serve as a modifiable target for possibly reducing symptoms among breast cancer survivors."

When study participants were evaluated separately by race/ethnicity, associations were significant among white breast cancer survivors; however; while a trend was seen in the benefit for Chinese women, results were not statically significant. Researchers explain Chinese women typically report fewer menopausal symptoms. Most of them also consume cruciferous vegetables and soy foods, making it difficult to see a significant effect in this subgroup. Indeed, in this study, Chinese breast cancer survivors ate more than twice as much soy and cruciferous vegetables.

Whether the reduction in symptoms accounts for longtime use of soy and cruciferous vegetables needs further investigation, says the study's senior author, Judy Huei-yu Wang, PhD, of Georgetown Lombardi's Cancer Prevention and Control Program.

Results obtained in preclinical studies in animals show that biologically active compounds present in both soy and cruciferous vegetables cause breast cancer cells to grow, but have opposite effects in animals that consume these compounds well before cancer is diagnosed and continue consuming them during and after cancer treatments.

Until more research is conducted, breast cancer patients should not suddenly start eating soy, if they have not consumed it before, says Leena Hilakivi-Clarke, PhD, a professor of oncology at Georgetown Lombardi and a co-author of the study.

Researchers also found suggestive associations with lower reporting of other symptoms, including joint problems, hair thinning/loss and memory less in women who consumed more soy foods, but these associations did not reach statistical significance.

Phytochemicals, or bioactive food components, such as isoflavones in soy foods and glucosinolates in cruciferous vegetables may be the source of the benefit, researchers say. Isoflavones bind to estrogen receptors and exert weak estrogenic effects, among other effects. Glucosinolates in cruciferous vegetables influence levels of metabolizing enzymes that can modulate inflammation and levels of estrogen, possibly attenuating treatment-related symptoms.

Co-authors of the study include Chiranjeev Dash, MBBS, MPH, PhD, Leena Hilakivi-Clarke, PhD, and Yun-Ling Zhen, MPH, PhD, from Georgetown Lombardi; Yi-Tin Hwang, PhD, from National Taipei University, Taiwan; Scarlett Lin Gomez, MPH, PhD, from the Cancer Prevention Institute of California; Teresa T. Fung, MS, ScD, from Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health; Shu-Lan Yeh, PhD, from Chang Shan Medical University, Taiwan; and Serena Phillips, RN, MPH, from Milken Institute School of Public Health, George Washington University.

The study was funded by a Lance Armstrong Foundation Young Investigator Award and the National Cancer Institute (CA139408).

The authors report having no personal financial interests related to the study.

Georgetown University Medical Center (GUMC) is an internationally recognized academic medical center with a three-part mission of research, teaching and patient care (through MedStar Health). GUMC's mission is carried out with a strong emphasis on public service and a dedication to the Catholic, Jesuit principle of cura personalis -- or "care of the whole person." The Medical Center includes the School of Medicine and the School of Nursing & Health Studies, both nationally ranked; Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, designated as a comprehensive cancer center by the National Cancer Institute; and the Biomedical Graduate Research Organization, which accounts for the majority of externally funded research at GUMC including a Clinical and Translational Science Award from the National Institutes of Health. Connect with GUMC on Facebook (Facebook.com/GUMCUpdate), Twitter (@gumedcenter) and Instagram (@gumedcenter).

Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center is designated by the National Cancer Institute as a comprehensive cancer center -- the only cancer center of its kind in the Washington, DC area. A part of Georgetown University Medical Center and MedStar Georgetown University Hospital, Georgetown Lombardi seeks to improve the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of cancer through innovative basic and clinical research, patient care, community education and outreach, and the training of cancer specialists of the future. Connect with Georgetown Lombardi on Facebook) and Twitter (@LombardiCancer).
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There was disclosure of the funding sources, and the release tells us that the study authors had no financial conflicts of interest. Good job.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 30, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Eating baked or broiled fish as little as once a week may boost brain health and lower the risk for mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease, new brain scan research suggests.

The study authors found that eating baked and broiled fish -- but not fried -- helps to preserve gray matter neurons, strengthening them in areas of the brain deemed critical to memory and cognition.

"Those who eat baked or broiled fish had larger brains," noted study author Dr. Cyrus Raji, a resident in the department of medicine at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Mercy Hospital. "They had larger brain cells in areas of the brain responsible for memory and learning. And the reason that's important is that these brain areas are at high risk for Alzheimer's disease."

In those people with larger brain volume, "the risk for Alzheimer's and mild cognitive impairment went down by fivefold within five years following the brain scans we conducted," he said.

Raji said he was "amazed" that this effect was seen with eating fish as little as one to four times a week. "We're talking about just a half serving a day," he said. "And that would be a very small lifestyle change that can affect disease risk a long time down the line."

Raji and his colleagues are slated to discuss their findings Wednesday at the annual meeting of the Radiological Society of North America, in Chicago.

More than 5 million Americans have Alzheimer's disease, an incurable, age-related disorder that slowly destroys memory and thinking and language skills. Older adults with mild cognitive impairment have less severe memory loss than those with Alzheimer's but often go on to develop the disease.

To assess the impact of fish on cognitive health, the authors focused on 260 mentally healthy elderly individuals drawn from the Cardiovascular Health Study, sponsored by the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

All the participants underwent 3-D MRIs, so the researchers could map out the size of each individual's gray matter and track it over 10 years. They also completed the U.S. National Cancer Institute Food Frequency Questionnaire.

The team then stacked up gray matter changes against dietary consumption as reported in the questionnaire.

The questionnaires revealed that 163 of the study participants ate fish at least once a week, with most consuming fish between one and four times a week.

With that information, the authors found that regardless of age, gender, physical activity routines, and/or educational achievement, race or weight, those who ate baked or broiled fish had larger mass in the hippocampus, precuneus, posterior cingulate and orbital frontal cortex regions of their brains.

The team further observed that people who ate baked or broiled fish weekly displayed better so-called "working memory," enabling them to more effectively execute routine tasks.

But fish and chips lovers, take note: No cranial benefit was evident with respect to consumption of fried fish.

The team cautioned that while eating baked and broiled fish appears to exert some cognitive benefit, other lifestyle and socioeconomic factors may play a role. For now, the connection must be viewed as an association, rather than a cause-and-effect.

Dr. Richard Lipton, vice chair of neurology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City, reiterated the point.

"One has to wonder if there are other factors associated with fish consumption that they didn't measure that might be protective," he said. "Like maybe people who eat fish exercise more, or eat less total calories. Or they could be eating other components of a Mediterranean Diet, such as fruits and vegetables."

Lipton added that "this group of researchers is really, really good," and called the study results "a very interesting finding, and absolutely worthy of further exploration."

Research presented at scientific meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more on brain health, visit the Society for Neuroscience.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: At least the story had one independent source, a NY neurologist who said, “One has to wonder if there are other factors… that they didn’t measure.”  But his comments were buried deep in the story, as was the line “For now, the connection must be viewed as an association, rather than a cause-and-effect.”  That should have been in the second paragraph at the latest.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 12, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- People taking popular cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins may have a slightly lower risk than others of developing Parkinson's disease, new research suggests.

This effect may be even more pronounced among people younger than 60, according to the study published in the March issue of Archives of Neurology.

However, the risk reduction was modest and may have been due to chance, the authors said, noting that more research is warranted, especially because statins can cause adverse side effects.

"There is no clear verdict," said Dr. Stuart Isaacson, director of the Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center of Boca Raton, who was not involved in the study.

"Right now we don't have any good evidence that there is anything we can do to reduce the risk of developing Parkinson's disease, but research is ongoing," added Isaacson, also an associate professor of neurology at Florida International University's Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine in Miami.

For the study, researchers led by Dr. Xiang Gao, of Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard University School of Public Health in Boston, analyzed data on more than 38,000 men and almost 91,000 women enrolled in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study and the Nurses' Health Study in 1994.

During 12 years of follow-up, 644 people were diagnosed with Parkinson's disease. People taking cholesterol-lowering drugs, especially those younger than 60, were less likely to develop the neurological disorder than those not using cholesterol drugs, the researchers found.

Nearly one million people in the United States have Parkinson's disease, a chronic and progressive movement disorder, and no one knows what causes it.

The researchers can't say exactly how -- or even if -- statins reduce the risk of Parkinson's. It's thought these drugs may have potent anti-inflammatory effects, which could protect the brain.

The study had some limitations, the authors acknowledged. For example, only about 70 percent of people who were taking drugs to lower cholesterol were actually on statins at the study's start.

Dr. Roy Alcalay, an assistant professor of neurology at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City, said it is way too early to say that statins lower risk for Parkinson's disease. "This is a promising avenue for future research," said Alcalay, an advisor for the Parkinson's Disease Foundation.

But there is some good news, he added. The data are compelling evidence that statins are not detrimental for people with or at risk of Parkinson's disease, he said. There was a concern that statins could be harmful as they might lower the level of coenzyme Q10 in the blood. Co-Q10, an antioxidant, is thought to have benefits for people with Parkinson's disease.

"If you need to be on statins for your heart, it is not going to increase your risk for Parkinson's," Alcalay said.

Learn more about Parkinson's disease and its symptoms at the Parkinson's Disease Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes two independent experts, providing good balance for the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The drug, finasteride, is available as a generic for about $2.00 a day, and millions of men safely take it now to shrink their prostates, its approved use.

With finasteride, as many as 100,000 cases of prostate cancer a year could be prevented, said Dr. Eric Klein, director of the Center for Urologic Oncology at the Cleveland Clinic.

Dr. Howard Parnes, chief of the prostate cancer group at the National Cancer Institute’s division of cancer prevention, also is convinced. “There is a tremendous public health benefit for the use of this agent,” he said.

While it might seem convoluted to offer a drug to prevent the consequences of overtreatment, that is the situation in the country today, others say. Preventing the cancer can prevent treatments that can be debilitating, even if the cancers were never lethal to start with.

“That’s the bind we’re in right now,” said Dr. Christopher Logothetis, professor and chairman of genitourinary medical oncology at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. “Most of the time, treatment wouldn’t help and may not be necessary. But the reality is that people are being operated on.”

“We are trying to avoid a diagnosis to avoid a prevention whose value is disputed,” he said. With finasteride, Dr. Logothetis added, “we’re trying to overcome our other sins.”

Other experts say, Not so fast. Finasteride might not make much of a difference in the death rate because so few men die from prostate cancer. What the drug’s proponents are advocating is taking a drug to somehow compensate for what many believe is the nation’s overzealous diagnosis and treatment of the disease.

Dr. Peter Albertsen, a prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut, explains: While 10 percent of men 55 and older find out they have prostate cancer, the cancer is lethal in no more than 25 percent of them. So if finasteride reduced the prostate cancer’s incidence by 30 percent, about 7 percent of men would get a cancer diagnosis and approximately 1.8 percent instead of 2.5 percent would have a lethal cancer.

“Finasteride might make a difference but only in a very small subset of men,” Dr. Albertsen said.

And, he adds, the study did not look for a decline in death rates, and it is unlikely that any study ever will — it would take too long and be too expensive. Yet the ultimate goal of prevention is to save lives. It remains an assumption that finasteride would have much impact on the minority of prostate cancers that, despite early detection and treatment, still kill.

Finasteride blocks the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, a hormone active mostly in the prostate and the scalp, and that all prostate cancers need to grow.

The drug is available from Merck & Company, as Proscar, and from six companies as a generic to shrink the prostate in older men whose prostates can enlarge, making urination difficult.

Researchers say it turns out that shrinking the prostate also may be good for cancer detection by making it easier to find all tumors, including the most aggressive.

“The data are compelling,” said Dr. Peter Scardino, chairman of the department of surgery at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, a convert who originally thought the drug was dangerous. “Finasteride has to be recognized as the first clearly demonstrated way to prevent prostate cancer with any medication or any oral agent at all.”

Finasteride has had its ups and downs. Its chronicle began in 1993, with the start of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and involving 19,000 men. Half took finasteride pills; the rest a placebo. In March 2003, 15 months before the study’s scheduled end, its directors halted it abruptly. The reason was that the results were overwhelmingly compelling — men taking the drug were not getting prostate cancer.

Yet despite that note of triumph, a troubling finding emerged. The study was designed to look for a reduction in the overall prostate cancer rate. And that is what it found. But, as Dr. Scardino pointed out in an editorial five years ago in The New England Journal of Medicine that accompanied the study, it appeared that 6.4 percent of the men who took the drug got fast growing, ominous-looking tumors. In contrast, such tumors were found in 5.1 percent, of men who took the placebo.

The concern was that the drug might be preventing cancers that never spread. At the same time, finasteride might actually be causing aggressive cancers that can kill.

It would, of course, be the worse possible outcome. Dr. Scardino’s editorial warned healthy men not to take finasteride.

That seemed to leave the drug dead. The study researchers, though, wondered if that conclusion was correct. Maybe, they thought, by shrinking the prostate, the drug was just making it easier to find aggressive tumors.

When doctors do a biopsy for prostate cancer, they probe the gland with a needle, hoping to find cancer cells. But prostate cancer grows as little nests and an aggressive cancer will appear as dangerous-looking cells in some clusters and less dangerous in others. A smaller prostate means a doctor is more likely to hit upon cancer nests and more likely to find aggressive-looking cells.

The researchers had a way to learn if they were correct. Most of the men in the study who had cancer — aggressive or not — chose to be treated and many had their prostates removed. A pathologist could carefully examine every one of those 500 prostates and compare the kinds of cancers found at surgery to those initially diagnosed at biopsy.

It took years, but the analysis showed the hypothesis was right. Now, two groups of independent researchers conclude, in papers in the current issue of Cancer Prevention Research, that finasteride decreases the risk of having any tumor at all — large or small, fast growing or slow growing, by the same amount — nearly 30 percent.

With this new analysis, many prostate cancer specialists, including Dr. Scardino, say their view of the drug has completely changed. The study actually found that finasteride protects against both lethal and less dangerous tumors and could cut prostate cancer risk by nearly a third.

Even the effect on smaller tumors has important implications, said Dr. Ian M. Thompson, Jr., the study’s principal researcher and a urologist at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio.

“The cancers that were prevented were the ones men are having surgery and radiation for today,” Dr. Thompson said.

Now, though, prostate cancer specialists have a new problem: How can they change the drug’s image?

Drug companies are unlikely to be instrumental, Dr. Thompson and others say, because finasteride’s patent has expired, giving companies little incentive to apply to the Food and Drug Administration to market it as a cancer preventative. Without F.D.A. approval, finasteride cannot be advertised as preventing cancer and insurers may not pay for it.

But doctors can prescribe drugs for other purposes at their discretion and Dr. Parnes said that men and their doctors may be persuaded to try it.

In the meantime, GlaxoSmithKline, which has a patented drug, Avodart, to reduce the size of men’s prostates, has a study asking whether its drug can prevent prostate cancer. If it can, and the drug agency approves Avodart for cancer prevention, doctors and patients may have to decide between a generic drug used off-label or a more expensive brand-name drug that does much the same thing.

Some leading prostate specialists, like Dr. Scardino, say they are recommending that men who worry about prostate cancer take finasteride.

He also ponders taking it himself. “I regularly think, Why don’t I take it? Why wouldn’t every man take it?” Dr. Scardino said. He hasn’t done so yet, partly because those years of concern about the drug took a toll.

“I think it’s the difficulty of adjusting to something that originally had a bad reputation,” Dr. Scardino explained.

Dr. Thompson has no such fears.

He is at no particular risk for prostate cancer, but, he reasons, taking finasteride is not that different than taking a statin for a slightly elevated cholesterol level.

“Imagine the marathoner with no family history of heart disease, who’s skinny, doesn’t smoke and has normal blood pressure,” Dr. Thompson says. “Should he take a statin? The amount of benefit he’ll get is not much, but his risk reduction still is 25 or 30 percent.”

Dr. Thompson knows what he will do about finasteride.

“I’m 54,” he said. “The men in the study were 55 and older. So I’ll start taking it next year.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story cited several highly-credentialed prostate cancer clinician-researchers.  However, the only one expressing a somewhat more negative tone got the least space.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
What if eating chocolate helped prevent and treat diabetes? It's crazy enough to laugh off.

But here's the thing: BYU researchers have discovered certain compounds found in cocoa can actually help your body release more insulin and respond to increased blood glucose better. Insulin is the hormone that manages glucose, the blood sugar that reaches unhealthy levels in diabetes.

Of course, there's a catch.

"You probably have to eat a lot of cocoa, and you probably don't want it to have a lot of sugar in it," said study author Jeffery Tessem, assistant professor of nutrition, dietetics and food science at BYU. "It's the compound in cocoa you're after."

When a person has diabetes, their body either doesn't produce enough insulin or doesn't process blood sugar properly. At the root of that is the failure of beta cells, whose job it is to produce insulin. The new study, published in the Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry, finds beta cells work better and remain stronger with an increased presence of epicatechin monomers, compounds found naturally in cocoa.

To discover this, collaborators at Virginia Tech first fed the cocoa compound to animals on a high-fat diet. They found that by adding it to the high-fat diet, the compound would decrease the level of obesity in the animals and would increase their ability to deal with increased blood glucose levels.

The BYU team, comprised of graduate and undergraduate students in Tessem's lab and the labs of Ben Bikman and Jason Hansen (BYU professors of physiology and developmental biology), then dove in and dissected what was happening on the cellular level -- specifically, the beta cell level. That's when they learned cocoa compounds named epicatechin monomers enhanced beta cells' ability to secrete insulin.

"What happens is it's protecting the cells, it's increasing their ability to deal with oxidative stress," Tessem said. "The epicatechin monomers are making the mitochondria in the beta cells stronger, which produces more ATP (a cell's energy source), which then results in more insulin being released."

While there has been a lot of research on similar compounds over the past decade, no one has been able to pinpoint which ones are the most beneficial or how exactly they bring about any benefit -- until now. This research shows the epicatechin monomers, the smallest of the compounds, are the most effective.

"These results will help us get closer to using these compounds more effectively in foods or supplements to maintain normal blood glucose control and potentially even delay or prevent the onset of type-2 diabetes," said study co-author Andrew Neilson, assistant professor of food science at Virginia Tech.

But rather than stocking up on the sugar-rich chocolate bars at the checkout line, researchers believe the starting point is to look for ways to take the compound out of cocoa, make more of it and then use it as a potential treatment for current diabetes patients. This research was funded, in part, thanks to grants from the Diabetes Action Research and Education Foundation and the American Diabetes Association.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that, “This research was funded, in part, thanks to grants from the Diabetes Action Research and Education Foundation and the American Diabetes Association.” The researchers did not list any relevant disclosures in their journal article. The release does not include funding from the “Virginia Agricultural Experiment Station and the Hatch Program of the National Institute of Food and Agriculture, U.S. Department of Agriculture” that is listed in the journal article.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Jan. 9, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Women with heavy menstrual bleeding may find some relief using an intrauterine device, or IUD, containing the hormone levonorgestrel, according to new research.

British researchers found that the treated IUD was more effective at reducing the effects of heavy menstrual bleeding (also called menorrhagia) on quality of life compared to other treatments. Normally used for contraception, the intrauterine system is sold under the brand name Mirena.

"If women suffer with heavy periods and do not want to get pregnant -- as the levonorgestrel intrauterine system is a contraceptive -- then having the levonorgestrel intrauterine system is a very good first-line treatment option that does not require taking regular, daily oral medications," said the study's lead author, Dr. Janesh Gupta, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Birmingham and Birmingham Women's Hospital in England.

For women who do want to get pregnant, Gupta said, taking the blood-clotting drug tranexamic acid during periods is an alternate method of treating heavy periods.

Results of the study, which was funded by the United Kingdom's National Institute of Health Research, appear in the Jan. 10 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Heavy menstrual bleeding is a significant problem for many women. About 20 percent of gynecologist office visits in the United States and the United Kingdom are because of heavy bleeding. There are several nonhormonal and hormonal treatment options available to reduce blood loss.

The current study compared the use of traditional medical options -- tranexamic acid pills, mefenamic acid (Ponstel), combined estrogen-progestogen and progesterone alone -- to the use of the levonorgestrel intrauterine system.

The researchers randomly assigned nearly 600 women with heavy menstrual bleeding to receive either the IUD or standard medical care. They assessed improvement using a patient-reported score on a scale designed to measure severity of symptoms. The scale goes from 0 to 100, with lower scores indicating more severe symptoms. The researchers also asked about quality of life and sexual activity, and noted whether a woman needed surgery for heavy periods.

Women in the IUD group reported much greater improvement -- 32.7 points on the symptom scale versus 21.4 points in the standard treatment group. They also reported greater improvements in quality of life.

There was no difference in the rates of surgery or sexual activity between the two groups.

More women were still using the intrauterine system after two years than were still taking standard medical treatments -- 64 percent compared to 38 percent.

Gupta said the main reason she believes the IUD group was more successful at reducing symptoms is that there is "100 percent compliance with treatment as there is a continuous drug treatment effect." Women taking medications may forget to take them sometimes.

Serious side effects were similar between the groups. Gupta said the main side effect from the intrauterine system is irregular periods for up to six months.

Another expert said the findings show promise for women bothered by heavy bleeding.

"This study really adds to the evidence that shows how useful this intrauterine system is for heavy menstrual bleeding," said Dr. Eve Espey, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of New Mexico School of Medicine in Albuquerque.

Getting an intrauterine system generally just requires one office visit, Espey said. Insertion of the device may be mildly uncomfortable for some women, she said.

For women who may be hesitant to use an IUD because of pelvic infections linked to an early version called the Dalkon Shield, Gupta said that as long as women are screened for sexually transmitted diseases before getting an intrauterine system, the risk of infection is low.

Espey agreed. "Today's intrauterine systems have a great side-effect profile," she said. "They also have a high continuation and a high satisfaction rate."

Learn more about intrauterine devices from the Association of Reproductive Healthcare Professionals.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There is another doctor who does not appear to be affiliated with the study quoted in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Omega-3 fatty acids may lower the risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal obese women, according to researchers.

The protection likely comes from the fatty acids' anti-inflammatory effects, said Dr. Andrea Manni, professor and division chief of endocrinology, diabetes and metabolism, Penn State College of Medicine.

Obesity is a major breast cancer risk factor in postmenopausal women, and scientists believe increased inflammation is an important underlying cause in this population.

"Omega-3 fatty acids have an anti-inflammatory effect, so that's one of the reasons why we suspected it may be particularly effective in obese women," Manni said.

Some epidemiological data supports the idea that omega-3s protect against breast cancer, but the findings have been inconsistent. Manni suspected that data from normal-weight women obscured the results.

Normal-weight women have less inflammation than heavier women, and are therefore less likely to benefit from anti-inflammatory omega-3s, he said.

To tease apart the effects, Manni's team, working alongside researchers from Emory University and Colorado State University, looked at the influence of prescription omega-3 supplementation on breast density in different weight women. Breast density is a well-established biomarker for breast cancer risk, and may be an independent risk factor, as well.

"The higher the breast density, the more likely the woman will develop breast cancer," Manni said.

The study included 266 healthy postmenopausal women with high breast density detected by routine mammograms. The women either received no treatment, the antiestrogen drug Raloxifene, the prescription omega-3 drug Lovaza or a combination of the two drugs.

At the conclusion of the two-year study, the researchers found that increasing levels of omega-3 in the blood were associated with reduced breast density—but only in women with a body mass index above 29, bordering on obesity.

Although Lovaza contains both of the fatty acids DHA -- 375 milligrams -- and EPA -- 465 milligrams, only DHA blood levels were associated with breast density reduction. The researchers plan to test the effect of DHA alone in obese subjects, potentially in combination with weight loss, in a future trial.

"The finding supports the idea that omega-3s, and specifically DHA, are preferentially protective in obese postmenopausal women," Manni said. "This represents an example of a personalized approach to breast cancer prevention."

These findings may help to support future research looking at the direct effect of omega-3 supplementation on breast cancer incidence in obese women.

Manni added that, with obesity-related cancers on the rise, the findings could have implications beyond breast cancer.

The researchers also made a secondary discovery. Lovaza is an omega-3 drug FDA-approved for the treatment of severe high triglycerides at the dose of 4 milligrams daily. In the current study, the combination of Lovaza and a half recommended dose of Raloxifene at 30 milligrams, was superior to the individual treatments in reducing triglycerides and LDL -- “bad” -- cholesterol and increasing HDL -- “good” -- cholesterol.

Other investigators on this project were Narinder Sandhu and Carina Signori, Department of Medicine; Susann E. Schetter, Department of Radiology; Jason Liao and Ana Calcagnotto, Department of Public Health Sciences; John P. Richie, Bogdan Prokopczyk and Neil Trushin, Department of Pharmacology; Cynthia DuBrock, Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute; Christopher Hamilton and Laurence M. Demers, Department of Pathology; Cesar Aliaga and Karam El-Bayoumy, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, all at Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center; Terryl J. Hartman, Emory University; and John McGinley and Henry J. Thompson, Colorado State University.Susan G. Komen for the Cure and Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute funded this research. GlaxoSmith Kline and Eli Lilly supplied Lovaza and Raloxifene, respectively.

About Penn State College of MedicineLocated on the campus of Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center in Hershey, Pa., Penn State College of Medicine boasts a portfolio of nearly $82 million in funded research. Projects range from the development of artificial organs and advanced diagnostics to groundbreaking cancer treatments and understanding the fundamental causes of disease. Enrolling its first students in 1967, the College of Medicine has more than 1,600 students and trainees in medicine, nursing, the health professions and biomedical research on its campus.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release does identify the funding sources for this research as well as the suppliers of the drugs used in this study so possible conflicts of interest are adequately addressed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
heart assocIation Mouth-to-mouth not necessary and seen as deterrent

In a break from decades-old first aid guidelines, the American Heart Association on Monday endorsed "hands only" cardio-pulmonary resuscitation - rapid chest compression without mouth-to-mouth resuscitation - to improve the odds for victims of cardiac arrest.

The new guidelines, published in the journal Circulation, recognize that recent research has shown no real advantage to conventional mouth-to-mouth CPR in outside-the-hospital cardiac arrest cases. In addition, studies show that bystanders are often reluctant to perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on strangers, but are more likely to try rapid chest compression.

"We think that if we can double the number of bystanders who attempt CPR, we can save tens of thousands of lives every year," said Mary Fran Hazinski, a nurse at Vanderbilt University Medical Center and spokeswoman for the American Heart Association.

Sudden cardiac arrest is a leading cause of death in the United States. Every day, it claims 900 American lives. Only about 6 percent of victims whose hearts stop outside of a hospital survive.

Studies show that either mouth-to-mouth or hands-only CPR may double the survival rate from cardiac arrest, but bystanders typically step in to provide the potentially life-saving intervention in only about one-third of cases. That hesitation is rooted not only in reluctance to lock lips with a stranger, but by anxiety over how to perform conventional CPR, in which the rescuer breathes into the victim twice after every 30 chest compressions.

"Many times people nearby don't help because they're afraid that they will hurt the victim and aren't real confident in what they're doing," said Michael Sayre, chairman of the Heart Association committee that rewrote the guidelines.

In fact, effective chest compression can break the victim's ribs about one-third of the time. That's a risk well worth taking when the odds of survival without CPR are so slim.

The Heart Association also stressed that three-quarters of sudden cardiac arrest cases outside the hospital occur in the home. The bystander who needs to provide those chest compressions is often a loved one of the victim.

Conventional CPR that combines both chest compression and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation has been taught in first aid classes since the 1960s. That method has been under review since 1997. Two years ago, after considering multiple studies, the Heart Association recommended hands-only CPR only in cases where people were unwilling or unable to provide the rescue breaths as well.

The latest revision stems from three major studies published last year that showed no advantage in using mouth-to-mouth resuscitation in cardiac cases.

Dr. Chris Barton, acting chief of the Emergency Department at San Francisco General Hospital, supports the new guidelines. He said the latest research on CPR supports the notion that in the critical minutes before an ambulance or defibrillation device arrives, it is very important to provide uninterrupted, deep chest compressions.

"You want the chest to go down about 2 inches. I weigh 160 pounds, and when I do this I put about half my weight into it," he said. The pressure should be applied to the center of the chest, between the two nipples of the victim.

The compressions also have to come in rapid succession - about 100 per minute. According to Hazinski, one easy way to remember the rhythm is that it is roughly equivalent to the beat of the 1977 Bee Gees' disco hit "Stayin' Alive."

"If you are untrained, just remember to push hard and push fast," Hazinski said. "Doing something is better than doing nothing."

These new guidelines are aimed at untrained bystanders, or to those who have been trained in CPR but are unsure they can perform it adequately. The message is, if there is any doubt, provide "hands only" CPR.

Although survival rates for cardiac arrest hover around 10 percent with CPR, Hazinski noted that rates have been pushed as high as 30 percent in cities, such as Seattle, that combine high bystander participation with a strong system of professional emergency medical response.

At best, CPR is a desperate measure. Survival rates are highly dependent on prompt arrival of a defibrillator - the kind carried by ambulance crews and increasingly available in public venues such as airports and sports stadiums.

"If you have access to an AED (Automated External Defibrillator), you want to apply that as early as possible," advised San Francisco General's Barton. "Early defibrillation is the most successful intervention you can do."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article cites three sources, two of them associated with the American Heart Association (which developed the new guidelines) and one an apparently independent expert who supports the guidelines. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
URBANA, Ill. - Nearly every American who has become a parent in the last decade has heard the slogan, "breast milk is best," and has likely been encouraged to offer breast milk to newborns. Among other things, breast milk contains natural sources of prebiotics: small, indigestible fiber molecules that promote the growth of good bacteria in the baby's gut. Yet for many families, breastfeeding is difficult or impossible. Fortunately, modern infant formulas are getting closer to the real thing with the help of University of Illinois researchers.

In a recent study from the Piglet Nutrition and Cognition Lab at U of I, scientists worked with piglets to show prebiotics included in infant formula can enhance memory and exploratory behavior.

"When we provide prebiotics in formula, our results confirm that we can not only benefit gut health, which is known, but we can also influence brain development," says Ryan Dilger, associate professor in the Department of Animal Sciences, Division of Nutritional Sciences, and Neuroscience Program at U of I. "We can actually change the way piglets learn and remember by influencing bacteria in the colon."

Piglets are widely considered a more informative model for human infants than mice and rats; their digestive systems, behavioral responses, and brain development are remarkably similar to human infants. Therefore, researchers are increasingly turning to piglets to test hypotheses in pre-clinical trials related to human health, especially in the context of gut microbes and brain development.

"There hasn't been a lot of work looking at the gut-brain axis in humans, but a lot of rodent work is showing those connections. This is taking it to an animal model that is a lot closer to human infants and asking if that connection still exists and if we can tease out possible mechanisms," says Stephen Fleming, lead author of the study and a doctoral student in the Neuroscience Program at U of I.

In early 2016, Dilger and his colleagues worked with piglets to show that a combination of innovative formula components, including prebiotics, may play a role in brain development and behavior. In their new study, the team concentrated solely on the effects of prebiotics.

Starting on the second day of life, piglets were given a cow's milk-based infant formula supplemented with polydextrose (PDX), a synthetic carbohydrate with prebiotic activity, and galactooligosaccharide (GOS), a naturally occurring prebiotic. When the piglets were 25 days old, Fleming took them through several learning, memory, and stress tests. After 33 days, blood, brain, and intestinal tissues were collected for analysis.

The test for learning and memory gave piglets a chance to play with dog toys: one they'd seen before and one brand-new toy. If they spent more time with the new toy, that was an indication that the piglet recognized it as new and preferred it. This "novel object recognition" test improves on classic maze tests commonly used in rodent studies.

"If you're trying to test for memory, this test is closer to what we'd do with an infant. After all, we don't generally train infants on mazes," Fleming says. "We know from previous research this test works for pigs, but this is the first published example of using it in a nutrition context."

Pigs fed PDX and GOS spent more time playing with new objects than pigs who didn't receive the prebiotic supplements. The preference for novel objects, an indication of natural curiosity, is a sign of healthy brain development and points towards positive development of learning and memory.

When prebiotics are working the way they should, good bacteria increase in abundance. One way to tell is by looking at metabolic end-products - volatile fatty acids (VFAs) - excreted by bacteria during digestion of prebiotic fibers.

"Volatile fatty acids are a global indicator for whether prebiotics had an effect on the overall population of bacteria. For example, we might want to see an increase in Lactobacillus and other beneficial bacteria that produce butyrate," Dilger explains. Volatile fatty acid (VFA) concentrations in the colon, blood, and brain were changed in pigs receiving PDX and GOS compared with control pigs.

Recent evidence suggests that bacterial VFAs could be getting into the blood and traveling to the brain, where they could potentially affect mood and behavior.

"We found that, yes, VFAs are absorbed in the blood of pigs that were fed PDX/GOS. And, yes, they do get into the brain," Fleming explains. "But when we looked at the relationship between these VFAs and the results of our behavior tests, there did not appear to be a clear connection."

Another surprise was a decrease in serotonin in brains of pigs fed the prebiotic. "When you hear less serotonin, there's an immediate reaction to say, 'Well, that's bad,'" Fleming says. Not necessarily; those pigs didn't show greater anxiety than control pigs during a stress test or poorer performance when given a learning and memory test. The researchers hypothesize that the prebiotics may alter levels of tryptophan, serotonin's amino acid precursor, but it's too early to say.

Although more work is needed to tackle remaining questions, the study adds to the growing body of research suggesting a strong and potentially modifiable link between the gut and the brain: a link that makers of infant formula should strongly consider.

"There are so many ways we can alter the composition of the microbiota and they can have very strong benefits. Promoting good 'gut health' remains a strong focus in the field of nutrition," Dilger says.

The article, "Dietary polydextrose and galactooligosaccharide increase exploratory behavior, improve recognition memory, and alter neurochemistry in the young pig," is published in Nutritional Neuroscience. Fleming and Dilger's co-authors include Supida Monaikul, Alexander Patsavas, Rosaline Waworuntu, and Brian Berg. The work was supported by Mead Johnson Nutrition.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the research was funded by Mead Johnson Nutrition, the manufacturer of a prebiotic infant formula.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>

• Read this story at www.uab.edu/news
• The UAB News Studio is available for live or taped interviews with UAB experts.

Newswise — BIRMINGHAM, Ala. – The Food and Drug Administration recently approved lifitegrast, a new eye drop for treating signs and symptoms of dry eye in adult patients. Kelly Nichols, O.D., Ph.D., a dry eye expert and dean of the University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Optometry, conducted research studies for the parent drug company to explore the efficacy and safety of lifitegrast in treating this eye condition that affects more than 16 million adults in the United States.

Inflammation associated with dry eye may eventually lead to damage to the surface of the eye.

“Dry eye is a common complaint to eye care professionals, with millions of U.S. adults experiencing the symptoms of this often chronic disease,” Nichols said. “It is critical for eye care professionals to have a dialogue with patients who report symptoms because dry eye can be a progressive ocular surface disease.”

The twice-daily eye drop solution of 5 percent lifitegrast ophthalmic solution is the only prescription eye drop indicated for the treatment of both signs and symptoms of dry eye, and it is the first new dry eye prescription drop approved in the last 13 years.

Nichols and a team of researchers studied 1,181 patients, of whom 1,067 received lifitegrast in four placebo-controlled 12-week trials. Signs and symptoms were assessed at baseline and at weeks two, six and 12.

In all four studies, eye dryness was significantly reduced, with two of the studies showing improvements at week two. Results from inferior corneal staining tests — used by physicians to detect abrasions on the cornea — showed improvement in three of the four studies.

Nichols continues to push for funding and advancement for dry eye research and treatment. Prior to FDA approval of the lifitegrast eye drop, Nichols presented a congressional briefing in Washington, D.C., addressing research into dry eye for the National Alliance for Eye and Vision Research. She focused on the cause and potential therapies for dry eye that are being funded through the National Eye Institute and in private industry.

Focusing her research on all aspects of the eye, Nichols discussed the mechanics of the three layers of the tear film and the importance of each from the cornea outward:
• Mucin layer: helps tears adhere to the eye
• Aqueous layer or water layer: nourishes and protects the cornea
• Lipid or oil layer: lubricates and prevents evaporation and provides smooth refractive surface needed for optimal vision

“We are unsure which of the 200-plus different lipids and 500-plus unique proteins are most important for protecting and lubricating the eye, and the absence or insufficiency of which results in dry eye,” Nichols said.

There are more than 30-plus new dry eye basic, translational and clinical studies being funded by the NEI/National Institutes of Health to further explore these lipids and proteins, with more than 50 papers being published monthly.

“Funding from NIH is helping the optometry world make significant strides in understanding the cause and treatment of dry eye,” Nichols said. “We still have a long way to go, but prevention and early detection are major goals. There is hope for dry eye patients worldwide.”

Diagnosis of dry eye is identified by an eye care professional based on careful evaluation of signs and symptoms, including dryness, discomfort, vision changes and damage to the surface of the eye. Specialty testing for dry eye is performed at the Dry Eye Relief Clinic at UAB Eye Care, in the School of Optometry.

About UABKnown for its innovative and interdisciplinary approach to education at both the graduate and undergraduate levels, the University of Alabama at Birmingham is the state of Alabama’s largest employer and an internationally renowned research university and academic medical center; its professional schools and specialty patient-care programs are consistently ranked among the nation’s top 50. UAB’s Center for Clinical and Translational Science is advancing innovative discoveries for better health as a two-time recipient of the prestigious Center for Translational Science Award. Find more information at www.uab.edu and www.uabmedicine.org.

EDITOR’S NOTE: The University of Alabama at Birmingham is a separate, independent institution from the University of Alabama, which is located in Tuscaloosa. Please use University of Alabama at Birmingham on first reference and UAB on all subsequent references.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release acknowledges that the person quoted was doing work for Shire plc, the company that makes the product. The release was correct to include this funder as a potential conflict of interest. It would also have been good to note that study was conducted by by the UAB Center for Translational Research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Dec. 7, 2018─Vitamin C may reduce the harm done to lungs in infants born to mothers who smoke during their pregnancy, according to a randomized, controlled trial published online in the American Thoracic Society’s American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine.

In “Oral Vitamin C (500 mg/day) to Pregnant Smokers Improves Infant Airway Function at 3 Months: A Randomized Trial,” Cindy T. McEvoy, MD, MCR, and her co-authors report that at three months of age, the infants whose mothers took 500 mg of vitamin C in addition to their prenatal vitamin had significantly better forced expiratory flows (FEFs). FEFs measure how fast air can be exhaled from the lung and are an important measure of lung function because they can detect airway obstruction.

The researchers also discovered an association between the infant FEFs and a genetic variant some of the mothers possessed that appeared to amplify the negative impact of nicotine on the babies before they were born. Other studies have linked this genetic factor, specifically for the α5 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, to increased risk of lung cancer and obstructive lung disease.

“Smoking during pregnancy reflects the highly addictive nature of nicotine that disproportionately affects the most vulnerable populations,” said Dr. McEvoy, lead study author and professor of pediatrics at Oregon Health & Science University. “Finding a way to help infants exposed to smoking and nicotine in utero recognizes the unique dangers posed by a highly advertised, addictive product and the lifetime effects on offspring who did not choose to be exposed.”

In a previous study, the authors had shown that 72 hours after birth, babies of mothers who smoked had better lung function if their mothers were randomized to vitamin C (500 mg/day) during their pregnancies compared to those born to mothers who smoked and were randomized to placebo. That study used passive methods to measure lung function, and the authors note that FEFs provide a more direct assessment of airway function and are similar to methods used to diagnose lung disease in adults and older children.

In the current study, 251 pregnant women who smoked were randomly assigned at 13 to 23 weeks of gestation to either receive vitamin C (125 women) or a placebo (126 women). Smoking was defined as having had one or more cigarettes in the last week. All participants received smoking cessation counseling throughout the study, and about 10 percent of the women quit smoking during the study.

The researchers wrote that study results support the hypothesis that oxidative stress caused by cigarette smoking reduces the amount of ascorbic acid, a component of vitamin C, available to the body. At the time they enrolled in the study, the women had lower levels of ascorbic acid than have been reported among women who do not smoke. Those levels rose in study participants who received vitamin C to become comparable to women who do not smoke.

Infants in this study will continue to be followed to track their lung function and respiratory outcomes. The authors believe that future trials of vitamin C supplementation in pregnant smokers should determine whether the benefits are greater if the supplementation starts earlier and continues postnatally in the babies themselves.

Summing up the findings of the current study, Dr. McEvoy said that a relatively low dosage of vitamin C may present “a safe and inexpensive intervention that has the potential to help lung health of millions of infants worldwide.”

However, she added, helping mothers quit smoking should remain the primary goal for health professionals and public health officials. “Although vitamin C supplementation may protect to some extent the lungs of babies born to mothers who smoke during pregnancy, those children will still be at greater risk for obesity, behavioral disorders and other serious health issues,” she said.

This study was funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the Office of Dietary Supplements.

“For mothers who smoke during pregnancy, vitamin C may reduce harm #smoking causes to their babies’ #lungs, finds new study of #vitaminC supplementation. #Nosmokingduringpregnancy.”

About the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine

The AJRCCM is a peer-reviewed journal published by the American Thoracic Society. The Journal takes pride in publishing the most innovative science and the highest quality reviews, practice guidelines and statements in pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine. With an impact factor of 15.239, it is one of the highest ranked journals in pulmonology. Editor: Jadwiga Wedzicha, MD, professor of respiratory medicine at the National Heart and Lung Institute (Royal Brompton Campus), Imperial College London, UK.

Founded in 1905, the American Thoracic Society is the world's leading medical association dedicated to advancing pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine. The Society’s more than 16,000 members prevent and fight respiratory disease around the globe through research, education, patient care and advocacy. The ATS publishes three journals, the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, the American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology and the Annals of the American Thoracic Society.

The ATS will hold its 2019 International Conference, May 17-22, in Dallas, Texas, where world-renowned experts will share the latest scientific research and clinical advances in pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding is very clearly attributed to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the Office of Dietary Supplements.
Conflicts of interest are not mentioned, and none were found.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About one in 20 men is estimated to have Peyronie’s, but figures are not precise because people with the condition tend not to discuss it publicly.

Although the company selling Xiaflex will be Auxilium Pharmaceuticals of Malvern, Pa., the F.D.A. approval was a belated triumph for the drug’s original developer, BioSpecifics Technologies of Lynbrook, N.Y., on Long Island. Founded in 1957, it struggled for decades to find uses for the product, almost going out of business before licensing the drug to Auxilium in 2004.

“It sort of proves to people that if you really believe in a drug you should never give up,” said Matthew Geller, a biotechnology investment banker who is a member of the BioSpecifics board.

Shares of BioSpecifics closed Monday at $27.61, up from $1 as recently as late 2006.

Some people treated with Xiaflex in clinical trials for the Dupuytren’s hand condition said it had made a big difference in their lives, and had allowed them to avoid painful surgery.

“When I looked down and saw my finger straightened out, I cried,” said Kenneth Nelson, 65, of Indianapolis. “It was to me just like a miracle.”

Xiaflex is an enzyme produced by a gangrene-causing bacterium, Clostridium histolyticum, which uses it to eat away the tissues of its victims. The enzyme, called collagenase, breaks down collagen, a major component of the body’s connective tissue that is found in skin, tendons, cartilage and other organs.

But collagenase by itself does not cause gangrene. And there are times doctors need to break down collagen, such as when an excess builds up in the hand or penis, causing Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. The ailments are named for French surgeons who described the conditions in the 18th and 19th centuries.

The enzyme was first extracted from the bacteria around 1950 by Ines Mandl, a young biochemist at Columbia University. Edwin H. Wegman, a Long Island entrepreneur, learned about Dr. Mandl’s work and set up a company called Advance Biofactures, which later became BioSpecifics, to turn collagenase into a drug.

In 1965, the company won approval of an ointment containing collagenase for use in removing dead tissue from skin ulcers and burns. The ointment, sold by licensees under the name Santyl, was a modest success, but the company never truly prospered.

So in the 1970s the company began developing what it thought would be a bigger money-maker, an injectable collagenase. It tested that drug for numerous uses, including herniated disks. Finally, in the early 1990s, two professors of orthopedics at the nearby State University of New York at Stony Brook suggested using the drug for Dupuytren’s.

The professors, Dr. Lawrence C. Hurst and Marie A. Badalamente, injected the drug into the tails of rats, as a stand-in for human fingers. They found they could dissolve the collagen in tendons, making the tails floppy, without harming nearby nerves and arteries. Then they organized clinical trials in patients and got federal grants to help pay for the work. The professors and Stony Brook will share a royalty of one half of 1 percent of sales of Xiaflex for use in treating Dupuytren’s.

But work was slowed by lack of money, and by 2004, BioSpecifics was about out of cash. In desperation, Ed Wegman’s son Mark, a top computer scientist at I.B.M., called a childhood friend, Laurence Korn, who had been the chief executive of a successful biotechnology company now known as PDL BioPharma.

With Dr. Korn’s help, BioSpecifics licensed the drug to Auxilium in a matter of weeks, receiving $5 million initially.

Auxilium was interested because of Peyronie’s disease. It already was selling a gel for men with low testosterone and had learned from urologists about the need for better treatments for bent penises.

“From talking with surgeons and patients who have Peyronie’s, neither of them wants to do the surgery,” said Will Sargent, a spokesman for Auxilium.

Two years ago, the drug giant Pfizer, which sells the erectile dysfunction drug Viagra, licensed the European rights to Xiaflex from Auxilium for an initial payment of $75 million. BioSpecifics got $6.4 million of that amount and will receive 8.5 percent of additional payments of up to $410 million that Pfizer might make.

Auxilium sought approval for treating Dupuytren’s first because it was easier to measure success in straightening fingers. But the company hopes to begin late-stage trials of Xiaflex for Peyronie’s disease later this year. In a midstage trial, injections of Xiaflex into the collagen plaque in the penis reduced the curvature. But the drug did not reduce pain or discomfort during intercourse by a statistically significant amount.

While collagenase itself is not patented, the companies do have patents on the use of the enzyme to treat Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. They are also shielded from competition for seven years under a federal law aimed at spurring development of drugs for rare, or “orphan,” diseases — even though newer estimates suggest these two diseases are not as rare as thought when the drugs were given orphan status.

Auxilium and BioSpecifics hope that the half-century-old collagenase might eventually become as versatile as Botox, another bacterial product. They are looking at uses that range from loosening up immobile “frozen shoulders” to eliminating fat bulges and cellulite.

With its belated success, BioSpecifics has sold off its ointment business. It now has only five employees and a business of collecting a roughly 11 to 12 percent royalty on sales of Xiaflex.

“We will be a cash machine going forward,” said Thomas L. Wegman, the president and the other son of the company founder. “We don’t have to pay for marketing. We don’t have to pay for manufacturing.”

The Wegman family — the two sons and the founder’s 75-year-old wife, Toby — controls about 25 percent of the company’s stock.

Ed Wegman, the company’s founder, did not live to see the F.D.A. approval, dying at age 87 in 2007. On Feb. 2, the day the drug was approved, one BioSpecifics director sent an e-mail message to the others saying, “Well done. Hope Ed is looking on.”

Meanwhile, Dr. Mandl, the biochemist who first isolated collagenase from the bacteria, is nearing 93. Last year, when BioSpecifics stock rose above $30, she sold the last 1,000 shares she had been given for serving as a consultant to the company over the years.

Unfortunately, she had sold most of her holdings years earlier for a relative pittance. “If I still had what I originally had,” she said. “I’d be very rich.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Most of the sources in this story are affiliated in some way with organizations that will profit from the sale of Xiaflex. These conflicts are disclosed, however, and the story does offer some clinical perspective from a hand specialist who does not appear to be connected to Xiaflex.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MRI can detect the earliest signs of breast cancer recurrence and fast-growing tumors.

Researchers have shown that magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can detect the earliest signs of breast cancer recurrence and fast-growing tumors. Their approach detects micrometastases, breakaway tumor cells with the potential to develop into dangerous secondary breast cancer tumors elsewhere in the body. The approach may offer an improved way to detect early recurrence of breast cancer in women and men. The work was completed at Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), Cleveland and was funded by the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB), part of the National Institutes of Health.

“MRI has a wide array of diagnostic applications and shows promise in breast cancer detection and treatment monitoring,” said Richard Conroy, Ph.D., director of NIBIB Division of Applied Science and Technology. “The technique used by researchers in this study enables very early detection of metastatic spread, which would allow adaptation of treatment more quickly and hopefully lead to better outcomes in the future.”

The study, published online in the Aug. 12, 2015, issue of Nature Communications, was led by Zheng-Rong Lu, Ph.D., CWRU M. Frank Rudy and Margaret Domiter Rudy Professor of biomedical engineering and an expert in molecular imaging for cancer and other diseases.

“We showed with this technique that we can detect very tiny tumors of just a few hundred cells,” Lu said, adding that the study pushed imaging boundaries, revealing smaller cancers than can be detected with current clinical imaging modalities. “Our imaging technology has the potential to differentiate aggressive tumors from low-risk tumors. These are two things that potentially can make a big impact on clinical practice and also management of cancer.”

One-third of patients diagnosed with breast cancer eventually develop metastases in distant organs, with an increased risk of death. Breast cancer has a high rate of metastasis to bone, lung, liver, lymph nodes, and the brain. Since small, early-stage cancers are the most responsive to drug treatments, screening is an important aspect of follow-up care for breast cancer patients, and early detection is critical in tailoring appropriate and effective therapeutic interventions. While multiple imaging techniques, including MRI, are currently used in breast cancer detection and clinical management, they are neither able to detect specific cancer types or early cancer growth.

The earliest signs of cancer spread are called micrometastases. As the name implies, they are often too small to be detected with standard screening. Dr. Lu’s team used a biochemical approach combined with MRI to detect molecular changes that signal micrometastases. To detect micrometastases, Lu and his team used MRI imaging — which uses a magnetic field and radio waves to produce images – and combined it with a special chemical contrast solution.

The contrast solution that the team developed contains a short piece of protein, or peptide, tagged with a minuscule magnet. They chose the peptide — a chain of just five amino acids — for its inclination to bind to protein matrix structures around cancer cells, called fibrin-fibronectin complexes. More importantly, the fibronectin part of the complex is expressed during a cell’s transition to cancer and plays a role in cell growth, migration and differentiation. Fibronectin is associated with high-risk breast cancer with poor prognosis.

The researchers collected images depicting metastases where breast cancer had spread beyond the original tumors. Metal molecules within the contrast solution are magnetized during the MRI process and enhance the image wherever the molecules of solution bind with the targeted protein.

“The primary tumor sends signals to distant tissue and organs to prepare the soil for metastasis,” Lu said. “By also binding with the magnetically tagged peptide, the biomarker is enhanced, generating enough signal for MRI detection of small, high-risk cancer and micrometastases.”

The researchers tested the approach in mice into which they had introduced breast cancer cells. After a two-week waiting period, the researchers injected the contrast solution and performed MRI. The MRI imaging detected metastatic tumors, including micrometastases, in lung, liver, lymph node, adrenal gland, bone, and brains of the mice.

Analysis of images showed that the contrast used by the research team bound almost exclusively to the fibrin-fibronectin complexes, producing a strong and prolonged image enhancement of micrometastases and tumors compared with normal tissue. Using a microscopic imaging approach, called cryo-imaging, and MRI, the researchers verified that the MRI technique could detect micrometastases, even observing bone micrometastases that were less than 0.5mm — the diameter of a very fine pencil lead.

Prior to their study with this contrast agent, Lu’s team had conducted studies to determine its clearance from the body after the imaging, which is essential for safe clinical use. Their testing showed that the agent is readily cleared from the body and has a low level of retention in tissues. Therefore, they expect it will be safe if ultimately developed for clinical use.

“The recurrence rates of some forms of breast cancer and the consequence of metastatic cancer make these efforts urgent and important,” said Lu, adding that his research team also hopes to advance the approach for prostate cancer detection. “We think this targeted approach holds great promise for earlier imaging of high-risk cancers in the clinic. It could also become useful as a non-invasive way to assess breast cancer treatment progress.”

The team plans to complete safety testing of the imaging agent during the next three years. They will then pursue human trials with this approach.

This work was supported in part by NIH grants EB00489.

About the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering: NIBIB’s mission is to improve health by leading the development and accelerating the application of biomedical technologies. The Institute is committed to integrating the physical and engineering sciences with the life sciences to advance basic research and medical care. NIBIB supports emerging technology research and development within its internal laboratories and through grants, collaborations, and training. More information is available at the NIBIB website: http://www.nibib.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article noted that the research was partially funded through an NIH grant. There are no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
BOSTON (Sept. 14, 2016) -- Although targeted drugs like Gleevec have revolutionized the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), patients generally must take them for the rest of their lives and may cease benefiting from them over time. In new research that could suggest a road to cure, scientists at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston Children's Hospital have found that CML stem cells die in response to inhibition of a protein called Ezh2. Drugs that target the protein are currently being tested in clinical trials for other cancers.

The findings, reported online today by the journal Cancer Discovery, raise the prospect that Ezh2 blockers, in combination with Gleevec and similar drugs, could eradicate the disease in some patients in relatively rapid fashion or could be an effective therapy for those who become resistant to Gleevec-like agents, the authors state.

In a paper published simultaneously by Cancer Discovery, a team of Scottish scientists report similar findings using a different research approach.

"The vast majority of patients with CML do remarkably well on imatinib [Gleevec] and similar drugs: The disease is well controlled and side effects are tolerable," says Stuart Orkin, MD, the study's senior author and a pediatric hematologist/oncologist at Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center. "In only 10-20 percent of patients, however, are the leukemia cells fully cleared from the body. The other 90 percent retain a reservoir of leukemic stem cells - which initiate the disease - and must stay on the drugs permanently."

CML is a slowly progressing type of blood cancer that develops in the bone marrow. Primarily occurring in adults, it is rare in children.

Over time, some patients develop resistance to Gleevec and other drugs that block BCR-ABL, the misbegotten "fusion" protein that drives CML growth. Although second- and third-line targeted therapies can often return the disease to remission, some patients don't benefit from these drugs or develop severe side effects.

The new study grew out of efforts to discover whether different types of cancer are susceptible to Ezh2 inhibitors. In laboratory experiments, the Dana-Farber/Boston Children's researchers found not only that Ezh2 is overabundant in leukemia stem cells but that it helps them survive and give rise to full-fledged CML cells. Follow-up studies in mice showed that inactivating Ezh2 through gene-editing techniques caused CML stem cells to die, halting the disease at its source.

"The stem cells' dependence on Ezh2 suggests they will be especially vulnerable to drugs that target the protein," Orkin remarks. "Such drugs are already in clinical trials for other diseases, including lymphoma and some solid tumors."

Epizyme, a biopharmaceutical company based in Cambridge, MA, recently opened a pediatric trial of an Ezh2 inhibitor for children with rhabdoid and other tumors. Dana-Farber/Boston Children's is a site in the multi-center Phase 1 trial.

Although adding Ezh2-targeting agents to the standard drug regimen for CML has the potential to dramatically shorten the treatment period for many patients, ethical considerations may lead to the agents' first being tested in patients who don't respond to Gleevec and similar drugs, either initially or after drug resistance develops, Orkin remarks. "Our findings suggest inhibition of Ezh2 should be considered as a way to eradicate CML when used in combination with current targeted therapies. It offers a promising approach to shortening the duration of therapy in order to achieve a cure. If successful, the cost savings of such an approach could also be significant."

Joining senior author Orkin, the study's lead author is Huafeng Xie, PhD, of Dana/Farber/Boston Children's. Co-authors are Cong Peng, Jialiang Huang, PhD, Bin E. Li, PhD, Woojin Kim, Elenoe C. Smith, Yuko Fujiwara, PhD, Partha P. Das, Minh Nguyen, of Dana-Farber/Boston Children's; Jun Qi, PhD, of Dana-Farber; James E. Bradner, MD, of Dana-Farber and the Novartis Institute for BioMedical Research; Shaoguang Li, MD, PhD, of University of Massachusetts Medical School; and Giulia Cheloni of UMass Medical School and the University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

The study was funded in part by the National Institutes of Health (grant UO1 CA105423) and Hyundai Hope on Wheels.

Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center -- the nation's top pediatric cancer center, according to U.S. News & World Report - brings together two internationally known research and teaching institutions that have provided comprehensive care for pediatric oncology and hematology patients since 1947. The Harvard Medical School affiliates share a clinical staff that delivers inpatient care at Boston Children's Hospital and most outpatient care at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We’re told the pharmaceutical company Epizyme opened a phase 1 clinical trial at Dana-Farber/Boston Children’s hospital. We’re also told an NIH grant and Hyundai Hope on Wheels is funding the study. The release also notes one of the authors on the study is an employee of Novartis Pharmaceuticals — which owns the (soon-to-expire) patent for Gleevec, also called Glivec.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Robots may not help doctors do a better job on some surgeries, according to a new study.

Surgeons treating women with endometriosis - a chronic condition that affects more than 5 million women and adolescent girls in the U.S. - didn’t get better or faster results when they used a robotic system.

With the surgeon alone, “the incision is smaller (and) the manipulations are more controlled,” Dr. Ceana Nezhat, an author on the study and the chair of Obstetrics & Gynecology at Northside Hospital in Atlanta, told Reuters Health.

Because the robot lets the surgeon get a better picture of the inside of the body, the authors had expected that surgeries using the robot would go more smoothly than those without it.

To test this idea, they looked back at 78 minor surgeries that were done on women with endometriosis - half using the assistance of a robot, half without it.

There was no difference in how much blood patients lost, and there were no complications in either group. But robotic surgeries took longer than non-robotic surgeries by about 40 minutes - 3 hours and 11 minutes compared to 2 hours and 29 minutes, on average. Longer surgeries often mean a more tired surgeon and more chances for things to go wrong.

The robot-surgeon team might not have outperformed the surgeon alone because the procedure was a relatively simple one.

Surgical robots do not operate on their own. Rather, surgeons move electronic instruments that are linked to the movement of other instruments inside the body, while they watch a three-dimensional image of what’s going on inside. One robot can cost around $1.5 million.

“We were surprised that (surgery with the robot) did not have better outcomes than (the surgeon alone), as we have always believed if you can see more and see better you can do more and do better,” the authors write.

However, they suggest that more complicated procedures for severe endometriosis, which might require open surgery, would benefit from the help of a robot.

Inexperienced doctors might also take advantage of the robot for surgery if they don’t think they have the skills to do the surgery with only a small cut, Dr. Nezhat said. In this case, the robot could turn what would have to be an open surgery into a simpler one.

Dr. Tommaso Falcone, chair of obstetrics and gynecology at Cleveland Clinic, said this study shows that more technology is not always better. Using a robot for basic surgery, like the kind studied here, would be like using a computer to do addition, he told Reuters Health.

“I just need a calculator to add a few things,” said Falcone, who was not involved in the study. “Yes it’s true that if I’ve got that supercomputer maybe it looks better. But all I need to do is add 5 and 5.”

Especially in a time of concern over rising medical costs, “we should not simply use the highly sophisticated technology just because it’s there,” Falcone said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: As noted above, the comments from Falcone were essential. It might have been worth noting that both the hospitals mentioned in the story actually promote robotic surgery for endometriosis quite heavily. Here’s one example:http://www2.northside.com/RoboticSurgery/Robotic-Surgery-At-Northside/Gynecologic-Surgeries/Robotic-Endometriosis.aspx
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Complementary and alternative medicine options may help men manage premature ejaculation, according to a new review of existing research.

The improvements were small, and the studies were of varying quality, but preliminary evidence suggests that acupuncture, Chinese herbal medicine, Ayurvedic herbal medicine and a Korean topical cream may all have desirable effects, researchers conclude in the journal Sexual Medicine.

“There are a range of treatments available for premature ejaculation, including drug treatments, behavioral techniques and counseling, however, some men may not want to visit the doctor, take drugs long-term or be on a long wait list for counseling,” said lead author Katy Cooper of the University of Sheffield in the UK.

“It’s important to evaluate the evidence for other therapies,” she told Reuters Health by email. “To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to assess complementary and alternative medicine for premature ejaculation.”

According to the International Society for Sexual Medicine, premature ejaculation can be a lifelong problem, and this primary form of the problem is usually defined as ejaculation happening within one minute of initiating vaginal intercourse every time a man has ever had sex. A man’s “latency time” can also become reduced later in his sexual life, and this secondary form is usually defined as ejaculation within three minutes or less.

In the current study, researchers evaluated 10 randomized controlled trials that included comparisons either to another type of treatment or to a placebo, or dummy, treatment. Two studies were of acupuncture, five were of Chinese herbal medicine, one of Ayurvedic herbal medicine and two of Korean topical “severance secret” cream.

Together, the two acupuncture studies found that the treatment slightly increased intravaginal ejaculatory latency time (IELT) by about half a minute compared to placebo.

Chinese herbal medicine increased IELT by about two minutes, Ayurvedic herbal medicine increased IELT by nearly a minute and topical cream increased IELT by more than eight minutes.

In some instances, a combination of traditional and alternative options was the most effective. For example, Chinese medicine paired with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) increased IELT by two minutes longer than SSRIs alone and nearly three minutes longer than the Chinese medicine alone.

“There are no approved treatments for premature ejaculation,” said Donald Patrick, vice chair for research at the University of Washington in Seattle. “This is a common condition that has serious psychological effects on relationships,” said Patrick, who wasn’t involved in the study. “We need treatments to address it, and it should be treated with equal seriousness as erectile dysfunction.”

The prevalence of premature ejaculation is difficult to measure because of the differing definitions of the problem and some men’s reluctance to report it. Some studies suggest that between 20 and 30 percent of men report early ejaculation concerns, but the International Society for Sexual Medicine estimates that about 4 percent of men have a lifelong condition.

“Although it is not openly discussed in the media - at least not as much as erectile problems have been discussed in the post-Viagra era - numerous studies report men feel frustrated, depressed and anxious because of this problem,” said Ege Can Serefoglu of the Bagcilar Training and Research Hospital in Istanbul, Turkey.

The main limitation of the study is the underlying weakness of the studies evaluated. Bias was unclear in most of the studies, and only five used stopwatches to measure IELT, which is the “gold standard” for premature ejaculation studies, Patrick said.

In addition, the authors write, the studies are so different, it’s tough to draw conclusions about the different options. For example, the five Chinese medicine studies tested different substances, including Qilin pills, Yimusake and Uighur.

Some studies, but not all, discussed side effects such as gastrointestinal discomfort, dizziness, mild pain and decreased libido. When they were reported, the adverse effects were generally mild, the study team writes.

“Nowadays, I am encountering alternative medicine-obsessed patients more than I used to, and it doesn’t make sense to argue with them about the treatment they want,” Serefoglu told Reuters Health by email. “After all, the placebo is a well-known clinical phenomenon, and some of my patients report surprisingly favorable outcomes.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The researchers interviewed don’t appear to have any conflicts of interest, and several independent sources were included.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Learning skills for positive emotions result in less HIV in blood and less anti-depressant use
• Positive emotions are possible even with stress of chronic health problems
• Men using positive emotion skills learned to cope with their stress, while control group went on anti-depressants

CHICAGO --- When individuals recently diagnosed with HIV were coached to practice skills to help them experience positive emotions, the result was less HIV in their blood and lower antidepressant use, reports a new Northwestern Medicine study.

"Even in the midst of this stressful experience of testing positive for HIV, coaching people to feel happy, calm and satisfied -- what we call positive affect -- appears to influence important health outcomes," said lead author Judith Moskowitz, professor of medical social sciences and director of research at the Osher Center for Integrative Medicine at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine.

This is believed to be the first test of a positive emotion intervention in people newly diagnosed with HIV. Based on the study results, the intervention is promising for people in the initial stages of adjustment to any serious chronic illness.

The paper was published recently in the Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology.

The HIV study is part of a larger body of positive affect research being conducted by Moskowitz. She also is studying the health effects of teaching the skills to individuals with type 2 diabetes, women with metastatic breast cancer and caregivers of dementia patients.

For the HIV study, which was based in San Francisco, 80 participants (primarily men) were taught a set of eight skills over five weekly sessions to help them experience more positive emotions. Another 79 participants were in the control group.

Moskowitz and colleagues designed the tools based on evidence showing these particular skills increase positive emotions. Some of the skills included:

1) Recognizing a positive event each day 

2) Savoring that positive event and logging it in a journal or telling someone about it 

3) Starting a daily gratitude journal 

4) Listing a personal strength each day and noting how you used this strength recently 

5) Setting an attainable goal each day and noting your progress 

6) Reporting a relatively minor stressor each day, then listing ways in which the event can be positively reappraised. This can lead to increased positive affect in the face of stress 

7) Understanding small acts of kindness can have a big impact on positive emotion and practicing a small act of kindness each day 

8) Practicing mindfulness with a daily 10-minute breathing exercise, concentrating on the breath

Fifteen months after the interventions, 91 percent of the intervention group had a suppressed viral load compared to 76 percent of the control group. In addition to the potential benefit of a lower viral load on the infected person, there may be public health benefits.

"From a public health perspective, that is potentially huge for prevention of HIV," Moskowitz said. "HIV is less likely to be transmitted with a low viral load. To have a difference like that is amazing."

The reduced viral load could be because of a stronger immune system, Moskowitz said. Observational studies in people living with HIV have shown positive emotion is related to a higher CD4 count (an indicator of less HIV-related damage to the immune system). Or, the reduced viral load may be the result of participants' better adherence to their antiretroviral drug therapy, which generally leads to a suppressed or undetectable viral load, Moskowitz said.

The positive emotion intervention also improved mental health. At baseline, about 17 percent of the control group and intervention group reported being on antidepressants. Fifteen month later, the intervention group was still at 17 percent but the control group's antidepressant use rose to 35 percent.

"The group that learned coping skills did not increase antidepressant use, whereas overall the control group increased its antidepressant use," Moskowitz said. In addition, the intervention group was significantly less likely to have repeating, intrusive thoughts about HIV.

The research was supported by grants R01 MH084723 and K24 MH093225 from the National Institute of Mental Health and grant P30 AI117943 from the Third Coast Center for AIDS Research, all of the National Institutes of Health.

More News at Northwestern Now
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release noted the grants that supported the research. The study didn’t note any financial conflicts of interest. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Spit Test May Reveal The Severity Of A Child's Concussion

A little spit may help predict whether a child's concussion symptoms will subside in days or persist for weeks.

A test that measures fragments of genetic material in saliva was nearly 90 percent accurate in identifying children and adolescents whose symptoms persisted for at least a month, a Penn State team told the Pediatric Academic Societies Meeting in San Francisco, Calif. In contrast, a concussion survey commonly used by doctors was right less than 70 percent of the time.

If the experimental test pans out, "a pediatrician could collect saliva with a swab, send it off to the lab and then be able to call the family the next day," says Steven Hicks, an assistant professor of pediatrics at Penn State Hershey. Hicks helped develop the test and consults for a company that hopes to market concussion tests.

A reliable test would help overcome a major obstacle in assessing and treating concussions, which affect more than one million children and adolescents in the U.S. each year. Many of the injuries are related to sports.

In most cases, concussion symptoms last only a few days. But up to 25 percent of young patients "go on to have these prolonged headaches, fatigue, nausea, and those symptoms can last sometimes one to four months," Hicks says.

And, right now, there's no way to know which kids are going to have long-term problems, he says.

"Parents often say that their biggest concern is, 'When is my child going to be back to normal again?' " Hicks says. "And that's something we have a very difficult time predicting."

Hicks and a team of researchers have been looking for an objective test that might help.

They knew that, after a concussion, injured brain cells try to heal themselves. As a part of this process, brain cells release tiny fragments of genetic material called microRNAs. Some of these fragments eventually turn up in blood and even in saliva.

The team did an experiment that involved 50 concussion patients between the ages of 7 and 18.

"When they came to our medical center and received the diagnosis of concussion, we evaluated them with some standard survey-based tools and then we also got a sample of their saliva," Hicks says. Most samples were collected about a week after the injury.

The team measured levels of many different microRNAs in the samples, and eventually they identified a handful that let them predict how long symptoms would last. They also identified one microRNA that predicted which children would have a specific concussion symptom: difficulties with memory and problem solving, Hicks says.

A saliva test could greatly improve care for young people who don't have obvious symptoms of a concussion, says Manish Bhomia, an adjunct assistant professor at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, Md.

"A lot of children get mild concussion and oftentimes it goes ignored," he says.

A reliable lab test would help ensure that children who have a head injury don't go back to school, or to the soccer field, before their brain has healed, Bhomia says.

And microRNAs offer a promising way to assess concussions in adults as well as children, says Bhomia, whose research involves a range of "biomarkers" for traumatic brain injury.

But saliva may not be the best place to measure microRNAs, Bhomia says. A better option, he says, might be blood samples, which tend to contain greater numbers of the genetic fragments.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that the lead researcher “helped develop the test and consults for a company that hopes to market concussion tests.” It also includes comments from a source who does not appear to be connected with the study, nor have any potential conflicts of interest. Though as we noted above, the way this source’s comments are reported creates confusion about what the study actually looked at.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Patients gave universally positive feedback about the app's ease of use and the ability to have wounds monitored

CHICAGO (Jan. 19, 2018): A new smartphone app called WoundCare is successfully enabling patients to remotely send images of their surgical wounds for monitoring by nurses. The app was developed by researches from the Wisconsin Institute of Surgical Outcomes Research (WiSOR), Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, with the goal of earlier detection of surgical site infections (SSIs) and prevention of hospital readmissions. The study results appear as an "article in press" on the website of the Journal of the American College of Surgeons ahead of print.

SSIs are the most common hospital-acquired infection and the leading cause of hospital readmission following an operation.1,2,3 Due to the prevalence off SSIs, the WiSOR research team decided to see if postoperative wound monitoring could be effectively achieved by having patients upload photos through the WoundCare app and answer a few brief questions to gather information not easily captured through images.

"Patients cannot identify [infections] and frequently ignore or fail to recognize the early signs of cellulitis or other wound complications," study authors wrote. "This drawback leads to the common and frustrating scenario where patients present to a routine, scheduled clinic appointment with an advanced wound complication that requires readmission, with or without reoperation. However, the complication may have been amenable to outpatient management if detected earlier."

Forty vascular surgery patients were enrolled in the study. There was an overall data submission rate of 90.2 percent among participants, and submissions were reviewed within an average of 9.7 hours. During the study, seven wound complications were detected and one false negative was found.

"We set out to come up with a protocol where patients could become active participants in their care and allow us to be in closer communication and monitor their wounds after they leave the hospital," said lead study author and general surgery resident Rebecca L. Gunter, MD. . "This approach allows us to intervene at an earlier time rather than waiting for patients to come back in after the problem has already developed past the point of being able to manage it on an outpatient basis."

Patients were enthusiastic about the app's ease of use and the reassurance they felt having their wounds regularly monitored. The nurse practitioners responsible for reviewing the submitted images attested to the value of the photos and patient satisfaction, although they also noted it was difficult to find time to review the submitted images on top of an already heavy clinical workload. Study authors note that the success and sustainability of a post-discharge wound-monitoring protocol requires a dedicated transitional care program and not simply adding a task to the current staff workload.

This protocol also has a cost-savings component, in addition to the patient safety and satisfaction aspects. Study authors note that SSIs are the most expensive hospital-acquired infection, costing an average of nearly $30,000 per wound-related readmission and an estimated $3-10 billion annually.

"If you could imagine saving the cost from the number of patients whose readmission you were able to prevent, that result could provide significant savings to the health system," Dr. Gunter said. Although capturing specific numbers related to cost-savings was not part of this study, Dr. Gunter said it is an important area of focus for future studies.

A limitation to telemedicine protocols that call for the use of smartphones is that not every patient has the necessary technology or knowledge to upload images on their own. The WiSOR research team addressed this issue by having participants undergo tailored training to learn to use the WoundCheck app. They provided each patient with an iPhone 5S and an accompanying visual reference guide to further assist in using the phone and app. Dr. Gunter said they were very successful in giving patients knowledge and access to technology so they could participate in the study. She said this is a model easily adaptable to other medical centers, whether through providing participants with a phone, having a rotating supply of phones at the hospitals for patients to borrow, or relying on a patient's personal device.

"We have demonstrated that a population of complex and high-risk patients, many of whom are older adults and novice smartphone users, can complete this protocol with high fidelity and satisfaction," the researchers concluded.

Study coauthors from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, include Sara Fernandes-Taylor, PhD, Shahrose Rahman, BS, Lola Awoyinka, MPH, Kyla M. Bennett, MD, Sharon M. Weber, MD, FACS, Caprice C. Greenberg, MD, MPH, FACS, and K. Craig Kent, MD, FACS.

"FACS" designates that a surgeon is a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons.

Support for this study came from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality: AHRQ R21 HS023395. Dr. Gunter is supported by the National Institutes of

Health: NIH T32 HL110853. This study was presented at the 13th Annual Academic Surgical Congress, Las Vegas, Nev., February 2017.

Citation: Feasibility of an Image-Based Mobile Health Protocol for Postoperative Wound Monitoring. Journal of the American College of Surgeons.

1Wiseman JT, Guzman AM, Fernandes-Taylor S, et al. General and vascular surgery readmissions: a systematic review. J Am Coll Surg 2014;219:552-569.e2.

2Weber DJ, Sickbert-Bennett EE, Brown V, et al. Completeness of surveillance data reported by the National Healthcare Safety Network: an analysis of healthcare-associated infections ascertained in a tertiary care hospital, 2010. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012;33:94-96.

3Lewis SS, Moehring RW, Chen LF, et al. Assessing the relative burden of hospital-acquired infections in a network of community hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013;34:1229-1230.

About the American College of Surgeons

The American College of Surgeons is a scientific and educational organization of surgeons that was founded in 1913 to raise the standards of surgical practice and improve the quality of care for surgical patients. The College is dedicated to the ethical and competent practice of surgery. Its achievements have significantly influenced the course of scientific surgery in America and have established it as an important advocate for all surgical patients. The College has more than 80,000 members and is the largest organization of surgeons in the world. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that support came from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and that lead author Rebecca L. Gunter, MD, is supported by the National Institutes of Health.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, July 19, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- It's still very early, but scientists say a test based on a patient's saliva might someday help detect Alzheimer's disease.

"Saliva is easily obtained, safe and affordable, and has promising potential for predicting and tracking cognitive decline, but we're in the very early stages of this work and much more research is needed," study author Shraddha Sapkota, a neuroscience graduate student at the University of Alberta in Canada, said in a news release from the Alzheimer's Association.

The study was to be presented Sunday at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference in Washington, D.C. Experts note that studies presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

In the study, Sapkota's team tested the saliva of 22 people with Alzheimer's disease, 25 people with what's known as mild cognitive impairment (a decline in memory and thinking that's sometimes a precursor to dementia), as well as 35 people whose mental skills were normal for their age.

They found that the saliva of people with Alzheimer's had different levels of certain substances compared to the saliva of healthy people or those with mild cognitive impairment.

Experts agreed that the findings held promise, but much more research will be needed.

"This is a very preliminary study with a small number of subjects and the results are far from conclusive," said Dr. Allison Reiss, head of the Inflammation Section at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y.

She believes the current study lacks information on possible confounding factors -- things such as "coexisting illnesses, medications, hydration state, tobacco use and multiple other variables" that could influence what's found in the saliva samples.

"There are many gaps in the evidence," Reiss said. "It is uncertain whether the strength and consistency of the relationship between these metabolites [in saliva] and Alzheimer's risk will be maintained in a large multicenter study."

Still, Dr. Paul Wright, chair of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., said the research "is still in its infancy but very promising."

If a saliva test lives up to its promise, one advantage is "the ease of obtaining a sample," he said.

But that convenience also brings its own problems, Wright added. People might ask for a test even when they don't show any signs of dementia, and "this may result in anxiety and depression if there is a false positive result," he said.

For that reason, "larger studies are needed to corroborate and validate their findings," Wright said.

The U.S. National Institute on Aging has more about Alzheimer's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Nice job here. Two of the three sources quoted in the story are apparently unaffiliated with the institution conducting the research, suggesting independent voices. A comparison with a Time story about the same study makes this story seem exceptionally well-sourced.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A breakthrough study led by the University of Sydney's Brain and Mind Centre and Royal Prince Alfred Hospital has revealed unique molecules in the blood of people with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) that could become definitive diagnostic biomarkers of the world's most common neurologic disability in young adults.

Published today in Scientific Reports, the discovery identifies tiny 'dysregulated' micro-RNA molecules that correctly diagnose MS and discriminate between patients at different disease stages - all in a simple blood test.

Currently, there is no definitive test for MS. Diagnosis and disease monitoring relies on several parameters, including clinical examination, MRI, cerebrospinal fluid assessment, and electrophysiology.

MS is a chronic disease, so current diagnostic and monitoring tests are costly and still have limited utility to discriminate between different stages of the disease.

In addition to identifying biomarkers that distinguish healthy people from those with MS, the researchers identified nine unique micro-RNA molecules that differentiate between two MS sub-types: relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) and progressive MS.

Relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) affects 70 percent of people and often evolves into a secondary progressive form of MS. 10-15 percent of people with MS are diagnosed with a progressive form of the disease from the outset known as primary progressive MS.

The team also validated eight out of nine micro-RNA molecules in an independent group of progressive MS cases, confirming the reproducibility of the findings.

"This is the first demonstration that micro-RNAs associated with circulating exosomes in blood are informative biomarkers not only for the diagnosis of MS, but in predicting disease subtypes with a high degree of accuracy," said Associate Professor Michael Buckland, Head of the Department of Neuropathology at RPA Hospital and the Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney.

The research was made possible through the generosity of patients at the Brain & Mind Centre's multidisciplinary Multiple Sclerosis Clinic, a collaborative service offered by Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, and the University of Sydney. The research was funded by an Incubator grant from MS Research Australia.

"This blood test may allow people with MS to begin treatment earlier, and identify the most appropriate treatment for their condition," said Dr Matthew Miles, CEO MS Research Australia.

"This, in turn may lead to fewer relapses and a slower loss of brain volume, resulting in slowing or potentially halting progression of the disease for the person living with MS. It will also help remove the uncertainty surrounding which sub type of the disease an individual has and therefore be a catalyst for better outcomes for all people with MS."

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS).

The research team assessed the utility of microRNAs (miRNA) in serum (blood) exosomes as biomarkers of MS disease.

Micro-RNA are small non-coding RNA that control many genes and processes vital for cellular life such as metabolism, development and the immune system. They are called miRNA because they are very short, only 18-25 letters long. Science has so far identified about 1800 human miRNAs.

Exosomes are nano-sized particles shed by almost all cell types in the body and are packed with micro-RNAs and other types of small RNA. The research team has shown previously that some micro-RNAs are selectively packaged into exosomes for release from the cell.

Exosomes are tiny packages released by both healthy and diseased cells in the body. They circulate in blood and can be purified in their millions from a single vial of blood. Dubbed the biological equivalent of 'tweeting', the exosomes circulate throughout the body and can deliver their cargo of information to multiple cells in almost real-time.

In inflammatory diseases such as MS, there is a significant increase in circulating exosome concentrations.

"In studying the blood exosomes of healthy volunteers and patients with MS, the research team identified a 'molecular signature' of MS that not only correctly diagnoses MS, but also discriminates between patients with different stages of disease," Associate Professor Buckland said.

"Exosomes released by brain cells circulating in the blood, so they offer an easily accessible way to monitor diseases of the brain. We are only now starting to wake up to their enormous potential as clinical tests."

Given exosomes can cross the blood-brain barrier, it is likely that some of the circulating exosomes in MS patients come from affected central nervous system cells or the associated inflammatory milieu.

The researchers hypothesised that physiological changes associated with MS and its progression is reflected in differences in serum exosomal micro-RNAs.

Using next generation sequencing and integrative bioinformatics they found that serum exosome micro-RNA profiles not only distinguish MS from healthy controls, but also distinguish relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) from progressive MS with high accuracy.

Associate Professor Michael Buckland is Head of the Molecular Neuropathology at the University of Sydney and Head of the Department of Neuropathology at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding source is identified. Since the goal is to devise a commercial diagnostic test, we would also encourage releases to point out any potential conflicts of interest. In this case, there doesn’t appear to be any.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Sept. 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- For asthma patients whose condition is not controlled with standard inhaled steroids, the addition of Spiriva -- a medication already approved for lung disease -- appears to improve breathing, a new study finds.

However, the study authors and an outside expert stressed that these are early findings and much longer, larger clinical trials are needed.

Tiotropium bromide (Spiriva)) belongs to a class of drugs called anticholinergics, which work by enlarging the airways to allow for easier breathing. Currently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has only approved the medication for use by patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a chronic ailment that is a combination of bronchitis and emphysema.

Treating asthma has never been a one-size-fits-all proposition, so "having a new class of asthma medications could be potentially important," said lead researcher Dr. Stephen P. Peters, a professor of pulmonary, critical care, allergy, and immunologic medicine at Wake Forest University, in Winston-Salem, NC.

"People are different. Some people will respond to some medications, some respond to others," he said.

The report, funded by the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, is published in the Sept. 19 online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine. The journal is releasing the data early to coincide with its presentation Sunday at the European Respiratory Society meeting in Barcelona.

For the study, Peters' team tried three drug regimens on 210 asthmatics. These included: Spiriva plus an inhaled steroid; a double dose of the inhaled steroid; and an inhaled steroid plus Serevent, a long-acting beta agonist that relaxes the muscles in the airway.

Patients stayed on each regiment for 14 weeks.

The researchers found that Spiriva plus an inhaled steroid was more effective than giving a double dose of steroids in improving breathing and controlling asthma for these tough-to-treat patients.

In addition, the combination of an inhaled steroid and Spiriva was not less effective than using an inhaled steroid plus Serevent, they said.

That's important, Peters said, because there have been some safety concerns raised about long-acting beta agonists. These drugs carry a note on their labels warning of the possibility of severe adverse events, including death, he noted.

The results need to be confirmed in a much larger pool of patients, Peters said, and he noted that the patients were not followed long enough to see if Spiriva was able to reduce the severity of asthma attacks and hospitalizations.

In addition, Spiriva's safety profile among asthmatics still needs to be studied, he said.

Because the drug is not yet FDA-approved for use in asthma, Peters was reluctant to recommend it for that use. "My hope is that in three to five years we will have the drug approved for asthma," he said.

Dr. Shirin Shafazand, an assistant professor of pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, said that "perhaps there is a role for Spiriva in these poorly controlled asthmatics."

However, at this stage there is no definitive answer whether Spiriva should or shouldn't be used in asthma, she said.

"This is a good foundation to design a trial where you would look at Spiriva plus steroids versus doubling the dose of steroids in a large number of asthmatics who are poorly controlled and then you follow them long-term," Shafazand said, but right now there is no data on long-term efficacy and safety.

For more information on asthma, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article cites an independent source who was not, apparently, related to the study. The funding of the study was also mentioned. 
The AP article we reviewed digs into further conflicts of interest for the study investigators. As an aside to our review, that article also probes the controversy over the fact that a drug company didn’t donate some of the drugs used in this study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The cancer drug that former president Jimmy Carter says made his melanoma seemingly disappear has helped about 40 percent of similar patients survive for as long as three years, oncologists said Wednesday.

The drug, called Keytruda, takes a new approach to treating cancer by stopping tumor cells from cloaking themselves against the normal, healthy immune system response.

New data about to be released to a meeting of cancer specialists shows that 40 percent of the patients who have been taking the drug are still alive three years later. That compares to about 5 percent of patients given the standard therapy, interleukin, the American Society for Clinical Oncology (ASCO) says.

That means 60 percent of patients are not living that long — but it’s still far more than the usual 11-month survival with advanced melanoma.

“It is definitely a huge benefit over what we have seen in the past,” said ASCO president Dr. Julie Vose, a specialist in blood cancers at the University of Nebraska Medical Center.

Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer. It will be diagnosed in more than 76,000 Americans this year, according to the American Cancer Society, and it will kill 10,000.

Rates are rising, in part because tanning became fashionable. Melanoma is easy to cure when caught early, but it is often hard to tell if a mole or freckle has turned cancerous. Carter, for example, was only diagnosed once the tumors had spread to his brain, last fall.

That’s Stage IV cancer and it’s almost always deadly at that stage. But Carter has remained well enough to continue teaching his weekly Sunday school classes and said this past Sunday he’d just traveled to London.

He says there’s no trace of his cancer now.

“In the past, patients with this type of melanoma — he has metastases to the brain — you don’t even see responses to therapy,” Vose told NBC News. “This is something really different than what we have seen in the past.”

Other people are having similar experiences.

For the trial, Caroline Robert of Gustave Roussy and Paris-Sud University in France and colleagues treated 655 patients with advanced melanoma.

"These are patients whose disease cannot be surgically removed, cannot be cured by surgery and usually the majority of these patients have disease that involved vital organs," said Dr. Stephen Hodi, a melanoma specialist at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute who worked on the study.

Seventy-five percent of them had already been given other cancer treatments, including Yervoy, known generically as ipilimumab.

On average, the patients lived two years and 40 percent of them are still alive three years later. About 15 percent of these patients have what’s called a complete remission, meaning there is no trace of their tumors. That doesn’t mean a cure — it’s too soon to say that — but it does mean months or years of cancer-free life that they otherwise could not have hoped for.

And 61 of the patients, or 9 percent, have stopped taking the drug after their tumors went away. Virtually all of them are still in remission.

“This is huge in the melanoma community,” said Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation.

“It's difficult to know at what point you call it a cure. For the patient, though, it means they are cancer-free and for some of those patients, it is likely that their cancer never will come back,” Turnham told NBC News.

“When this study was started the average life expectancy of someone with advanced melanoma was 11 months and now we're seeing that a large percentage of people are living at least three years.”

Keytruda — known generically as pembrolizumab — targets the activity of genes called PD-1 (anti-programmed-death-receptor-1) and PD-L1. The interaction between the two genes lets some tumors escape detection and destruction by immune system cells.

PD-1 stops immune cells from attacking normal healthy cells by mistake. Tumor cells make PD-L1 turn on PD-1 when immune cells approach. Keytruda, an engineered immune protein called a monoclonal antibody, disrupts this signal and lets the immune cells attack the tumor cell.

The drug works far better in patients whose tumors express more PD-1, meaning they have a lot of PD-1 activity, so the drug will optimally be used jointly with a test for PD-1. There are side-effects, including fatigue, itchiness and rash. It was bad enough for 8 percent of patients that they stopped taking it.

The Food and Drug Administration gave Keytruda accelerated approval for melanoma in 2014. It's got breakthrough therapy designation for Hodgkin's lymphoma and colon cancer and got accelerated approval for lung cancer.

“In a matter of a few years, these therapies have truly transformed the outlook for patients with melanoma and many other hard-to-treat cancers,” said Dr. Don Dizon, an oncologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and a spokesman for ASCO.

Keytruda's being tested in other cancer types now.

Earlier Wednesday, the FDA gave accelerated approval to a drug that works in a similar way.

It approved Tecentriq, known generically as atezolizumab, for use in patients with advanced bladder cancer.

Like Keytruda, Tecentriq is a monoclonal antibody. It goes straight to PD-L1, so its target is slightly different.

FDA’s approval was made on the basis of a trial that showed 12 percent of patients with advanced bladder cancer who had high levels of PD-L1 activity saw their tumors disappear, compared to 5.5 percent of patients on other treatments. Another 14 percent had a partial response, meaning their tumors shrank a little, compared to 9.4 percent on standard treatment.

The drugs must be infused and they are pricey. Keytruda costs about $12,500 a month, or $150,000 a year.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: At least two outside sources were quoted in addition to a study spokesperson.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
To place an electronic embedded link to this study in your story Links will be live at the embargo time: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jamapediatrics.2015.1025

Breastfeeding for six months or longer was associated with a lower risk of childhood leukemia compared with children who were never breastfed or who were breastfed for a shorter time, according to an article published online by JAMA Pediatrics.

Leukemia is the most common childhood cancer and accounts for about 30 percent of all childhood cancers. Still, little is known about its cause. Breast milk is meant to exclusively supply all the nutritional needs of infants and current recommendations include exclusively breastfeeding for the first six months of life to optimize growth, development and health.

Efrat L. Amitay, Ph.D., M.P.H., and Lital Keinan-Boker, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H., of the University of Haifa, Israel, reviewed the evidence in 18 studies on the association between breastfeeding and childhood leukemia.

In a review of all 18 studies, the authors found breastfeeding for six months or longer was associated with a 19 percent lower risk compared with no breastfeeding or breastfeeding for a shorter period of time. A separate analysis of 15 studies found that ever being breastfed compared with never being breastfed was associated with an 11 percent lower risk of childhood leukemia.

The authors suggest several biological mechanisms of breast milk may explain their results, including that breast milk contains many immunologically active components and anti-inflammatory defense mechanisms that influence the development of an infant’s immune system.

“Because the primary goal of public health is prevention of morbidity, health care professionals should be taught the potential health benefits of breastfeeding and given tools to assist mothers with breastfeeding, whether themselves or with referrals to others who can help. The many potential preventive health benefits of breastfeeding should also be communicated openly to the general public, not only to mothers, so breastfeeding can be more socially accepted and facilitated. In addition, more high-quality studies are needed to clarify the biological mechanisms underlying this association between breastfeeding and lower childhood leukemia morbidity,” the study concludes.

Editor’s Note: Please see article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, etc.

For more information, contact JAMA Network Media Relations at 312-464-JAMA (5262) or email mediarelations@jamanetwork.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Neither the news release nor the study cited any outside sponsors. The study was completed by epidemiologists at the School of Public Health in Haifa, Israel, and the Ministry of Health in Ramat Gan, Israel.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For concussion sufferers, even those who never lost consciousness, physicians may now be able to predict early on who is more likely to continue experiencing symptoms months or years after the head-jarring event, using a new non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) method devised by a consortium of researchers led by UC San Francisco scientists.

In their new study, published online January 13, 2017 in the Journal of Neurotrauma, the researchers used a technique called functional MRI (fMRI), coupled with sophisticated statistical analysis, to track activity in the brain networks of 75 patients, aged 18 to 55, within the first two weeks of their having experienced concussions.

The study revealed telltale patterns of brain activity that, six months later, were associated with worse performance on behavioral and cognitive tests and were different from patterns seen in healthy control subjects.

The fMRI method and analysis developed for the study highlighted abnormal patterns of brain activity that pointed to a higher risk for long-term, post-concussive symptoms, even among the 44 study participants who had no evidence of bleeding or bruising in the brain in the immediate aftermath of brain trauma on computed tomography (CT) or ordinary MRI scans.

"This is an exploratory, proof-of-concept study showing that we can identify patients soon after mild brain trauma who may have more persistent symptoms, despite no other evidence of injury within the brain," said Pratik Mukherjee, MD, PhD, professor of radiology and biomedical imaging at UCSF and the senior author of the study. "We may be able to use this information to help guide treatment decisions and counseling of patients early on, when it may be more effective."

Only subjects who had lost consciousness for less than 30 minutes were eligible for the study, and many study subjects never lost consciousness during their injury.

Scientists refer to concussion as mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), but for some patients the harmful, sometimes insidious effects are long lasting. Common symptoms in the aftermath of concussion include confusion, headache, changes in vision or hearing, thinking or memory problems, fatigue, sleep changes and mood changes. Previously there has not been a way to predict whose symptoms will fade or persist following mTBI.

Although effective drug treatments for mTBI await discovery, rest and counseling are known to be helpful for patients, Mukherjee said.

In the new study, the researchers focused on well-known networks of activity that are observed when the brain is in a resting state. "We asked subjects to close their eyes, to relax, and to not focus their attention on anything specific -- but also to not fall asleep," Mukherjee said.

In comparison to the control subjects, who had never experienced TBI, mTBI patients displayed less connectivity in frontal areas of the "default mode network," a set of brain regions that are particularly active in the resting brain. They also exhibited less connectivity within several other networks, including those known as the executive control network, the fronto-parietal network, the dorsal attentional network, and the orbitofrontal network; they showed an increase in connectivity in the visual network. Several of these differences were associated with worse performance months later in cognitive and behavioral tests.

UCSF radiologist Esther Yuh, MD, PhD, associate professor of radiology, served as the lead neuroradiologist and also contributed to the analysis for the new study. Postdoctoral fellow and first author Eva Palacios, PhD, led the data analysis for the fMRI experiments. The study was part of the ongoing Transforming Research and Clinical Knowledge in Traumatic Brain Injury (TRACK-TBI) project, through which Mukherjee and study co-author Geoffrey Manley, MD, PhD, vice chairman of neurological surgery at UCSF and chief of neurosurgery at Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital, along with collaborators from many other research institutions are leading studies and gathering common data across research sites to more quickly advance TBI research.

Additional co-authors include researchers from UCSF, the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and University Hospital Antwerp, Belgium.

The research was funded through project grants from the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Defense.

UC San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with nationally renowned programs in basic, biomedical, translational and population sciences; and a preeminent biomedical research enterprise. It also includes UCSF Health, which comprises top-ranked hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals in San Francisco and Oakland -- and other partner and affiliated hospitals and healthcare providers throughout the Bay Area.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources for this research project included the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Defense. In the original journal article, all authors stated they were free of competing financial interests.
Since the news release disclosed the funding sources, we give it a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON, March 5, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc. (Vanda) (NASDAQ: VNDA) today announced that HETLIOZ®, a circadian regulator, demonstrated significant and clinically meaningful benefits in nighttime and daytime symptoms of jet lag disorder. HETLIOZ® is currently approved in the US and Europe for the treatment of Non-24-hour sleep-wake disorder, a rare and chronic circadian rhythm sleep disorder.

Jet lag disorder is a common circadian disorder frequently observed in millions of travelers who cross multiple time zones. Jet lag disorder is characterized by nighttime sleep disruption, a decrease in daytime alertness and impairment to social and occupational functioning.

The clinical efficacy results reported today are from the JET8 Phase-III clinical study (3107) (the JET8 study). In the JET8 study, 318 healthy volunteers were admitted to a sleep unit and were subjected to a circadian challenge of an 8 hours advance to their usual bedtime. The JET8 study design induced the circadian challenge experienced by travelers who cross 8 times zones, which leads to jet lag disorder. This clinical design allowed for the study of HETLIOZ® without the confounding effects of sleep deprivation and variable light conditions.

Results from the JET8 study showed significant and clinically meaningful effects of HETLIOZ® 20 mg on the primary endpoint of the study as well as multiple secondary endpoints. The pre-specified primary endpoint was the amount of sleep time in the first two thirds of the night. Secondary endpoints included measures of sleep parameters (TST, LPS, WASO) and next day alertness (KSS and VAS). (Table 1).

The results of the JET8 study shown above demonstrate the effectiveness of HETLIOZ® in treating jet lag disorder. The magnitude of the total sleep time benefit of 85 minutes improvement over placebo is significant and clinically meaningful. The demonstration of benefits in measurements of next day alertness on both KSS and VAS is meaningful and it underscores the ability of HETLIOZ® to address both nighttime and daytime symptoms of jet lag disorder.

Vanda previously reported on the JET5 study (3101) that examined the effects of HETLIOZ® in a circadian challenge of 5 hours advance of the subjects' usual bedtime. The results of that study were published in The Lancet in 2009.1 The observation that HETLIOZ® is effective in treating the symptoms caused by an abrupt advance of the circadian cycle of a magnitude of 5 or 8 hours suggests that HETLIOZ® will be an effective therapeutic tool in the treatment of individuals that experience symptoms of jet lag. HETLIOZ® will be potentially useful under circumstances of rapid eastward transmeridian travel experienced by frequent travelers, the rapid deployment of military troops and any circumstances that will necessitate the abrupt phase advance of the sleep wake cycle.

Jet lag disorder affects millions of individuals annually who cross multiple time zones during their travel. Jet lag disorder symptoms are more severe during eastward travel. It is reported that more than 30 million US residents make trips abroad each year to overseas destinations. Of these, 60% (approximately 20 million) travel to destinations in Europe, Middle East and Asia. It is also reported that 8% (approximately 1.6 million) travel in Business or First class.2

"We are extremely pleased with the outcome of this study which establishes the utility of HETLIOZ® in the treatment of jet lag disorder as HETLIOZ® was shown to overcome a significant circadian challenge of an 8 hour phase advance. This challenge is equivalent to eastward travel across 8 time zones as experienced for example on travel from Los Angeles to London, Washington DC to Moscow, Paris to Tokyo, or London to Singapore. HETLIOZ® improved both nighttime sleep and next day alertness potentially offering significant benefits to millions of travelers," said Mihael H. Polymeropoulos, MD, Vanda's President and CEO.

Vanda intends to seek marketing approval for the use of HETLIOZ® in the treatment of jet lag disorder. Vanda believes that if HETLIOZ® is approved by regulatory authorities for the treatment of jet lag disorder it will potentially offer a therapeutic solution to many travelers and will likely represent an important commercial opportunity for the company. For review of the current prescribing information of HETLIOZ® please visit www.hetlioz.com.

The Vanda management team will host a conference call and live webcast today, March 5, 2018, at 8:30 AM ET to discuss these updates. Investors can call 1-888-771-4371 (domestic) or 1-847-585-4405 (international) and use passcode 46600533. A replay of the call will be available on Monday, March 5, 2018, beginning at 11:00 AM ET and will be accessible until Monday, March 12, 2018, at 11:59 PM ET. The replay call-in number is 1-888-843-7419 for domestic callers and 1-630-652-3042 for international callers. The passcode number is 46600533.

The conference call will be broadcast simultaneously on Vanda's website. Investors should click on the Investor Relations tab and are advised to go to the website at least 15 minutes early to register, download, and install any necessary software or presentations. The call will also be archived on Vanda's website for a period of 30 days.

HETLIOZ® IS NOT CURRENTLY APPROVED BY ANY REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR THE TREATMENT OF JET LAG DISORDER.

HETLIOZ® is a melatonin receptor agonist. HETLIOZ® has been granted market authorization by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency. For full U.S. prescribing information, please visit www.hetlioz.com.

The most common adverse reactions (incidence >5% and at least twice as high on HETLIOZ® (tasimelteon) than on placebo) were headache, increased alanine aminotransferase, nightmares or unusual dreams, and upper respiratory or urinary tract infection. The risk of adverse reactions may be greater in elderly (>65 years) patients than younger patients because exposure to HETLIOZ® is increased by approximately 2-fold compared with younger patients.

HETLIOZ® is indicated for the treatment of Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Disorder (Non-24).

HETLIOZ® may cause somnolence: After taking HETLIOZ®, patients should limit their activity to preparing for going to bed, because HETLIOZ® can potentially impair the performance of activities requiring complete mental alertness.

The most common adverse reactions (incidence >5% and at least twice as high on HETLIOZ® than on placebo) were headache, increased alanine aminotransferase, nightmares or unusual dreams, and upper respiratory or urinary tract infection. The risk of adverse reactions may be greater in elderly (>65 years) patients than younger patients because exposure to HETLIOZ® is increased by approximately 2-fold compared with younger patients.

Use of HETLIOZ® should be avoided in combination with fluvoxamine or other strong CYP1A2 inhibitors, because of a potentially large increase in exposure of HETLIOZ®, and a greater risk of adverse reactions. HETLIOZ® should be avoided in combination with rifampin or other CYP3A4 inducers, because of a potentially large decrease in exposure of HETLIOZ®, with reduced efficacy.

There are no adequate and well-controlled studies of HETLIOZ® in pregnant women. Based on animal data, HETLIOZ® may cause fetal harm. HETLIOZ® should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risks. Caution should be exercised when HETLIOZ® is administered to a nursing woman.

HETLIOZ® has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment and is not recommended in these patients.

Safety and effectiveness of HETLIOZ® in pediatric patients have not been established.

Vanda is a global biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of innovative therapies to address high unmet medical needs and improve the lives of patients. For more on Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc., please visit www.vandapharma.com.

1. Rajaratnam SM, Polymeropoulos MH, Fisher DM, Roth T, Scott C, Birznieks G, Klerman E. Melatonin agonist tasimelteon (VEC-162) for transient insomnia after sleep-time shift: two randomized controlled multicenter trials. The Lancet. 2009: 373: 433-516.

2. US Department of Commerce, International Trade Administration, National Travel and Tourism Office. Profile of U.S. Resident Travelers Visiting Overseas Destinations: 2015 Outbound.

Various statements in this release and to be made on the conference call are "forward-looking statements" under the securities laws. Forward-looking statements are based upon current expectations that involve risks, changes in circumstances, assumptions and uncertainties. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those reflected in Vanda's forward-looking statements include, among others: the ability of HETIOZ® to provide significant benefit in the treatment of the symptoms of jet lag disorder; Vanda's ability to obtain marketing approval for the use of HETLIOZ® in the treatment of jet lag disorder; and other factors that are described in the "Risk Factors" and "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" sections of Vanda's annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, which is on file with the SEC and available on the SEC's website at www.sec.gov. In addition to the risks described above and in Vanda's annual report on Form 10-K, other unknown or unpredictable factors also could affect Vanda's results. There can be no assurance that the actual results or developments anticipated by Vanda will be realized or, even if substantially realized, that they will have the expected consequences to, or effects on, Vanda. Therefore, no assurance can be given that the outcomes stated in such forward-looking statements and estimates will be achieved.

All written and verbal forward-looking statements attributable to Vanda or any person acting on its behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements contained or referred to herein. Vanda cautions investors not to rely too heavily on the forward-looking statements Vanda makes or that are made on its behalf. The information in this release is provided only as of the date of this release, and Vanda undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines any obligation, to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.

Corporate Contact:

Jim Kelly

Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer 

Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc. 

(202) 734-3428

jim.kelly@vandapharma.com
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Information and references for further information about financial support are contained at the end of the release and it’s clear that Vanda sponsored the trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- The use of mammograms has dipped since a medical task force made controversial recommendations that women in their 40s may not need to get breast cancer screenings every year, according to one of three small studies to be presented Monday.

The studies related to this topic will be presented at the American Roentgen Ray Society annual meeting. They do not appear in peer-reviewed journals.

The studies suggest that fewer physicians are recommending annual mammograms for women in their 40s, fewer patients in that age group are getting screened and that tumors found through routine mammography are more likely to be detected in early stages of cancer.

The studies examined the impact of the controversial guidelines issued by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal advisory board.

Who decides about mammograms? Inside the task force

In November 2009, the group stated that yearly mammograms should not be automatic at age 40 and that physicians should discuss their risks and benefits with their patients. It recommended routine mammography screenings every two years for women ages 50 to 74.

"The benefit in 40- to 49-year-old women is pretty small," said Dr. Virginia Moyer, chair of the task force, about annual mammograms. "There is a real, but rather modest benefit. There are also risks, and they are greater in younger women than older women."

Mammograms are less effective in detecting growths in younger women, whose breasts may be denser. The screening gets better with older women because breast tissues change over time.

As a result, some women experience false positives, anxiety and unnecessary biopsies because of mammograms, according to data. Roughly 15% of women in their 40s detect breast cancer through mammography.

"The benefit is modest enough it needs to be an individual decision," Moyer said about mammograms for women in their 40s.

This contradicted advice from cancer groups such as the American Cancer Society and Susan G. Komen for the Cure, which told women 40 and older to get screened every year. It sparked immediate outcry from such groups and cancer survivors, who say routine mammograms for women younger than 50 can save lives.

Suspicious growths caught in regular-screening mammograms are more likely to be in early stages and therefore more treatable, said Dr. Donna Plecha, division chief of mammography at University Hospitals at Case Medical Center in Ohio.

She reviewed records of 524 biopsies (samples of suspicious growths in breasts) from women in their 40s during 2008 to 2009 at her hospital.

Of the 359 biopsies from screening mammography patients, 15% had cancer. These cancers were more treatable because they were caught in earlier stages, Plecha said.

Although 85% of those biopsies turned out to be noncancerous, some "may show us the patient is at higher risk of breast cancer," she said.

"I haven't met many patients who don't appreciate us being thorough, to trying to find the cancers at an early stage," Plecha said. "I would still recommend screening mammograms starting at age of 40," because cancers caught earlier would be more curable.

Breast cancer ID'd more accurately by docs who see more scans

Plecha's findings were not surprising to Moyer. It's obvious that annual screenings would catch cancers before they progress, she said.

The study presumes that catching earlier stages for women between the ages of 40-49 would translate into fewer breast cancer deaths.

"The data that we have suggests that 1 in a thousand will benefit from mammograms in the 40-49 age," she said. "There are whole lots of assumptions that are not supported by the data they presented."

The task force did not say don't get mammograms, Moyer said.

"It might make women not want to get the test," she said. "This is a decision that should belong to the woman with appropriate info on hand."

In another study, Dr. Lara Hardesty, section chief of breast imaging at the University of Colorado Hospital, examined survey results from fewer than 50 internists, gynecologists, family practitioners and nurse midwives.

She found that fewer clinicians were recommending annual mammograms after the task force's guidelines were issued.

Before the guidelines, 56% recommended yearly mammograms for women in the 40- to 49-year-old range. After the guidelines, that rate decreased to 20%, and 56% of the clinicians reported they were discussing the risks and benefits of screening with patients. That decrease, Hardesty said, "is a statistically significant difference," but it also showed more doctors were discussing mammograms with patients.

Hardesty also found that there were 205 fewer mammograms among women in their 40s after the guidelines were issued. Among patients 50 and older, mammograms increased slightly from 4,479 patients to 4,498.

It was unclear why mammograms in the 40s decreased while older women's mammograms increased slightly.

Hardesty offered this hypothesis: Older women are used to having annual mammograms because they've done it for years. Meanwhile, younger women may feel as though they don't have to get this screening.

Although the task force concluded that the net benefit of mammography in the 40s is small, Hardesty said: "If you're the one person we find your cancer, it's the world to you."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Good sourcing, including – unlike the competing Denver Post story – input from the chair of the US Preventive Services Task Force.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PMS is a combination of physical and emotional symptoms linked to the menstrual cycle. PMS symptoms occur 1 to 2 weeks before a woman's period. Up to 80% of women report having some symptoms prior to menstruation. These symptoms qualify as PMS in 20% to 30% of pre-menopausal women. According to the Medical University of South Carolina, current available treatments include SSRIs and other drug treatments that treat side effects and can cost from US$60.00 - US$535.00 per month.

More than 200 different symptoms have been associated with PMS, including emotional symptoms such as: stress, anxiety, insomnia, fatigue, mood swings, emotional sensitivity and/or changes in libido. Physical symptoms can include bloating, abdominal cramps, constipation, lower back pain, acne, breast swelling, muscle pain and others.

"When the benefits of phospholipids on PMS and PMDD came to light through Lipogen's research, we immediately explored its potential," says David Rutenberg, CEO for Lipogen. "Realizing the significance of this discovery, it encouraged us to further explore a product line for women's health utilizing Lipogen's proprietary phospholipid ingredients."

The previously unrecognized PMS/PMDD benefit of PS Plus came about when 2,000 volunteers received and consumed Lipogen's PS Plus for brain health and stress management. At the end of the 2-month study, out of 220 women under the age of 40 who consumed the product regularly, 23 women (10.45%) reported that they noticed relief of premenstrual syndromes. They also reported that it helped them sleep better, experience fewer mood swings, fewer hot flashes and reduced stress.

"Based on these strong results, we improved the formulation and applied for a patent in the US market," explains Rutenberg. "We also have begun an ongoing, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial with daacro GmbH, Trier, Germany, to learn more how Lipogen's formulation can help alleviate PMS and PMDD symptoms. Our patented solution is made of natural ingredients, is GMO-free, and can save significant health costs over medication alternatives, all with no reported side-effects."

With 25 years of specializing in natural phospholipid research, development and production, Lipogen guarantees its customers ingredient systems that are supported by the highest level of scientific data, technical quality and safety to meet the growing demand for natural cognitive health solutions.

For further information, please contact:
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It’s clear from the release that Lipogen, the company that issued the release, also funded the study. According to the release:
“When the benefits of phospholipids on PMS and PMDD came to light through Lipogen’s research, we immediately explored its potential,” says David Rutenberg, CEO for Lipogen.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 8, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Statins, lauded for their ability to lower cholesterol and prevent heart attacks and strokes, may also reduce the risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis, Israeli researchers report.

"We found that statin users who purchased their medication persistently were less likely to develop rheumatoid arthritis over a long follow-up period," said lead researcher Gabriel Chodick, from Maccabi Healthcare Services in Tel Aviv.

For example, compared with patients who took statins less than 20 percent of the time, patients who took statins for 40 percent to 59 percent of the time had a 23 percent lower risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis, he said.

"Patients who were covered for more than 80 percent of the time, had a 40 percent lower risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis," Chodick said. "The effect was stronger in younger patients and in patients using more effective statins."

The report was published online Sept. 7 in PLoS Medicine.

For the study, Chodick's team collected data on 1.8 million patients who got their health care through the Maccabi Healthcare Services, an HMO in Israel.

The researchers looked for connections between statin use and the development of both rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, a degenerative joint disease that is unlikely to be affected by statins, the researchers noted.

Over nine years of follow-up, 2,578 people developed rheumatoid arthritis and 17,878 developed osteoarthritis.

When Chodick's group looked at statin use, they found that those not taking statins had a 51 percent higher risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis over about 80 percent of the follow-up period.

After looking for other possibilities, those who took statins regularly had a 41 percent lower risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis compared with people who were not taking statins regularly.

Among those taking statins, there was only a small, short-term reduction in risk of development of osteoarthritis.

"Although the study does not have immediate clinical implications, our findings may suggest that patients who were prescribed statins and take it persistently may benefit from the many effects of statins, which go far beyond cholesterol reduction, including the reduction of rheumatoid arthritis risk," Chodick said.

A previous study on the same group indicated that persistent use of statins was associated with substantially lower all-cause mortality, which could not be explained only by the prevention of cardiovascular disease, he said.

"We believe that a major part of the improved survival among statin users comes from the anti-inflammatory effects demonstrated by lower risk of rheumatoid arthritis. Unfortunately, our previous study indicated that, despite their benefits, many patients on statins discontinue their treatment," Chodick said.

This work received no outside or corporate finding, the researchers noted.

Dr. Robert Myerburg, a professor of medicine and physiology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, stressed that "this is a study looking for an association, and it doesn't prove that starting statins early in life will prevent or delay the onset of rheumatoid arthritis."

The only way to prove the connection is with a clinical trial, Myerburg said. "At this point, I would not use a statin for that [prevention of rheumatoid arthritis] indication," he said.

For more information on statins, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


The story includes both an independent source and the information that the researchers did not receive any outside funding for their work.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Health.com) -- People who consume lots of foods rich in vitamin B12 -- such as fish and fortified cereals -- may be at lower risk of developing Alzheimer's disease than people who take in less of the vitamin, a small study conducted in Finland suggests.

In the study, which was published in Neurology, researchers in Scandinavia analyzed blood samples from 271 individuals ages 65 to 79 who showed no evidence of dementia. The researchers tested for levels of a blood marker of vitamin B12 and for levels of homocysteine, an amino acid that has been linked to an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease (as well as heart disease and stroke).

B vitamins, including B12 and folate, have been shown to help lower homocysteine levels, so high levels of the amino acid suggest low levels of B12.

Health.com: 9 foods that may help save your memory

Over the next seven years, 17 study participants were diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease. The people with the highest levels of homocysteine at the beginning of the study had the greatest risk of developing the disease. In contrast, each unit increase in the marker of vitamin B12 (known as holotranscobalamin) reduced the risk of developing Alzheimer's by 2 percent.

The relationship between vitamin B12 and Alzheimer's risk is "complex," says Dr. Sudha Seshadri, M.D., an associate professor of neurology at the Boston University School of Medicine and the author of an editorial accompanying the study. But, she adds, "B12 levels, particularly holotranscobalamin levels, likely play a contributory role."

The links among Alzheimer's risk, homocysteine, and B12 were more pronounced in older individuals, the study found.

Blood levels of folate, which the researchers also measured, were not related to homocysteine levels or Alzheimer's risk in this study. Folic acid -- a synthetic version of folate found in many supplements and multivitamins -- has been shown to lower homocysteine in previous studies, but its effect on disease risk is disputed.

A National Institutes of Health panel recently concluded that there are no foods or vitamins that definitively prevent the development of Alzheimer's disease, and experts say this study is consistent with the panel's recommendations. "A healthy diet likely remains important," Seshadri says. "The role of supplementation remains unclear."

Health.com: Ginkgo doesn't work: are there better ways to save your brain?

Maria Carillo, Ph.D., the senior director of medical and scientific relations at the Alzheimer's Association, a nonprofit research and advocacy group, urges caution in interpreting the new findings, especially given that so few study participants developed the disease.

"We do know that vitamin B12 is a huge contributor to lowering homocysteine levels," she says. "Lowering these in general is important for cardiovascular health, and this study strengthens our knowledge about its role in risk for Alzheimer's disease."

Dr. Sam Gandy, M.D., the associate director of the Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, in New York City, says that it may make sense for people to get blood tests to measure their levels of B12 and folate.

Health.com: How to age-proof your memory

However, he says, the study findings may not necessarily translate to people outside Scandinavia. And he worries that the results may spur doctors to recommend B12 injections to their patients -- a preventive treatment that he says is unfounded and already overused.

It's still unclear whether increasing your intake of vitamin B12 will help protect you from Alzheimer's, Gandy says. "Good nutrition should minimize the risk of Alzheimer's disease, but we can't say that any specific food has been proven to reduce this risk."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Attaching curcumin, a component of the common spice turmeric, to nanoparticles can be used to target and destroy treatment-resistant neuroblastoma tumor cells, according to a new study published in Nanoscale.

The study, conducted in partnership by researchers at Nemours Children's Hospital and the University of Central Florida, demonstrates a potentially novel treatment for neuroblastoma, the most common cancer in infants.

"High-risk neuroblastoma can be resistant to traditional therapy, and survival can be poor. This research demonstrates a novel method of treating this tumor without the toxicity of aggressive therapy that can also have late effects on the patient's health," said Tamarah J. Westmoreland, MD, PhD, a pediatric surgeon at Nemours Children's Health System and senior author of the study. "Unique approaches to target tumor cells with nanoparticle delivery systems hold promise for treatment of resistant tumors, such as the high risk neuroblastoma. We are hopeful that in the future, nanoparticles can be utilized to personalize care to patients and reduce the late effects of therapy."

Neuroblastomas are cancers that start in early nerve cells and commonly form in the tissue of the adrenal glands, near the kidneys. About 700 new cases of neuroblastoma are diagnosed each year in the United States and most cases appear in children younger than 5 years old. High-risk neuroblastoma is hard to cure and is more likely to become resistant to standard therapies or recur. These cancers are also associated with late effects after treatments have ended, including developmental delays, hearing loss, or other disabilities.

Curcumin has been shown to have substantial anti-cancer ability, but its low solubility and poor stability have made its use in medicinal applications challenging. Researchers from Nemours and UCF found that nanoparticles can be used to deliver curcumin to tumor sites.

"This shows that nanoparticles can be an effective delivery vehicle for cancer drugs," said Professor Sudipta Seal, who directs of UCF's NanoScience Technology Center and Advanced Materials Processing Analysis Center, and is a collaborator on the study. "More research is needed, but we are hopeful it could lead to more effective treatment of this devastating disease in the future."

In the study, researchers loaded Cerium oxide nanoparticles with curcumin and coated them with dextran to test in cell lines of a high-risk form of neuroblastoma, known as MYCN-amplified, as well as non-amplified neuroblastoma. This formulation induced substantial cell death in neuroblastoma cells while producing no or only minor toxicity in healthy cells. Overall, the nano-therapeutic treatments showed a more pronounced effect in MYCN-amplified cells, which are traditionally more resistant to drug therapies.

Nanoscience research, which explores the unusual properties of materials at the nanoscale, has led to advancements in medicine, energy, information storage, computing and other fields. At no more than 100 nanometers, nanoparticles are exceedingly small. By comparison, a sheet of paper is about 75,000 nanometers thick.

This study was conducted in a laboratory setting in Orlando, Fla., at Nemours Children's Hospital and the University of Central Florida in cells from children with neuroblastoma, but researchers hope to begin to use these curcumin nanoparticles with micro RNA in animal models to direct the molecule to a tumor site. This research is an excellent example of the collaboration between Nemours Children's Hospital and the University of Central Florida. Funding of this work was supported by the Nemours Foundation along with the regional economic development initiative of the Florida High Tech Corridor.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release discloses the study’s funding sources, which include the Nemours Foundation and the regional economic development initiative of the Florida High Tech Corridor.
We were not able to find any potential conflicts of interests.
We rate this one Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 6, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Cancer patients who have ovarian tissue removed and stored for later transplantation have a chance at a successful pregnancy, a new study finds.

Powerful chemotherapy and radiation treatments for cancer can impair a woman's fertility. This new study shows that ovarian tissue transplants are safe and effective and pose little risk of the cancer coming back, the Danish researchers said.

"This procedure is gaining ground worldwide as an optional fertility treatment for fertile female cancer patients who after cancer treatment most likely will be infertile," said lead researcher Dr. Annette Jensen, from the Laboratory of Reproductive Biology at Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen.

With this procedure, many women who survive cancer should be able to become pregnant and have healthy children, Jensen said.

Of 32 women who had ovarian tissue frozen and transplanted in this study, 10 women -- or 31 percent -- had a child, she said.

Many young cancer patients today can expect to live a normal lifespan. Their focus shifts from survival to quality-of-life, explained senior researcher Dr. Claus Yding Andersen, a professor of human reproductive physiology at the University of Copenhagen. "Here, fertility is very important to many young women," he said.

"The tissue restores ovarian organ function, and women regain menstrual cycles and sex hormone levels that will avoid menopause," Andersen added.

Dr. Avner Hershlag, chief of the Center for Human Reproduction at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., called the new research "innovative and exciting."

Simultaneous advances in cancer treatment and reproductive medicine have made these scientific leaps possible, he said.

However, Hershlag said he would like to see a pregnancy rate above 31 percent. "The pregnancy rate with frozen embryos is close to 50 percent, and results are getting better," he said, referring to another option for women hoping for a future pregnancy. "It remains to be seen which method is better."

The Danish report was published Oct. 7 in the journal Human Reproduction.

For the study, the researchers reviewed the outcomes of 53 transplantations of thawed ovarian tissue in 41 Danish women. The investigators followed the women for 10 years, looking at ovarian function, fertility and safety.

The women's average age when the tissue was removed and frozen was nearly 30. Average age of the first transplant was 33.

Thirty-two of the women attempted pregnancy. Ten were successful and had at least one child -- 14 children in all.

Eight children were conceived naturally, and six with the help of in vitro fertilization, the researchers reported.

Two women had abortions, one because she was separating from her partner and the other because her breast cancer recurred. Another woman had a miscarriage, the researchers said.

For three of the mothers, more than 10 years had passed since the ovarian tissue transplantation. In six cases, it was more than eight years. And for 15 of the women, transplantation had taken place more than five years earlier, the researchers said.

Although three women had a relapse of their cancer, these relapses did not appear related to the tissue transplantation. And no cancer developed in the transplanted tissue, Jensen said.

"So some of these women will still be able to have more children and avoid menopausal symptoms," she said, noting two more pregnancies have been reported to her laboratory since the study's publication.

Not all women are eligible for ovarian tissue transplants, however. "In particular, we have not performed transplants in patients who have suffered from leukemia, because the ovarian tissue may harbor cancer cells," Jensen said.

For more on fertility and cancer treatments, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted two of the authors of the original study, Jensen and Andersen, as well as a third researcher, Hershlag, who appears to be independent of that group. The inclusion of multiple sources is a strong point in the coverage.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 13, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- For black Americans suffering from heart disease, meditation might help prevent heart attacks, strokes and early death, a small new study suggests.

These benefits appear to be the results of meditation's ability to lower blood pressure, stress and anger, all of which have been linked to increased cardiovascular risk, researchers say.

"This is a whole new physiological effect on top of conventional treatment," said lead researcher Dr. Robert Schneider, director of the Institute for Natural Medicine and Prevention in Fairfield, Iowa. "People can prevent heart disease reoccurrence using their own mind-body connection. People have this internal self-healing ability."

An outside expert, however, said the study is too limited in size and scope to allow conclusions as to whether meditation really reduces risk of death or disease.

The new study focused on Transcendental Meditation. Originally from India, it is not associated with any particular religion or philosophy. It is thought to produce alpha brain waves that occur in deep relaxation. According to the Maharishi Foundation, more than 5 million people worldwide practice this type of meditation.

The research focused on blacks because they are at a higher risk than whites of having heart attacks and strokes and dying from heart disease, Schneider said. He added, however, that meditation would work as well among whites and other populations.

"Other studies have been done among whites and the results are similar," he said.

The report was published in the Nov. 13 issue of the journal Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes. The study was sponsored by the Maharishi University of Management and funded by the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

For the study, Schneider's team randomly assigned 201 black Americans with heart disease either to a Transcendental Meditation stress-reducing program or health education class about lifestyle modification in diet and exercise.

Almost 60 percent of the participants were taking cholesterol-lowering drugs. Forty-one percent of the meditation group took aspirin, as did 31 percent of the health education group; 38 percent of the meditation group and 43 percent of the health education group smoked, the researchers noted.

Participants' average body-mass index -- a measurement of body fat based on height and weight -- was 32, which is considered obese.

Meditation consisted of sitting with eyes closed for about 20 minutes twice a day. The goal was to rest while remaining alert.

After more than five years of follow-up, the researchers found those who meditated saw significant reductions in blood pressure and anger compared to those receiving health education. In addition, 20 people in the medication group had a heart attack or stroke or died, compared with 32 in the health education group.

Both groups increased exercise and drank less. For those who meditated, there was a trend toward reduced smoking; however, this was not statistically significant.

Learning how to do Transcendental Meditation isn't inexpensive. An initial 10-hour course runs about $1,500 when taught by nonprofit groups, and there is continued lifetime follow-up, Schneider said.

And it's not something you can learn by yourself. "You've got to have a teacher right there in front of you teaching according to experience," he said. "So it's only learned live."

Transcendental Meditation is not generally covered by health insurance, he said. "One of the reasons we did the study is because insurance and Medicare calls for citing evidence for what's to be reimbursed," Schneider said. "This study will lead toward reimbursement. That's the whole idea."

But a cardiology expert said that although the study adds to evidence supporting meditation, it doesn't prove a cause-and-effect relationship between the practice and better health outcomes.

"Transcendental Meditation has been reported to have health benefits and has been evaluated in a number of studies," said Dr. Gregg Fonarow, professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles.

Some studies have suggested favorable effects on cardiovascular risk factors whereas others studies have been inconclusive, he said.

Even though the findings in this study were statistically significant, the new study was too small to be conclusive, Fonarow said.

"In addition, since this study was conducted at a single center and the primary [change in heart attack, stroke and death] was not statistically significant without adjustment for other factors, more studies and replication of these findings are needed," he said.

For more information on heart disease, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent cardiologist is extensively quoted, bringing an appropriate dose of skepticism to the coverage.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 25, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- After undergoing weight-loss surgery, women are significantly less prone to diabetes during pregnancy but twice as likely to deliver smaller-than-normal infants, a new study suggests.

Swedish scientists found that weight-loss (or "bariatric") surgery before pregnancy lowers the chances of certain complications for mothers and babies but raises the odds for others. They recommended any pregnancy after weight-loss surgery be considered high-risk and receive stricter monitoring.

"The number of women who are obese in early pregnancy has increased dramatically over the last decades," said study author Kari Johansson, a postdoctoral researcher and nutritionist at Karolinska Institute in Stockholm. "Consequently, there has been a dramatic rise in the number of women becoming pregnant after bariatric surgery," she added.

"The positive effects of bariatric surgery on health outcomes -- such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease -- are reasonably well-studied, but less is known about the effects on pregnancy and [post-delivery] outcomes," Johansson pointed out.

The study was published online Feb. 26 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

U.S. health officials say more than one-third of American adults are obese, with a body mass index (BMI, a height-weight calculation) of 30 or higher.

Nearly 179,000 obese people underwent weight-loss surgery in the United States in 2013, according to the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. While various techniques may be used, the surgery restricts the amount of food the stomach can hold and/or reduces the intestines' absorption of calories and nutrients from food.

Johansson and her colleagues used data from nationwide Swedish health registries to compare pregnancies between nearly 600 women who had given birth after bariatric surgery and more than 2,300 women who hadn't had the surgery but had the same BMI.

Only 2 percent of women who had weight-loss surgery developed gestational diabetes, compared to 7 percent of the other group, the researchers said. The surgical group was also much less likely to give birth to larger-than-normal babies.

However, the weight-loss surgery group was twice as likely to give birth to babies considered small for their gestational age, and their pregnancies were also of slightly shorter duration. Additionally, the surgical group experienced a slight bump in the rate of stillbirths, the study found.

The investigators didn't examine what might have caused smaller babies among bariatric surgery recipients, or higher stillbirths. But Johannson said those outcomes might be due to reduced nutrient absorption resulting from the surgery, with a fetus not receiving sufficient nutrition.

"It has been reported that gastric bypass [a form of bariatric surgery] increases the risk of protein, iron, vitamin B12, vitamin D and calcium deficiencies," she said. "Also, many women in our study may have been continuing to lose weight when they became pregnant. Continued weight loss may affect fetal nutrition and could influence growth."

Because obesity is linked to poor outcomes for expectant mothers and babies -- including birth defects, gestational diabetes, high blood pressure, premature birth and even childhood obesity -- efforts to lose weight before pregnancy are important, said Dr. Aaron Caughey, chair of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Oregon Health and Science University's School of Medicine.

But Caughey, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new research, said women considering weight-loss surgery should make the decision based on the long-term health benefits of the procedure -- not on potential pregnancy-related benefits.

"I don't think pregnancy should be the thing that tips the scale," said Caughey. "I don't think the evidence from this study is enough to say now that you should absolutely get this surgery so you have a better pregnancy outcome."

Caughey agreed with the researchers that any pregnancy occurring after weight-loss surgery merits a higher level of monitoring and should be considered high-risk.

He also noted that some experts advise women who undergo weight-loss surgery before pregnancy to delay conceiving until 12 to 24 months after the procedure, the period when the most rapid weight loss occurs.

"I think a conversation with someone who takes care of complicated pregnancies, a maternal-fetal medicine doctor, is a good idea," Caughey said.

The American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery offers more about weight-loss surgery.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article quotes the independent source who wrote the editorial that came with the research article. This is a strong point of the story’s coverage.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the four-month study, the group randomly assigned to receive intranasal insulin twice a day either improved slightly or remained the same in tests of memory and assessments of their ability to handle day-to-day activities. The lower dose seemed more effective than the higher one. Those who received placebos got worse.

A third also had scans to assess their brains’ use of glucose. One hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease is reduced metabolism in the brain, which shows up on scans as less use of glucose, the fuel for brain cells. In this assessment, those getting insulin used more glucose in their brains; those taking placebos used less.

For years, the study’s principal investigator, Suzanne Craft, has studied insulin’s effects in Alzheimer’s. She is professor of psychiatry at the University of Washington in Seattle and director of the memory disorders clinic at the Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System.

Brain cells need insulin, Dr. Craft said. And conditions in which the body makes too little insulin or is resistant to its effects — diabetes, prediabetes, even untreated high-blood pressure — are associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s.

In addition, she said, beta amyloid, a toxic protein that accumulates in the brain of Alzheimer’s patients, seems to tie up insulin in the brain.

So, Dr. Craft reasoned, perhaps if more insulin could be put into the brains of people with the degenerative brain disease, their memories and ability to function might improve. The problem was to find a way to get more insulin to the brain but not to the body.

The solution was a special device made by Kurve Technology that delivers a spray of insulin deep into the nose. From there the hormone travels along the path of nerves into the brain.

The investigators first tried a single dose of insulin delivered via nasal spray to the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease. Their memories improved temporarily. Then they tried giving insulin daily for three weeks. Again, the hormone seemed to help. That led to the current study, lasting four months.

But Dr. Martha Daviglus of Northwestern University, who led a panel last year that assessed published papers on preventing and treating Alzheimer’s, urged caution. In her field, cardiovascular medicine, she has seen many exciting findings in small studies that fall apart in larger or longer ones.

Now Dr. Craft wants to test insulin again in a much more extensive study. .

In the meantime, she cautions Alzheimer’s patients not to rush out and try to take insulin. It is too soon to say if the treatment is even safe, she said. And patients would need a special device to get it deep into the nose. Kurve’s device is not yet on the market.

“The individual person will not be able to get this device,” Dr. Craft said. But, she added, if her study goes forward, many will be able to participate in it.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes quotes from the lead researcher on the study as well as an expert who was not affiliated with the research. The comments from the independent expert help drive home the need for caution when interpreting these results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
April 29, 2016 - A modified surgical technique may provide a simpler approach to the surgical treatment for one type of chronic headache, according to an "Ideas and Innovations" paper in the May issue of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery®, the official medical journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS).

Using an incision originally designed for another purpose, surgeons can gain direct access to the nerves involved in some types of chronic temporal headache, according to the report by ASPS Member Surgeon Dr. Ziv M. Peled of Peled Plastic Surgery, San Francisco. He hopes his new technique will "lower the bar to adoption" of effective surgical treatment for patients with this debilitating headache condition.

In recent years, surgery has emerged as an effective treatment option for selected patients with chronic, severe headaches. Developed by plastic surgeons who noticed that some migraine patients had fewer headaches after cosmetic forehead-lift, these procedures address "trigger sites" linked to certain headache patterns.

Severe temporal headaches can result from muscle spasms or enlarged blood vessels putting pressure on specific nerves located on the side of the head--specifically, the zygomaticotemporal branch of the trigeminal nerve (ZTBTN) and sometimes the auriculotemporal nerve (ATN). During these operative procedures, surgeons seek to relieve pressure on these nerves or to disconnect the nerves in order to prevent them from triggering future headaches.

The technique is a new use of an approach that many surgeons are already familiar with: the Gillies incision, used for surgical repair of cheekbone fractures. Dr. Peled found that this short incision, placed in the temple behind the hairline, provides direct access to the ZTBTN and ATN. He describes his initial experience with the new approach in 19 patients.

All patients had chronic temporal headaches that did not improve with medications. They also had a positive result on preoperative testing--either injection of botulinum toxin (Botox) to temporarily block muscle activity, or local anesthetics to temporarily block the involved nerve. Before and after surgery, headache symptoms were assessed using a standard score, the Migraine Headache Index (MHI).

As in previous studies, surgery provided significant relief from chronic temporal headaches. Average MHI score decreased from about 132 points before surgery to 52 points afterward. Of the 19 patients, 16 had at least a 50 percent reduction in headache symptoms.

It's unclear why the three remaining patients didn't have good improvement, although Dr. Peled notes that two of the three had had temporal headaches for decades before surgery. None of the patients experienced complications, and there was little or no visible scarring.

The experience supports a growing body of research showing good outcomes with surgery for chronic temporal headaches. Most recently, a study in Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery reported similar results whether the nerve is decompressed or disconnected. However, previous studies have used technically more complex approaches to access the ZTBTN.

The simplified approach using the Gillies incision combines the advantages of other approaches to chronic temporal headache surgery while minimizing the disadvantages, Dr. Peled believes. He comments, "This is a straightforward technique and effective procedure that may make it easier for plastic surgeons to adopt and offer surgical options for patients with this debilitating condition."

Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® is published by Wolters Kluwer.

Click here to read "A Novel Surgical Approach to Chronic Temporal Headaches."

For more than 60 years, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® (http://journals. ) has been the one consistently excellent reference for every specialist who uses plastic surgery techniques or works in conjunction with a plastic surgeon. The official journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® brings subscribers up-to-the-minute reports on the latest techniques and follow-up for all areas of plastic and reconstructive surgery, including breast reconstruction, experimental studies, maxillofacial reconstruction, hand and microsurgery, burn repair, and cosmetic surgery, as well as news on medico-legal issues.

The American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS) is the world's largest organization of board-certified plastic surgeons. Representing more than 7,000 Member Surgeons, the Society is recognized as a leading authority and information source on aesthetic and reconstructive plastic surgery. ASPS comprises more than 94 percent of all board-certified plastic surgeons in the United States. Founded in 1931, the Society represents physicians certified by The American Board of Plastic Surgery or The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada. ASPS advances quality care to plastic surgery patients by encouraging high standards of training, ethics, physician practice and research in plastic surgery. You can learn more and visit the American Society of Plastic Surgeons at http://www. or http://www. and http://www. .

Wolters Kluwer is a global leader in professional information services. Professionals in the areas of legal, business, tax, accounting, finance, audit, risk, compliance and healthcare rely on Wolters Kluwer's market leading information-enabled tools and software solutions to manage their business efficiently, deliver results to their clients, and succeed in an ever more dynamic world.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2015 annual revenues of €4.2 billion. The group serves customers in over 180 countries, and employs over 19,000 people worldwide. The company is headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands. Wolters Kluwer shares are listed on Euronext Amsterdam (WKL) and are included in the AEX and Euronext 100 indices. Wolters Kluwer has a sponsored Level 1 American Depositary Receipt program. The ADRs are traded on the over-the-counter market in the U.S. (WTKWY).

For more information about our products and organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release does a good job of disclosing the fact that Dr. Ziv M. Peled of Peled Plastic Surgery is a Member Surgeon of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS). It isn’t clear, but it seems the 19 patients mentioned in the release were Dr. Peled’s private patients.
Although we would have liked this to be explicitly stated, we feel this earns a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The policy response to the opioid epidemic is frequently framed as a conflict: If you pull back the opioid painkillers that led to the epidemic, you are going to harm the pain patients who use these opioids to treat their pain. In effect, you’re trading one problem (addiction) for another (undertreatment of chronic pain).

A new study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, however, offers a cause for optimism: Reviewing the research so far, it found that it may be possible to reduce doses for patients in long-term opioid therapy and improve their pain outcomes. So doctors can potentially pull back the opioids that launched the current drug overdose crisis and still successfully treat pain patients.

Now, by this latest study’s own admission, the evidence is of generally poor quality. Most of the studies reviewed were of poor methodology or sample size, while only a few were of “fair” or “good” quality. The review also only looked at patients who volunteered to taper off opioids, meaning this research does not prove that involuntarily pulling patients off the drugs will lead to similar outcomes.

Suffice to say, then, a lot more research is necessary before this issue is settled.

But the new study does offer a glimmer of hope in a fairly grim opioid epidemic: Maybe it is possible to reduce the amount of dangerous opioids that patients are consuming and still alleviate people’s pain.

For the latest review of the evidence, researchers looked at 67 studies that collectively provided data on more than 12,000 pain patients who were weaned off at least some opioids. Though the researchers found a lot of studies to pool from, they generally graded these studies as “very low” in quality and methodology.

Researchers then identified the studies — none of which were graded as “good” quality — that evaluated pain-related outcomes for patients after long-term opioid therapy was tapered. Focusing on the “fair-quality” studies, they found that after opioid dose reductions, patients on average saw improved pain, function, and quality of life.

The authors provide a few possible explanations for this: Perhaps the non-opioid pain treatments, such as physical therapy and meditation, that accompanied dose reductions simply produced better results than the opioids did. Maybe the opioids themselves caused problems that negatively impacted function or quality of life, “such as constipation, fatigue, poor sleep, and depressed mood.” It’s possible that opioid dose reduction also resolved what’s known as opioid-induced hyperalgesia, “a paradoxical response in which patients receiving opioids become more sensitive to painful stimuli.”

Or, the researchers suggested, the observational studies simply showed reverse causation — “that is, patients successfully tapered opioids because pain severity decreased.”

The findings do not mean that doctors can now simply yank patients off opioids and expect them to get better. For one, the reviewed studies generally looked at the results of tapering, when patients are slowly weaned off opioid painkillers — a process that, Stanford psychiatrist Anna Lembke told me, can take months or even years.

Crucially, the studies also looked at what happened when these reductions in opioid doses were paired with alternative treatments, including alternative medicines like acupuncture, interdisciplinary pain programs, and medication-assisted treatment for addiction. This is very, very different from a situation in which a patient is taken off opioids and effectively left stranded without any other form of care.

As the researchers readily admit, the study also had several major limitations. Most of the studies analyzed were of poor quality — meaning there’s a serious need for better research in this area. And the studies only evaluated voluntary reductions in opioid doses; it’s entirely possible that involuntary reductions in opioid doses would lead to sharply different outcomes.

“We should be cautious in interpreting the findings,” Joseph Frank, lead author of the study, told me. He emphasized that more research needs to be done to fill “important gaps” in our knowledge. He added, “I want patients and their doctors to use caution in applying this.”

A few pain patients will still benefit from opioids

One of the study’s implications is that opioids actually aren’t a good treatment for chronic pain. This isn’t new. As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention concluded in its 2016 summary of the research, there are simply no good long-term studies looking at the effects of opioids on long-term pain outcomes, while there are many studies showing that long-term opioid use can lead to bad results in other areas, including addiction and overdose.

That does not mean opioids are never an effective treatment for chronic pain.

As addiction and pain experts often tell me, health care can vary vastly from patient to patient. Some patients feel worse on opioids, while others report quick pain relief. Some patients experience grueling withdrawal if taken off opioids, while for others the symptoms are much less severe. Some patients are at unusually high risk for addiction, while many — most, in fact — aren’t. And so on.

In a few cases, then, opioids will still be the best answer for some individual chronic pain patients. When prescribed carefully on a schedule that works to diminish the excessive buildup of tolerance, they can work for some people. But as Stanford pain specialist Sean Mackey emphasized to me, opioids should not be a first-line treatment due to the risks, and alternatives should be tried first.

This, then, is another key caveat to the study: Its findings shouldn’t be applied to every patient. Like much of health care, each case will typically require individual evaluations to see what works.

“There are people who do well with tapering [opioids],” Stefan Kertesz, an addiction researcher at the University of Alabama Birmingham who was not involved in the study, told me. “There are people who do not do well with tapering.”

But the study suggests that getting some patients off opioids could improve their pain outcomes. The key is convincing patients that this truly can work so they buy into the treatment and genuinely follow through with it — and making non-opioid treatments for pain accessible enough that patients see them as realistic options.

Alternative pain treatments need to be made more accessible

The reality, though, is non-opioid pain treatments are often out of reach for many Americans. Patients may not have insurance to cover the treatment. Even if they do have insurance, their health plan might not cover comprehensive pain care. And even if they do have insurance and their health plan covers pain treatments, there may not — particularly in rural areas — be a nearby pain clinic or doctor who can actually provide the care these patients are seeking.

This is something the study’s authors readily acknowledge.

“It’s an important part of this challenge,” Frank said. “These non-opioid strategies that were tested in these research studies are not adequately available. Several of the studies were done in pain centers where they have expert programs, and those just are not widespread.”

In fact, the lack of access to non-opioid strategies may be one big reason that doctors resorted to opioids in the first place. The drugs offered an easy answer — if ultimately an ineffective one — to the many problems doctors faced, including patients who had complicated pain problems that physicians didn’t fully understand and tight schedules driven by the current demands of the health care system that made it hard to take the time to work through a patient’s individual problems. (More on all that in my interview with Lembke.)

To address this, Frank argued that patients need better access to pain treatments. And doctors, especially primary care doctors who are frequently the first people patients see in the health care system, also need to be better trained to deal with chronic pain.

These solutions could help a lot of people: According to one study from the Institute of Medicine, 100 million US adults suffer from chronic pain. The opioid epidemic shows that if this care isn’t made available, patients may end up resorting to drugs that can literally get them killed — or, as has been reported in other tragic cases, they may kill themselves once the pain grows too bad. (The newest study, however, noted that there is no good research yet looking at these two potential outcomes if pain patients are taken off opioids.)

“Not only do we lack the data, but I have seen and heard of countless cases of overdose and suicide from people who have been involuntarily discontinued,” Kertesz said, emphasizing this is strictly based on anecdotal observations. “One day in June, in my inbox were 42 deaths.”

The findings show the balancing act of opioid policy: Even if doctors need to pull back opioids, they must be careful to ensure patients suffering from debilitating pain and other problems can still meet their other care needs.

It’s not just pain care. When dealing with opioid users who are addicted, doctors and policymakers also need to ensure that addiction treatment is available. Otherwise, these patients will likely try to find another source of drugs — even if it means resorting to a riskier opioid, such as heroin or fentanyl, to satisfy their cravings.

There’s good evidence this happened to many — but not all — opioid painkiller users: A 2014 study in JAMA Psychiatry found 75 percent of heroin users in treatment started with painkillers, and a 2015 analysis by the CDC found people who are addicted to painkillers are 40 times more likely to be addicted to heroin.

The fundamental problem is many of these patients don’t get addiction treatment once they lose access to painkillers or before they progress to heroin or fentanyl. Without the option of treatment, opioid users’ only answer to averting dependence-induced withdrawal becomes harder drugs. Yet based on a 2016 report by the surgeon general, only 10 percent of Americans with drug use disorders get specialty treatment.

That doesn’t mean that reducing prescriptions is a mistake. By stopping doctors from unscrupulously prescribing the drugs, governments can potentially stop opioids from flowing to new users who didn’t really need the drugs and could have developed addictions had they been allowed to get painkillers.

But the reduction has to be paired with increased access to addiction care — and it frequently hasn’t been.

Beyond addiction treatment, Kertesz argued that policymakers should also address some of the underlying conditions that drive addiction. He emphasized the need for broader mental health care, given that people often have mental health issues that can make addiction more likely.

“Who is at higher risk — John with PTSD and a dose of 10 milligrams a day, or James, who has no PTSD and is on 200 milligrams a day?” Kertesz said. Based on his reading of the data, “it’s John with PTSD on the 10 milligrams.”

But as is true for addiction and pain treatments, adequate mental health care is also out of reach for many patients — showing just another way that the US health care system isn’t built to adequately address the full needs of patients.

All of this shows why the policy solution to the opioid epidemic isn’t as easy as simply pulling back prescription opioids: To avoid exacerbating existing problems or causing new ones, policymakers need to consider the other needs of people who were perhaps getting opioids they didn’t really need.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A refreshing number of outside experts are quoted or cited in this story, and their remarks weren’t the typical “the study was intriguing” variety. Their quotes added some helpful context, such as how long it can take doctors to wean people off opioids (“months or even years”) and how everyone responds differently to tapering — and how some do poorly with it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Treating stroke patients who have lost control and awareness of one side of their body with magnetic stimulation to the brain may improve their symptoms, researchers said today.

In a new, small study published in the journal Neurology, patients who were given quick bursts of stimulation over a couple of weeks improved by about 20 percent on tests of vision and attention, while those who got a fake stimulation treatment didn’t improve significantly.

But researchers said it’s still unclear what types of patients might benefit from the treatment and by how much.

About half of people who have a stroke end up with difficulty processing or reacting to things on one side of their body, most often on the left side after a stroke in the right side of the brain, said Dr. Anna Barrett, director of stroke rehabilitation research at the Kessler Foundation in West Orange, New Jersey, who wasn’t involved in the new study. That post-stroke condition is known as neglect.

“People that have that tend to do much worse in their eventual recovery,” Barrett said. “They’re less likely to become completely independent.”

Most of those patients can improve with therapy and exercises, she said, but the process is often slow, and keeping people in the hospital during it is costly.

She said that because of that, the new findings are “promising,” but added that brain stimulation is still an experimental technique, and not ready to be used as part of normal stroke rehabilitation.

For the study, Italian researchers randomly assigned 20 patients with neglect to get real or fake magnetic stimulation in ten sessions over two weeks, in addition to their conventional rehab program. The treatment involved an electromagnetic coil placed over the left side of the brain that transmitted pulses of electrical currents.

Similar types of stimulation treatment are used in some patients with depression or during spinal surgery, according to Barrett. The device costs about $50,000.

Nine people in each group completed all the treatment sessions.

Before treatment, right after and another two weeks later, stroke patients were given tests to measure their visual-spatial skills, as well as attention and concentration. Those including drawing and shape-copying tests, as well as menu reading and map navigating tasks.

Patients in both groups started out with an average mark of about 170 on the tests, which are scored from 0 to 227 combined.

The “real” magnetic stimulation group improved by about 16 percent right after the treatment and 23 percent at the later time point, while there was no significant benefit seen in patients given the fake stimulation.

The researchers said that it’s not clear what the amount of improvement they observed would mean for patients in their daily lives.

But, lead author Dr. Giacomo Koch said, “What we found is that the improvement was more marked in those patients that were more impaired.”

Koch, from the Santa Lucia Foundation in Rome, told Reuters Health he thinks those patients with more severe problems would likely see a benefit outside of just test results.

He said that larger studies at multiple treatment sites are needed to determine how helpful magnetic stimulation can be in stroke recovery. But he was optimistic about the treatment’s future.

“I think in a few years this could become another tool that could be used systematically in the neurorehabilitation wards,” Koch said. He added that the treatment isn’t painful, and only takes a few minutes for each session.

Close to 800,000 people in the U.S. suffer a stroke each year, mostly older adults. For those with neglect, doctors typically prescribe cognitive rehabilitation, in which therapists teach skills and help the patient become more aware of the affected side of the body.

Barrett, also from the University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, said that she wonders whether stimulation could help patients achieve the goals that are most important to regaining independence after a stroke, such as using the bathroom.

It’s also not clear if the treatment might help most neglect patients, or if the findings only apply to certain groups, she told Reuters Health.

The ideal option might end up being a combination treatment that involves stimulation in certain patients and other therapies that address a range of skills important for regaining function, Barrett added. But, she said, “That all remains to be investigated.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes an author of the new study as well as a neurologist who wasn’t involved with the research.  In fact, that independent expert was quoted before the study author was.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings suggest that the antidepressant Lexapro might make hot flashes a little less of a nuisance to women — adding to the mixed bag of results regarding that drug’s effect on menopause symptoms.

The study, of 205 women, found that those randomly assigned to take Lexapro (escitalopram) for eight weeks reported less daily “interference” from their hot flashes.

Compared with women given inactive placebo pills, they said hot flashes were taking less of a toll on their work, daily activities, sleep and general mood. Women on the placebo also improved over time, however.

The findings come from the same clinical trial that, last year, showed Lexapro halved the number of hot flashes women had each day. (See Reuters story of January 18, 2011.)

A separate study a few months later showed no such benefit, however. In two trials of 36 women, researchers found that Lexapro did not cut the number or severity of hot flashes over eight weeks. (See Reuters Health story of May 26, 2011.)

And the lead researcher on that study said these latest findings are “nothing to write home about.”

“The differences between the treatment and placebo groups are very small,” said Robert Freedman, a professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit.

In general, studies of hot-flash remedies over the years have “virtually always found a large placebo effect,” Freedman noted in an interview.

That could mean that study participants’ hot flashes are just getting better over time, which they sometimes do.

“But my feeling is that it’s the placebo effect,” Freedman said, referring to the phenomenon of study participants on placebos improving because they believe they are getting a real treatment.

Hot flashes, which mostly affect women transitioning to menopause and already in that phase of life, involve a sudden sensation of heat, sometimes accompanied by sweating or visible reddening of the skin.

Their exact cause is unknown, but hormonal regulation of body temperature is thought to be involved.

Bouts of hot flashes can happen many times a day and past research has found they can continue for anywhere from a few months to up to 10 years.

So far, Freedman noted, the only hot-flash treatment that has consistently worked in studies is hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

And right now, HRT is the only treatment approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for cooling hot flashes.

But women and doctors are wary of HRT these days — since a 2002 clinical trial linked the hormones to increased risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots.

So researchers have been looking for alternatives. And studies have suggested that a few antidepressants, used at low doses, can be helpful for some women — including paroxetine (Paxil), fluoxetine (Prozac) and venlafaxine (Effexor).

This latest study, reported in the journal Fertility & Sterility, focused on hot flash “interference” — the degree to which women feel hot flashes disrupt their lives.

That’s important because it gets at quality of life, according to the researchers, led by Janet S. Carpenter of Indiana University in Indianapolis.

The trial included 205 women who were having at least 28 bouts of hot flashes or “night sweats” a week. Carpenter’s team randomly assigned half to use Lexapro for eight weeks, while the other half were given placebo pills.

The women kept diaries to record their hot flash symptoms. And every four weeks, they filled out a questionnaire on hot-flash interference.

After four weeks, the study found, women on the antidepressant saw their score on the interference scale fall by half, on average. It remained there at week eight.

But women in the placebo group also improved, albeit more slowly and to a somewhat lesser degree.

In a separate analysis of the same study group, Carpenter’s team found that women on Lexapro also reported bigger improvements in sleep problems: half saw their insomnia symptoms drop by at least 50 percent, versus 35 percent of placebo users.

Those findings appear in a separate report in the journal Menopause.

Freedman said that the overall research on antidepressants and hot flashes is still inconsistent. “Overall, the picture is not optimistic.”

In his own study last year, Freedman used a different approach to measuring hot flashes: instead of asking women to record their symptoms in a diary, the researchers had them wear a “detector” to monitor objective measures of hot flashes.

It is possible for women’s hot flashes to remain unchanged objectively, but have their subjective experience of them change. “But that raises the question of why,” Freedman said.

And for now, he noted, it’s also not clear why antidepressants would have effects on hot flashes.

Lexapro, which costs about $125 a month, belongs to the group of antidepressants called selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). They increase levels of the brain chemical serotonin, which may have a role in regulating body heat.

But no one knows if altering serotonin levels actually does affect women’s hot flashes. In fact, Freedman said, there’s some evidence that lowering serotonin levels does not worsen hot flashes — which would be expected if the “serotonin theory” is correct.

Antidepressants can also have side effects, like nausea, drowsiness, headache, constipation and dry mouth.

Right now, no antidepressant is specifically approved to treat hot flashes. But in the U.S., doctors are allowed to prescribe drugs “off-label” for conditions other than their approved uses.

Besides antidepressants, doctors sometimes prescribe certain blood pressure medications or the anti-seizure drug gabapentin, which some studies suggest may be helpful.

Hot flashes often need no drug treatment at all, though.

If they are not severe, experts say simple steps can be enough — like avoiding hot and spicy foods, turning down the thermostat, or trying relaxation techniques, such as yoga or meditation.

There are several herbal or “natural” products marketed for easing menopause symptoms, including black cohosh, soy, red clover and dong quai. But there is little evidence that they work, according to the North American Menopause Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article does appear to use independent sources including interviewing Dr Robert Freedman, a psychiatrist who was skeptical of the true benefits of using antidepressants to treat hot flashes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Once, "relaxation beverages" consisted of alcohol, chamomile tea and warm milk. Now, the field includes a slew of new drinks promising a better night's sleep using such ingredients as melatonin, valerian root and - think turkey - tryptophan.

They have apt names such as Unwind, iChill and Dream Water, and offer such flavors as Berry-Berry Tired, Snoozeberry and Lullaby Lemon. They're the inverse of energy drinks. Consumers can wake up with Red Bull and then wind down with Slow Cow.

But can consumers trust these fruity concoctions to give them their z's?

According to Steven M. Scharf, director of the Sleep Disorders Center at the University of Maryland in Baltimore, the answer is a resounding maybe.

"The issue is this: Some of them probably have some biologic effect, but they haven't been as well studied as you'd like," Scharf says. "Nobody's ever compared valerian root to [the prescription sleep aid] Ambien."

The chief ingredient in many of these beverages is melatonin, a hormone that induces sleepiness and helps coordinate the body's biological clock. It's typically released by the pineal gland around 10 p.m.; secretion stops around 4 or 5 a.m., helping to trigger the body to wake up, Scharf says.

The body produces about three-fourths of a milligram of melatonin a day. The manufacturer of the sleep aid Snooz'n says its 2.5-ounce "shots" contain five milligrams of melatonin; Unwind, a "relaxation blend," has three milligrams per 12-ounce can.

Oral doses of melatonin haven't worked much better at inducing sleep than a placebo in most studies, Scharf says, and a single, concentrated shot of the stuff doesn't exactly mimic the body's time-release system. However, a study published in January in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society found that a pre-bedtime cocktail of magnesium, zinc and a five-milligram dose of melatonin significantly improved sleep among a group of 43 elderly Italian insomniacs.

Jason Healy, the head of InterMark Brands, which markets Snooz'n, says he drinks his product on nights when he is stressed-out or when he is traveling internationally. The back of the Snooz'n bottle says the beverage will "combat stress, energy drinks and sleeplessness" and takes about 30 minutes to take effect. When it launches nationally in March, Snooz'n will be available in grocery and convenience stores and pharmacies, like most of these drinks.

"We attack [insomnia] from two angles," Healy says. "You've got to turn off all the stimulants and also get into a natural sleep cycle."

Melatonin is used for the latter, while ingredients such as valerian root and chamomile take care of the former, Healy says. Both of those herbs are associated with soporific effects, according to the Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Valerian root has properties that resemble the benzodiazepine class of medications (such as Valium and Xanax), but Scharf says he has no idea how they compare with standard sleeping pills because of the lack of comparative studies.

Containers of relaxation drinks look similar to those of energy drinks. Many mimic the diminutive shape of the 5-Hour Energy shot or the bright graphics and tall, narrow can of Rockstar or Monster. Flavors range from a pleasant, fruit-flavored soda to just shy of cough syrup.

Many relaxation beverages contain safety labels that warn consumers that they should neither drive or operate machinery after drinking them, nor mix them with alcohol. Some say they aren't intended for people younger than 18 or for pregnant or nursing women - a warning that the Food and Drug Administration has also made about melatonin.

In January 2010, the FDA sent a warning letter to the Innovative Beverage Group, which makes the relaxation beverage Drank, saying the melatonin it uses is an "unapproved food additive" and not "generally recognized as safe."

Drank is still being sold with melatonin in it. In a statement, Drank inventor Peter Bianchi says "the safety of Drank's consumers remains a top priority" and the company is working to modify the product's packaging and marketing "to reflect its classification as a dietary supplement."

The FDA regulates conventional beverages' ingredients and labeling claims more strictly than those of dietary supplements. Drank is still classified as a beverage.

The relaxation drink market is tiny compared with the energy drink market, says Garima Goel Lal, a senior analyst at the consumer research firm Mintel.

A Mintel survey found that 48 percent of all "functional beverage" users said they were looking for beverages to release stress.

A functional beverage - the term is used for sport, energy and relaxation drinks - is a nonalcoholic drink that claims to have health benefits. The number of nonalcoholic beverages making relaxation claims continues to rise; 40 new ones came on the market in 2010, according to Mintel. The field is too young to identify the leaders and the losers, Goel Lal says.

"They're trying to find a niche," she says.

Katherine Zeratsky, a registered dietitian at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., has blogged about relaxation drinks. She says that people with certain health conditions, such as high blood pressure, should consult their physician before downing a can of Unwind or any of the other sleep beverages.

"A person can just go to the convenience store and purchase this," Zeratsky says. "There's this perception that it's safe and, depending on the person, it might not be a good choice."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes a physician sleep expert, a dietitian, and an employee of one of the beverage companies. There don’t appear to be any conflicts of interest that weren’t properly disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The finding is another in a series suggesting that early detection of cancer might not always lead to better outcomes for patients. A study published in March, for instance, suggested that early detection of using the blood test did not help men live longer but did lead to unnecessary treatments.

This new study does not refer to initial diagnosis of ovarian cancer, only to a relapse. Doctors are convinced that if the initial diagnosis can be made early, which is very difficult, the cancer can be treated by surgery. But for relapsed ovarian cancer, surgery is usually not an option.

Dr. Beth Karlan, director of gynecologic oncology at Cedars Sinai Medical Center in , said the results of the new trial would “make us all rethink the approach to treating patients with recurrent ovarian cancer.”

Dr. Karlan, who was not involved in the study but presented a commentary on it, said CA125 testing should be done less frequently. But she stopped short of saying it should be eliminated, saying that in any event, patients would not accept that.

“Many women often say they live from one CA125 to the next,” she said.

The new study, done in and nine other countries, compared 265 women who began chemotherapy after their CA125 levels began to rise with 264 women who waited to begin chemotherapy until they had symptoms, like or pain.

The group getting the test began chemotherapy a median of about five months earlier. But the overall median survival for the groups was the same, about months from the start of their remission. Moreover, the extra chemotherapy seemed to worsen the quality of life.

Dr. Rustin said the explanation for the counterintuitive results was not that CA125 was a poor predictor of cancer’s return. Rather, he said, some cancers were sensitive to chemotherapy, so it did not matter if they were treated early. Other were resistant to chemotherapy and would not respond to treatment no matter when it was given.

Dr. Andrew Berchuck, director of gynecologic oncology at , said that while “it’s the American way, sort of, to be aggressive” and treat early, some doctors and patients even now did not start chemotherapy when CA125 rises.

“I’ve had patients who wouldn’t dream of not being treated,” Dr. Berchuck said. “But there are also people who wouldn’t want to go back on chemo unless they absolutely have to.”

Diane Paul, an ovarian cancer survivor and patient advocate in , said that when she was getting the CA125 test, she asked her doctors not to tell her the results, to reduce her anxiety. “I was in a constant state of , waiting for the test, waiting for the results,” she said.

But others would prefer to know. “This makes me feel in control of this disease,” said Carol Tawney of Shawnee, Kan., a seven-year survivor who has her CA125 tested every two months.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes several experts who are not involved in the story, providing valuable perspective on the results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 4, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Regularly consumption of food and drink rich in substances called flavonoids, such as berries, apples, tea and red wine, can lower a man's risk of developing Parkinson's disease by 40 percent, new research suggests.

For women, however, a reduction in risk was only seen when they ate at least several servings of berries a week, according to the study. Men also had a risk reduction from frequently eating berries.

"For total flavonoids, the beneficial result was only in men. But, berries are protective in both men and women," said the study's lead author, Dr. Xiang Gao, a research scientist at the Harvard School of Public Health and an associate epidemiologist at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

"Berries could be a neuroprotective agent. People can include berries in their regular diet. There are no harmful effects from berry consumption, and they lower the risk of hypertension too," Gao added.

Results of the study are published online April 4 in the journal Neurology.

Parkinson's disease is a degenerative condition that affects the central nervous system. It causes movement disorders, such as tremors, rigidity and balance problems. About 500,000 Americans have Parkinson's disease, according to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

Flavonoids are substances found in plant foods that help prevent damage to the body's cells, known as oxidative damage. Anthocyanins are a type of flavonoid plentiful in such berries as strawberries and blueberries.

For the study, the researchers reviewed nutrition and health data from almost 50,000 men enrolled in the Health Professional Follow-Up Study and more than 80,000 women participating in the Nurses' Health Study.

The researchers looked at dietary intake of five major flavonoid sources: tea, berries, apples, orange juice and red wine.

Over 20 to 22 years of follow-up, 805 people developed Parkinson's disease -- 438 men and 367 women.

When researchers compared those who ate the most flavonoids with those who ate the least, they found that only men saw a statistically significant benefit, lowering their risk of Parkinson's by 40 percent.

Gao said it wasn't clear why only men benefited from the extra flavonoid intake, but he noted that other studies have also found differences between men and women. Gao said it's not clear if there's a biological mechanism causing these differences, or another factor.

But, when the researchers looked at the dietary compounds individually, it was clear that berries could benefit both men and women, lowering the risk of Parkinson's disease by about 25 percent for those who had at least two servings of berries a week.

Gao said that anthocyanins protect the cells from oxidative damage and they also have an anti-inflammatory effect, which may be how berries help to reduce Parkinson's risk.

The study findings should be interpreted cautiously because the participants were mostly white professionals, and the results might not apply to other ethnic groups. Also, recollections of dietary intake may be faulty, and it's possible that other properties of fruits and vegetables might have influenced the results, the authors said.

Dr. Michael Okun, medical director of the National Parkinson Foundation, said, "It is exciting to see research emerging about modifiable dietary issues that may affect the risk of getting diseases such as Parkinson's."

But, he added, it's important for people to realize that this research isn't applicable to people who already have the disease.

He also said it will be important to confirm these findings in other studies and learn the mechanism of how berries and other flavonoids appear to offer some protection against Parkinson's disease.

Learn more about Parkinson's disease from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted an independent expert, who cautioned that people who already have Parkinson’s disease won’t benefit from eating berries or other flavonoid-rich foods.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors love the detailed pictures created by CT scans. Patients often expect a scan. But now researchers are warning that the radiation patients get each time computerized tomography is used to detect injuries and disease will cause thousands of extra cancers in coming years.

A new study from the National Cancer Institute projects 29,000 excess cancers from the 72 million CT scans that Americans got in 2007 alone. Nearly 15,000 of those cancers could be fatal.

CT-related cancers will impose a similar burden each year — unless the number of scans and the radiation dose-per-scan can be reduced.

"Physicians [and their patients] cannot be complacent about the hazards of radiation or we risk creating a public health time bomb," says Dr. Rita Redberg, editor of Archives of Internal Medicine, which is publishing the paper in this week's issue.

Children, younger adults and women are especially susceptible. Two-thirds of the excess cancers will occur in women, the NCI researchers say.

A separate study in the journal documents needlessly high radiation exposures from CT scans at four San Francisco-area hospitals.

That study looked at actual radiation doses for 11 common types of CT scans in more than 1,100 patients. For the same body part, the doses varied enormously from one hospital to another and even within the same hospital. The researchers found a 13-fold range between the highest and lowest radiation dose.

That means many unsuspecting patients are getting considerably more radiation than they need for an adequate CT image.

"For the same body part, the same patient with abdominal pain being evaluated for possible cancer, there can be a profoundly different radiation dose," says Dr. Rebecca Smith-Bindman, a radiologist at the University of California at San Francisco who led that study.

Smith-Bindman says neither doctors nor patients appreciate the amount of radiation exposure that U.S. patients are accumulating from CT scans. The number of scans has increased at a rate of 10 percent a year recently, jumping from 3 million scans in 1980 to more than 70 million a year today.

"It's often said that the radiation dose of a chest X-ray is comparable to flying across the continent," Smith-Bindman says, referring to natural radiation exposures at high altitudes. "But a CT scan can be comparable to 500 transcontinental flights."

She adds that a single CT scan can deliver about the same radiation dose that survivors of the atomic blasts at Nagasaki and Hiroshima endured.

"I think we need to pause and think about whether the extra information [from CT scans] really helps us make a diagnosis," Smith-Bindman says. "In most cases it does, and we should be using CT scanning in those cases. But in other situations it doesn't ... and the potential for harm outweighs the benefits."

She says patients should start asking doctors if they really need a particular CT scan, and if so, whether it can be done with minimal radiation exposure. It's especially important for younger adults and parents to ask the questions.

Smith-Bindman says radiation exposures can be cut substantially by eliminating unnecessary CT scans — both initial scans and repeat or follow-up scans now often done routinely. Also some fancier CT studies, involving multiple "slices" through the body in a single examination, can be replaced by simpler CT tests, conventional X-rays or tests such as ultrasound or MRI that don't involve radiation.

Another way is to reduce the amount of radiation involved in each scan.

Dr. James Thrall, chairman of the American College of Radiology, agrees. He says at his institution, the Massachusetts General Hospital, doctors who order a CT scan or other imaging study must list the reason. A computer program feeds back an "appropriateness score." A low score indicates the test is unlikely to be necessary.

"Our experience over the last five years has been rather phenomenal," Thrall says. Instead of an annual growth rate of 12 percent in CT scans, it's now about 1 percent, lower than the hospital's annual growth in patient load. "That means we're doing fewer scans per person," he says.

To cut down on unnecessarily high radiation doses, Thrall says, the College of Radiology is also developing an "alarm" system that will alert hospitals when their CT scan exceeds an acceptable dose. That will require hospitals to feed dose data to a central computer run by the radiology group.

In the long run, experts say, newer-generation CT scanners will come equipped to prevent excessive radiation doses. But it will take a while for thousands of current machines to be replaced.

Thrall doesn't agree with the National Cancer Institute's projection of 29,000 excess cancer deaths a year from CT radiation.

"I think it's almost undoubtedly less than 29,000," he says. "But in one respect, it doesn't matter whether it's 29,000 or 1,000. There are opportunities for us in radiology to do all the good things we do using less radiation."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple experts, including the authors of the study, the author of the accompanying editorial and a Radiologist who was not involved with the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WALNUT CREEK, Calif., Jan. 15, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Child screams from the pain of earache; exhausted parent ventures to drugstore in wee hours to find…nothing. "Eardrops don't work," says Dr. Scott Morehouse, founder of ClearPop, "because the Eustachian tube, where the pain occurs, is connected to the mouth, not the outer ear."

The beleaguered parent now drags hollering kid to the doctor's office, only to find the pediatrician reluctant to prescribe antibiotics. Since 2013, the American Academy of Pediatrics endorses a wait-and-see approach, seeking to let more earaches heal on their own without antibiotics.

In light of this, Morehouse developed a lollipop with a patented shape optimized to pull congestion out of the middle ear and into the mouth. ClearPop for Rapid Earache Relief has been shelved by Raley's (CA, NV) select RiteAid locations, and is available at boutique drugstores and Amazon. Moms have flooded https://www.facebook.com/ClearPop with glowing testimonials for this simple drug-free solution that:

-can be given along with analgesics or antibiotics.

-is increasingly used by frequent flyers to deal with ear pain that afflicts children disproportionately during air travel.

CLINICAL TESTS

Children diagnosed with Acute Otitis Media, or ear infection, consumed the xylitol and Vitamin C-based product in pediatric offices. After 20 minutes, 88.5% reported their ear pain dramatically reduced or vanished. The earache episode was totally resolved for 80%. Full study report at http://clearpop.com 



EAR INFECTION AND ANTIBIOTICS

Ear infections are the Number One reason kids aged 5 and under receive oral antibiotics. Due to increasing concern about antibiotic overuse and its links to obesity, celiac disease, and Superbugs, the American Academy of Pediatrics now recommends against the use of antibiotics to treat routine ear infections in children over 2.

ABOUT CLEARPOP

ClearPop for Rapid Earache Relief represents a simple, safe, pediatrician recommended, clinically effective and fun way to treat earaches. ClearPop is made by Try This First, Inc. a physician-funded "small pharma" organization aimed at reducing the estimated 30 million antibiotics prescriptions written to children yearly for ear infection. Founder and Chairman: Dr. Scott Morehouse, scott@clearpop.com
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: No confusion here. The release is clearly a promotional vehicle for ClearPop which is noted in the dateline and throughout the copy. It also provides links back to the ClearPop website and states that the creator of Clearpop also started and leads the company.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, June 15, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Reiterating a recommendation last made in 2008, an influential U.S. panel of health experts is advocating that regular colon cancer screening begin at age 50 and continue until at least age 75.

However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force stopped short of saying any one screening method was better than another.

"There are multiple screening options for colorectal cancer that reduce the risk of dying from the disease. We encourage people to choose the best option for them, in consultation with their clinician," former Task Force member Dr. Douglas Owens said Wednesday in a USPSTF news release.

The panel's reticence to choose one option over another may be at odds with the preference of many doctors, who often advise colonoscopy as the "gold standard" test.

Dr. Arun Swaminath is one of them.

"There is only one test -- colonoscopy -- that can both diagnose a polyp/cancer and remove or sample it at the same time," said Swaminath, who directs the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"This is key, because a positive stool test plus stool DNA test (such as Cologuard), or a positive imaging test (such as CT colonoscopy) will still require a follow up colonoscopy to confirm and treat the problem," he explained.

For its part, the American Cancer Society recommends colonoscopy screening once every 10 years, beginning at age 50, or one of a number of other tests at more frequent intervals.

In drafting its updated colon cancer screening guidelines, the USPSTF reviewed data on several screening strategies. Besides colonoscopy, these included flexible sigmoidoscopy (an invasive procedure that penetrates less far than colonoscopy); CT colonography (a scan of the colon); traditional fecal occult blood tests (looking for blood in stool); and the recently approved Cologuard DNA-based stool test.

The panel said there were no comparison studies that suggested that any of the screening methods were any more effective than others. There are varying amounts of proof supporting the effectiveness of each, and each method has its advantages and limitations, the panelists said.

And what about colon cancer screening for the elderly?

In its statement, the panel said that "for some adults ages 76 to 85, the benefits of screening are smaller, and the potential for harm greater. However, some people in this age group may benefit, especially if they have never been screened before and are healthy enough to undergo treatment if cancer is found."

For this older group, the USPSTF recommends that decisions on screening be made during consultations between the patient and his or her doctor.

All of the recommendations are specific to symptom-free people 50 years of age or older with an average risk colorectal cancer, the panel stressed. People with disorders or medical histories that raise their odds for colon cancer may need more rigorous screening, the USPSTF said.

The updated recommendation was published online June 16 in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

"Evidence convincingly shows screening for colorectal cancer works, but not enough people are taking advantage of this highly effective service," said Owens, a general internist at the Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System and a professor at Stanford University.

The USPSTF notes that only one-third of eligible adults in the United States are screened for colon cancer, and more need to take advantage of this effective method of prevention.

Colorectal cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer death in the United States. This year about 134,000 people in the country will be diagnosed with the disease, and about 49,000 will die from it., the panel said

The USPSTF is an independent, volunteer panel of experts that makes recommendations about the effectiveness of specific preventive health services.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on colon cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes comments from a physician who is not on the USPSTF and who expresses a different viewpoint. We won’t mark down the story for not discussing conflicts of interest because the USPSTF is a voluntary, publicly-funded body and none of the members reported any conflicts in their disclosure forms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the first controlled clinical trial of nicotinamide riboside (NR), a newly discovered form of Vitamin B3, researchers have shown that the compound is safe for humans and increases levels of a cell metabolite that is critical for cellular energy production and protection against stress and DNA damage.

Studies in mice have shown that boosting the levels of this cell metabolite--known as NAD+--can produce multiple health benefits, including resistance to weight gain, improved control of blood sugar and cholesterol, reduced nerve damage, and longer lifespan. Levels of NAD+ diminish with age, and it has been suggested that loss of this metabolite may play a role in age-related health decline.

These findings in animal studies have spurred people to take commercially available NR supplements designed to boost NAD+. However, these over-the-counter supplements have not undergone clinical trials to see if they work in people.

The new research, reported Oct. 10 in the journal Nature Communications, was led by Charles Brenner, PhD, professor and Roy J. Carver Chair of Biochemistry at the University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine in collaboration with colleagues at Queens University Belfast and ChromaDex Corp. (NASDAQ: CDXC), which supplied the NR used in the trial. Brenner is a consultant for ChromaDex. He also is co-founder and Chief Scientific Adviser of ProHealthspan, which sells NR supplements under the trade name Tru NIAGEN®.

The human trial involved six men and six women, all healthy. Each participant received single oral doses of 100 mg, 300 mg, or 1,000 mg of NR in a different sequence with a seven-day gap between doses. After each dose, blood and urine samples were collected and analyzed by Brenner's lab to measure various NAD+ metabolites in a process called metabolomics. The trial showed that the NR vitamin increased NAD+ metabolism by amounts directly related to the dose, and there were no serious side effects with any of the doses.

"This trial shows that oral NR safely boosts human NAD+ metabolism," Brenner says. "We are excited because everything we are learning from animal systems indicates that the effectiveness of NR depends on preserving and/or boosting NAD+ and related compounds in the face of metabolic stresses. Because the levels of supplementation in mice that produce beneficial effects are achievable in people, it appears than health benefits of NR will be translatable to humans safely."

The next step will be to study the effect of longer duration NR supplementation on NAD+ metabolism in healthy adults, but Brenner also has plans to test the effects of NR in people with diseases and health conditions, including elevated cholesterol, obesity and diabetes, and people at risk for chemotherapeutic peripheral neuropathy.

Prior to the formal clinical trial, Brenner conducted a pilot human study - on himself. In 2004, he had discovered that NR is a natural product found in milk and that there is pathway to convert NR to NAD+ in people. More than a decade of research on NR metabolic pathways and health effects in mice and rats had convinced him that NR supplementation had real promise to improve human health and wellness. After consulting with UI's institutional review board, he conducted an experiment in which he took 1 gram of NR once a day for seven days, and his team analyzed blood and urine samples using mass spectrometry. The experiment showed that Brenner's blood NAD+ increased by about 2.7 times. In addition, though he reported immediate sensitivity to flushing with the related compound niacin, he did not experience any side effects taking NR.

The biggest surprise from his metabolomic analysis was an increase in a metabolite called NAAD, which was multiplied by 45 times, from trace levels to amounts in the micromolar range that were easily detectable.

"While this was unexpected, I thought it might be useful," Brenner says. "NAD+ is an abundant metabolite and it is sometimes hard to see the needle move on levels of abundant metabolites. But when you can look at a low-abundance metabolite that goes from undetectable to easily detectable, there is a great signal to noise ratio, meaning that NAAD levels could be a useful biomarker for tracking increases in NAD+ in human trials."

Brenner notes this was a case of bidirectional translational science; having learned something from the initial human experiment, his team was able to return to laboratory mice to explore the unexpected NAAD finding in more detail.

Brenner's mouse study showed that NAAD is formed from NR and confirmed that NAAD levels are a strong biomarker for increased NAD+ metabolism. The experiments also revealed more detail about NAD+ metabolic pathways.

In particular, the researchers compared the ability of all three NAD+ precursor vitamins - NR, niacin, and nicotinamide - to boost NAD+ metabolism and stimulate the activity of certain enzymes, which have been linked to longevity and health benefits. The study showed for the first time that oral NR is superior to nicotinamide, which is better than niacin in terms of the total amount of NAD+ produced at an equivalent dose. NR was also the best of the three in stimulating the activity of sirtuin enzymes. However, in this case, NR was the best at stimulating sirtuin-like activities, followed by niacin, followed by nicotinamide.

The information from the mouse study subsequently helped Brenner's team design the formal clinical trial. In addition to showing that NR boosts NAD+ in humans without adverse effects, the trial confirmed that NAAD is a highly sensitive biomarker of NR supplementation in people.

"Now that we have demonstrated safety in this small clinical trial, we are in a position to find out if the health benefits that we have seen in animals can be reproduced in people," says Brenner, who also is co-director of the Obesity Research and Education Initiative, professor of internal medicine, and a member of the Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center at the UI.

In addition to Brenner, the research team included lead study author Samuel Trammell, Mark Schmidt, Benjamin Weidemann, Zhonggang Li, and E. Dale Abel at the UI Carver College of Medicine; Philip Redpath and Marie Migaud at Queens University Belfast; Frank Jaksch at ChromaDex in Irvine, Calif, and Ryan Dellinger, formerly at ChromaDex.

The research was funded in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health, the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, the Roy J. Carver Trust, and ChromaDex.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release lists the funders and states that the manufacturer, ChromaDex, supplied NR for use in the trial and that lead researcher, Charles Brenner, is a consultant for ChromaDex and co-counder and chief scientific advisor of ProHealthspan, which sells NR supplements under the trade name Tru NIAGEN.
The release does not state that Brenner has other conflicts including owning stock in ChromaDex, or that four of the other nine researchers have financial conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers are hoping that by using a common tool for measuring of brain activity in a new way, they may be one step closer to identifying whether a child is a greater risk for autism.

"We haven't diagnosed autism at this point," says William Bosl, Ph.D., lead author and a research scientist at Children's Hospital Boston. But he says by using an electroencephalogram and new, sophisticated computer programs to analyze the EEGs, he and his co-authors were able to correctly identify with 80% accuracy, which babies were at higher risk for autism and which were not.

Scientists have known for quite some time now that the earlier a child with autism gets therapy, the easier it is to improve language and behavioral skills. In 2007, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended that all children be screened for autism at the ages of 18 months and 24 months. Here researchers are trying to find markers for autism before a child begins showing signs of autism.

In a new study published Tuesday in the journal BMC Medicine, scientists studied 79 infants. 46 babies had a brother or sister with known autism, which means they themselves are at an increased risk for the neurodevelopmental disorder that affects about one in 110 children according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The sibling of a child with a confirmed diagnosis of autism has a 1 in 5 chance of also developing the disorder. These infant siblings were compared with 33 infants with no known family history of autism.

The babies were given EEG's at 6, 9, 12, 18 and 24 months of age. Researchers strapped a net of 64 electrodes all over a baby's head while it was sitting in its mom's lap and a research assistant was blowing bubbles to hold the child's attention. The electrodes measured actual firings of neurons. The EEG technique is much easier to use because the baby can be awake and moving and wiggling around, says Dr. Geraldine Dawson, chief science officer for the advocacy group Autism Speaks, which partially funded this research. Other brain imaging technologies like magnetic resonance imaging would require a baby to be asleep or sedated because they have to be completely still while the test is being done. "Nobody wants to sedate a healthy infant," says Dawson.

Bosl explains that the new computer algorithms that he developed were able to analyze results of the EEG much better than in the past. He said that, judging by the differences in brain activity, he and his colleagues could detect which babies were in the high-risk group. They say they were nearly 100% accurate when the boys were 9 months old. They were most accurate with baby girls at age 6 months. Overall, the biggest differences in brain activity were seen at 9 months – which is much earlier than when a child typically shows behavioral problems associated with autism. The differences in brain activity were smaller as the babies got older.

Doctors and scientists not connected to the study are intrigued by the results but caution that this is very early research and not something concerned parents can be looking for as a screening tool for their babies any time soon.

Sarah Paterson, Ph.D., is the director of the neuroimaging lab at the Center for Autism Research at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. She is also looking for early signs of autism as part of the Infant Brain Imaging Study, but her work focuses on differences in brain structure. Paterson says that if the results out of Boston can be confirmed, "It's very exciting because finding an early sign for autism is really the holy grail." But she cautions that a lot more work needs to be done. "This study needs to be replicated by their lab and independent scientists," she says.

Dr. Max Wiznitzer says the researchers have found a "really fascinating technique, that offers a different way to look at the brain." Wiznitzer – a pediatric neurologist at Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital in Cleveland, Ohio – notes that what the study can't tell us is what the differences in brain activity between the two groups of babies actually mean. He, too, is hopeful that further research will provide more concrete information.

Bosl says the first children enrolled in his study are now at 2 and 3 years old, which is the age when autism usually is diagnosed. This will now allow the researchers to evaluate them for autism and then look back at the brain activity patterns of the children who do fit the clinical criteria for autism.

Bosl acknowledges that if this is very early research, but he believes if the results are confirmed, it may lead to a safe and inexpensive way to detect autism, which would allow intervention before any autistic behaviors appear.

 "It'll change the field, if this works," says Bosl. He hopes to expand the number of babies in his study to 200. "The only thing slowing us down right now is funding."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story made good use of outside experts, although we were dismayed to see the cliched “holy grail” reference, so beloved by researchers and journalists.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A first-of-its-kind osteoporosis drug lowers the risk of bone fractures better than some existing treatments, two studies suggest, and could soon add a more expensive but easier to manage treatment option to the booming market.

Amgen Inc. will stress that only two shots of its genetically engineered denosumab, which could be approved for sale this fall, are needed each year. That's important because many patients stop taking other drugs due to side effects or frequent dosing.

Wall Street sees denosumab as a potential blockbuster crucial to Amgen. But with many cheaper, heavily advertised treatments, doctors view its expected high cost as a drawback. Genetically engineered drugs, made by altering a cell's DNA or other genetic material, all cost more than $10,000 a year.

"It'll find a particular niche where it'll be used, but I don't see it as taking over the market," said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a professor and osteoporosis researcher at the Mayo Clinic.

Still, he called the drug a "tour de force of modern molecular medicine" because it is potent and was designed by making antibodies cloned over and over from cells in the lab to block one pathway involved in the how the body naturally breaks down bone cells.

Denosumab would be the first osteoporosis treatment that is such a monoclonal antibody — a type of immune cell cloned from the same parent cell to bind to a specific substance. In this case, it targets a molecule in bones that drives formation of cells called osteoclasts that break down bone, a strategy that greatly reduces bone loss.

The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday released its review of denosumab, with staff citing concerns about increased rates of skin infections and some tumors. That report comes just ahead of a meeting Thursday when outside advisers will weigh the drug's safety and effectiveness and recommend whether to approve it.

Amgen shares rose $1.57, or 2.6 percent, to close at $62.81.

Denosumab, an injection just under the skin, would have to compete against eight major types of pills and injected medicines, including estrogen and generic and brand-name Fosamax pills, long the market leader.

Most of those must be given more often, with pills swallowed once a day, week or month, a nasal spray inhaled daily, and one injection under the skin given daily. But another injection given intravenously is only needed once a year, and estrogen, while out of fashion due to its link to breast cancer, is available in skin patches changed once or twice a week.

Those drugs' annual retail cost can range from $385 for generic Fosamax, to roughly $1,250 for most brand-name pills, to $11,100 for injected Forteo, which must be injected daily.

Global sales of osteoporosis treatments, including hundreds of vitamin brands, hit nearly $8.4 billion last year, according to data from IMS Health. About 10 million Americans have osteoporosis.

Analyst Steve Brozak of WBB Securities said denosumab will pass the $1 billion annual sales threshold for blockbusters, but it's unclear by how much.

"You're going to have blowback by insurers" over how much they will pay, he said, but Amgen might try to charge more than $10,000 per year.

Dr. Lenore Buckley, a professor at Virginia Commonwealth University, said all these drugs carry some risks. The studies found denosumab caused eczema in some patients, and a dozen of the women got a serious skin infection, cellulitis, that sometimes required hospitalization for intravenous antibiotics.

"Because this drug affects the immune system, the long-term effects on cancer risk or immune function is still unknown," she warned, saying she expects FDA will require Amgen to track risks over time if the drug is approved.

The effectiveness of denosumab and existing drugs appears to plateau after two or three years, she added.

The two studies were released Tuesday by the New England Journal of Medicine.

Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., paid for both. Nearly all the researchers receive consulting, advisory and other fees from the company and competitors, or are Amgen employees. The biotech company designed the studies, handled data collection and analysis, and helped write the journal reports.

One study included 7,868 women, aged 60 to 90, with moderate to severe osteoporosis. Half got denosumab injections every six months for three years. They had 68 percent fewer spine fractures and 40 percent fewer hip fractures than the study participants who got dummy shots.

The second study included 1,468 men with prostate cancer at increased fracture risk due to cancer hormone therapy, although 556 dropped out for reasons from side effects and cancer progression to the study being extended from two to three years. Denosumab cut the risk of spine fractures 62 percent over three years compared to dummy shots. Spine bone density loss was far smaller for those given the drug.

Until recently, studies of osteoporosis drugs just measured changes in bone density, assumed to equate with lower fracture risk. Newer studies also measure fracture rates, but there are no head-to-head studies on that.

However, based on some prior studies, independent experts say denosumab appears more effective at preventing spine fractures than three older pills — Fosamax, Actonel and Boniva — and calcitonin nasal sprays, which all use various pathways to slow down cells called osteoclasts that break down bone. Experts think denosumab prevents spine fractures about as well as Reclast, an intravenously injected drug that slows bone breakdown, and daily just below the skin injections of Forteo, the only drug that stimulates bone-building cells called osteoblasts. And denosumab appears to prevent fractures of the hip, forearm and ankle about the same as all those drugs.

Dr. Jacob Warman, an osteoporosis expert at Brooklyn Hospital Center, said denosumab might have potential as an add-on to existing drugs to boost results. He expects that would be covered by insurers, who pay for multiple medicines for other conditions.

Amgen spokeswoman Kerry Beth Daly said the company has not yet set a price for the drug, but will try to keep it affordable. She said pricing also will reflect denosumab's twice-a-year dosing.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent sources were interviewed for this story.  The writer also points out that both trials were paid for by Amgen, the manufacturer of denosumab, and nearly all the researchers were employed by the company or received consulting or advisory fees from them.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Nuplazid (pimavanserin) tablets, the first drug approved to treat hallucinations and delusions associated with psychosis experienced by some people with Parkinson’s disease.

Hallucinations or delusions can occur in as many as 50 percent of patients with Parkinson’s disease at some time during the course of their illness. People who experience them see or hear things that are not there (hallucinations) and/or have false beliefs (delusions). The hallucinations and delusions experienced with Parkinson’s disease are serious symptoms, and can lead to thinking and emotions that are so impaired that the people experiencing them may not relate to loved ones well or take appropriate care of themselves.

“Hallucinations and delusions can be profoundly disturbing and disabling,” said Mitchell Mathis, M.D., director of the Division of Psychiatry Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “Nuplazid represents an important treatment for people with Parkinson’s disease who experience these symptoms.”

An estimated 50,000 Americans are diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease each year, according to the National Institutes of Health, and about one million Americans have the condition. The neurological disorder typically occurs in people over age 60, when cells in the brain that produce a chemical called dopamine become impaired or die. Dopamine helps transmit signals between the areas of the brain that produce smooth, purposeful movement -- like eating, writing and shaving. Early symptoms of the disease are subtle and occur gradually. In some people Parkinson’s disease progresses more quickly than in others. As the disease progresses, the shaking, or tremor, which affects the majority of people with Parkinson’s disease, may begin to interfere with daily activities. Other symptoms may include depression and other emotional changes; hallucinations and delusions; difficulty in swallowing, chewing, and speaking; urinary problems or constipation; skin problems; and sleep disruptions.

The effectiveness of Nuplazid was shown in a six-week clinical trial of 199 participants. Nuplazid was shown to be superior to placebo in decreasing the frequency and/or severity of hallucinations and delusions without worsening the primary motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.

As with other atypical antipsychotic drugs, Nuplazid has a Boxed Warning alerting health care professionals about an increased risk of death associated with the use of these drugs to treat older people with dementia-related psychosis. No drug in this class is approved to treat patients with dementia-related psychosis.

In clinical trials, the most common side effects reported by participants taking Nuplazid were: swelling, usually of the ankles, legs, and feet due to the accumulation of excessive fluid in the tissue (peripheral edema); nausea; and abnormal state of mind (confused state).

Nuplazid was granted for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions associated with Parkinson’s disease. Breakthrough therapy designation is a program designed to expedite the development and review of drugs that are intended to treat a serious condition and where preliminary clinical evidence indicates that the drug may demonstrate substantial improvement over available therapy on a clinically significant endpoint. The drug was also granted a priority review. The FDA’s program provides for an expedited review of drugs that offer a significant improvement in the safety or effectiveness for the treatment, prevention, or diagnosis of a serious condition.

Nuplazid is marketed by Acadia Pharmaceuticals Inc. of San Diego, California.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release tells us Nuplazid is marketed and funded by Acadia Pharmaceuticals.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Acupuncture No Better Than Placebo for Hot Flashes

The search for a benign, effective alternative treatment for hot flashes -- which has included the use of soy products, Chinese herbs and hypnosis -- has hit another roadblock.

A new study of acupuncture by Mayo Clinic researchers has found that sham treatments were no better than real acupuncture in relieving the daily drenching sweats that some women find disabling during menopause.

The new research, presented last month at the North American Research Conference on Complementary and Alternative Medicine in Edmonton, Alberta, is scheduled to be published in the journal Menopause early next year, according to lead researcher Ann Vincent, an assistant professor of medicine at the Rochester, Minn., clinic.

Vincent said she and her colleagues were disappointed by the results of the study, which was funded by Mayo and prompted in part by the findings from the Women's Health Initiative (WHI), a federally funded study of more than 36,000 women ages 50 to 79.

"We were hoping for something better," she said.

Beginning in 2002, WHI researchers reported that estrogen was beneficial in reducing hot flashes, but that the hormone, routinely prescribed to middle-aged women for years, also raised the risk of cancer, heart disease, stroke, dementia and other ailments.

As a result, federal health officials have recommended that women bothered by menopausal symptoms such as unpredictable sweats, sleep disturbances and vaginal dryness take the lowest dose of estrogen for the shortest possible time. Hot flashes, one of the most common symptoms of menopause, affect an estimated 75 percent of women, most of them in their forties and fifties.

It is unclear what causes hot flashes, which range in severity from barely noticeable to embarrassingly obvious and can leave some sufferers red-faced and wrung out. In most cases they are transitory, lasting only a few months or years, but in some cases they can last a decade or more. Hot flashes typically begin in the year or so before menopause and tend to abate in the years afterward.

Experts in women's health say they are one of the most common ailments for which women use alternative medicine and that interest in non-hormonal treatments has increased as a result of the WHI findings.

The study of acupuncture as a remedy for hot flashes was sparked by reports from women who had undergone the ancient Chinese therapy for other problems and reported that their hot flashes seemed to moderate.

Acupuncture involves the use of hair-thin disposable metallic needles inserted into various parts of the body; treatments are supposed to be painless and are designed to correct energy imbalances.

The 2,000-year-old treatment is widely used around the world, according to the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM), part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

A 1997 NIH consensus statement on acupuncture found that its success has been mixed, but some studies have found that it might be effective in blunting postoperative pain and in reducing the vomiting and nausea that often follows chemotherapy.

To prove it is effective in reducing hot flashes, the Mayo team needed to demonstrate that it was superior to sham, or placebo, treatment. That requirement has hobbled other alternative treatments, including the herb red clover and vitamin E supplements. That's because hot flashes have a high placebo-response rate: Symptoms often improve, at least temporarily, with a dummy treatment. Researchers believe this may result from the perception of patients that they are being treated with something that is likely to be effective.

Vincent's group recruited 103 women between the ages of 45 and 59 who reported that they had at least five hot flashes per day and were not using any other treatments for them. Half were randomly assigned to receive a series of 10 standardized acupuncture treatments -- needles were placed at the same spots in the arms, legs and lower belly; the other half received sham treatments in which needles were placed superficially near the same locations but away from so-called pressure points.

Researchers knew who was receiving sham treatment, but the women, who completed questionnaires detailing the extent of their hot flashes, did not.

By the end of six weeks, there was no difference between the groups: 61 percent of the sham group was experiencing hot flashes, while 62 percent who got actual acupuncture reported them.

That doesn't surprise Adriane Fugh-Berman, associate professor in the complementary medicine program at Georgetown University School of Medicine.

"Hot flashes are one of the most placebo-responsive conditions," she said. Some herbs and supplements seem to work, she added, but improvement has proven to be temporary. ?
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Article cites an author of the study, another expert, and a National Institutes of Health consensus document. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (Reuters) - Scientists for the first time have used gene therapy to successfully destroy cancer tumors in patients with advanced disease — a goal that has taken 20 years to achieve.

Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania engineered patients’ own pathogen-fighting T-cells to target a molecule found on the surface of leukemia cells.

The altered T-cells were grown outside of the body and infused back into patients suffering from late-stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), which affects the blood and bone marrow and is the most common form of leukemia.

Two participants in the Phase I trial have been in remission for up to a year. A third had a strong anti-tumor response, and his cancer remains in check. The research group plans to treat four more patients with CLL before moving into a larger Phase II trial.

“We put a key onto the surface of the T-cells that fits into a lock that only the cancer cells have,” said Dr. Michael Kalos, director of translational and correlative studies at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine and an investigator on the study.

The results provide “a tumor-attack roadmap for the treatment of other cancers,” including those of the lung and ovaries as well as myeloma and melanoma, researchers said.

The findings were published simultaneously Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine and Science Translational Medicine.

Kalos said past efforts to use the technique, known as “adoptive T-cell transfer,” failed either because the T-cell response was too weak or proved too toxic for normal tissue.

The technique differs from other cancer therapies designed to harness the body’s own immune system to fight tumors — such as therapeutic cancer vaccines.

“We are saying forget about stimulating an immune response. We are going to give you an immune response,” Kalos said.

The treatment appears safe, but researchers said more study was needed. The leukemia patients in the Phase I trial had to be treated with an immunity-boosting drug since the targeted molecule, CD-19, is also present on certain normal immune-system cells.

To deliver the gene therapy, the researchers used a virus that can only infect cells once. It was used to carry a chimeric antigen receptor targeting CD-19 coupled with receptors for two other components of T-cell activity.

About two weeks after the gene therapy, patients began to experience “tumor lysis syndrome” — chills, nausea and fever — caused by the break-down products of dying cancer cells.

The engineered T-cells were detected in patients’ blood for several months afterward, and a portion of them turned into “memory T-cells,” which could provide ongoing protection against cancer recurrence, researchers surmised.

Dr. Walter Urba of the Providence Cancer Center in Portland Oregon cautioned that continued presence of activated T-cells and memory cells might be more of a problem in other types of cancer where toxic effects on normal tissue could be more severe.

In addition, the long-term viability of the treatment is still unknown.

“One of the big questions is ... will those persistent T-cells continue to work and prevent that tumor from coming back,” said Urba, who was not involved in the study.

All of the funding for the University of Pennsylvania’s gene therapy work has come from the academic community, but the work is expensive.

“We are looking for corporate partners as we head into Phase II trials,” Kalos said.

Further study will show whether the latest results “reflect an authentic advance toward a clinically applicable and effective therapy or yet another promising lead that runs into a barrier that cannot be easily overcome,” Urba said in an NEJM editorial.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Both stories cited just one outside source. The Reuters story, though, did a superior job here by quoting someone who had some words of caution. Dr. Walter Urba of the Providence Cancer Center in Portland warned that “the long-term viability of the treatment is still unknown.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Patients generally sit in front of the light box, which can be as small as 9 by 11 inches and 5 inches deep, with the bright light emanating from the square surface, in the morning. “With the natural dawn being later in winter, the body rhythms drift late,” Dr. Lewy said. “If you can fix the drift, you can fix the depression.”

Light therapy may even help with major nonseasonal depression, experts say, and with sleep disorders. And because it has few side effects, researchers are studying whether light therapy can help with depression during pregnancy and be used to treat elderly people with dementia. It is also being investigated for the treatment of bulimia nervosa, severe premenstrual syndrome and even attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and bipolar disorder.

Though randomized controlled clinical trials of bright light are difficult to do properly — one expert is fond of saying that it is difficult to “blind” studies of bright light — the American Psychiatric Association considers bright-light therapy an effective low-risk treatment for both S.A.D. and nonseasonal major depressive disorder.

A 2006 multicenter double-blind randomized controlled trial that compared bright-light therapy head to head with the popular antidepressant Prozac (fluoxetine) in 96 subjects found the two treatments equally effective for alleviating winter depression, though light produced results faster, usually within a week, and with fewer side effects.

Why, then, do so few doctors prescribe bright-light therapy? Some say their patients don’t have the patience to sit in front of a light for 30 to 45 minutes every morning. Moreover, “doctors are just more comfortable prescribing medication, because that’s what they do for everything,” Dr. Lewy said.

Some patients who suffer from chronic depression say they use light therapy in addition to their regular medication in the winter months.

“I’ve always seen a drastic change in my personality from spring and summer to fall and winter, and it got worse as I got older,” said Rick Bach, 54, a painter who owns a hair salon in West Hartford, Conn., and tries to spend every January in Puerto Rico.

But while bright-light treatment is helpful, he said, it is not sufficient for him. “It can help you from falling into a deep depression, but it won’t help you climb out of one,” he said.

No one knows exactly how light treatment works, but most experts seem to agree that the body has a master biological clock that responds to or is “set” by natural light fluctuations.

“Light does more than just enable us to see,” said Dr. Norman Rosenthal, author of the landmark book “Winter Blues,” who was among the first to identify and describe S.A.D. Light also has an effect on hormones, the body’s chemical messengers, affecting the brain’s hypothalamus, which is involved in regulating mood, energy and appetite.

“The hormone melatonin, which is secreted at night, can be suppressed by light,” Dr. Rosenthal said. “Studies have also shown that light influences serotonin and epinephrine pathways in the brain, the same neurotransmitter systems known to be affected in people with general depression.”

But while part of the appeal of light therapy is that it can be self-prescribed, using a light box is not as simple as it may appear. Experts recommend consulting with a knowledgeable health care provider before starting treatment to rule out other medical conditions and to help with monitoring and adjusting bright-light exposure.

Some patients may want to try simply getting more natural light to help with seasonal mood changes — getting out as much as possible during the brightest time of day in the winter, sitting near windows during the day or taking vacations to sunny locales in the winter.

If you choose to try light therapy, here are a few tips from experts.

COSTS Light boxes can be purchased for about $200 online; they are also available for rent. Some patients manage to get insurance reimbursement by having a doctor write a letter, but don’t count on your policy covering it.

PRECAUTIONS Side effects include headaches and hypomania, though experts say these are rare. Face the light but do not stare at the light. If you have an eye condition of any kind, clear light therapy with your ophthalmologist first.

MORE INFORMATION Check the Web sites of the Society for Light Therapy and Biological Rhythms at www.sltbr.org and Center for Environmental Therapeutics at www.cet.org.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story uses independent sources, but strangely does not quote anyone who participated in the single research study cited from 2006.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MADISON, Wis. -- More than 700 million adults and children worldwide are obese, according to a 2017 study that called the growing number and weight-related health problems a "rising pandemic."

New battery-free, easily implantable weight-loss devices developed by engineers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison could offer a promising new weapon for battling the bulge.

In laboratory testing, the devices helped rats shed almost 40 percent of their body weight. Results of the study were published today (Dec. 17, 2018) in the journal Nature Communications.

Measuring less than 1 centimeter across, or about a third of the area of a U.S. penny, the tiny devices -- which are safe for use in the body and implantable via a minimally invasive procedure -- generate gentle electric pulses from the stomach's natural churning motions and deliver them to the vagus nerve, which links the brain and the stomach.

That gentle stimulation dupes the brain into thinking that the stomach is full after only a few nibbles of food.

"The pulses correlate with the stomach's motions, enhancing a natural response to help control food intake," says Xudong Wang, a UW-Madison professor of materials science and engineering.

Unlike gastric bypass, which permanently alters the capacity of the stomach, the effects of the new devices also are reversible. When Wang and his collaborators removed the devices after 12 weeks, the study's rats resumed their normal eating patterns and weight bounced right back on.

Wang's device has several advantages over an existing unit that stimulates the vagus nerve for weight loss. That existing unit, "Maestro," approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2015, administers high-frequency zaps to the vagus nerve to shut down all communication between the brain and stomach. It requires a complicated control unit and bulky batteries which frequently must be recharged.

That ongoing maintenance can be a big barrier to use, says Luke Funk, a surgery professor in UW-Madison's Division of Minimally Invasive, Foregut and Bariatric Surgery. "One potential advantage of the new device over existing vagus nerve stimulators is that it does not require external battery charging, which is a significant advantage when you consider the inconvenience that patients experience when having to charge a battery multiple times a week for an hour or so."

In fact, Wang's device contains no batteries, no electronics, and no complicated wiring. It relies instead on the undulations of the stomach walls to power its internal generators.

That means the device only stimulates the vagus nerve when the stomach moves.

"It's automatically responsive to our body function, producing stimulation when needed," says Wang. "Our body knows best."

Wang is a world expert in wearable and implantable capacitive electricity-generating devices, having previously created implantable nanogenerators that harvest energy from people's beating hearts and breathing, a motion-powered bandage for wound healing, and other such devices.

He and his collaborators patented the weight-loss device through the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and are moving forward with testing in larger animal models. If successful, they hope to move toward human trials.

"Our expectation is that the device will be more effective and convenient to use than other technologies," says Wang.

UW-Madison radiology professor Weibo Cai is also a senior author on the study.

This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (R01EB021336 and P30CA014520).
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release states that funding was provided by grants from the National Institutes of Health. It’s noteworthy that the journal article reporting the trial results states the authors declared no competing interests. However, the release discloses that the researchers patented the device. This is a glimpse at the varying and incomplete ways in which conflicts of interest are (or are not) reported in journals and in downstream news coverage.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A popular dietary supplement called SAMe may help depressed patients who don’t respond to prescription antidepressant treatment, a new study shows.

SAMe stands for S-adenosyl methionine, a naturally occurring molecule that is widely used in Europe for depression, arthritis and other ailments. It is found throughout the human body, with high concentrations in the liver, adrenal glands and brain.

The latest research, conducted by investigators at Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, is important not only because it suggests another treatment option for patients with depression, but because it also offers news clues into the physical pathways of depression that could ultimately lead to more effective treatments.

“There are many directions in research that this opens up,” said Dr. George I. Papakostas, director of treatment resistant depression studies at Mass General and the study’s lead author. “It provides clues to new treatments, and it provides clues to understanding what causes depression as well as what goes on biochemically when people get better from depression.”

The researchers studied the use of SAMe or a placebo in 73 adults with depression who were not responding to prescription antidepressant treatment. All of the study subjects continued to take the prescription antidepressant, but 39 of them were randomly assigned to receive SAMe for six weeks. The remaining 34 patients received a placebo in addition to their regular prescription treatment.

After six weeks of treatment, 36 percent of the patients taking a combination of SAMe and an antidepressant showed improvement, compared to just 18 percent of those taking the antidepressant and placebo. And about 26 percent of patients in the SAMe group experienced a complete remission of symptoms, compared to just 12 percent in the placebo group, according to a report published in The American Journal of Psychiatry.

The research offers hope to patients who haven’t been helped by traditional antidepressant treatment. Studies suggest that for more than half of depressed patients, antidepressants alone don’t eliminate symptoms. As a result, doctors are looking for additional treatments to help these patients, referred to as “nonresponders.”

Modern antidepressants essentially work by building up concentrations of neurotransmitters, which amplifies their effect on the brain. It’s not clear exactly how SAMe works to curb depression, but researchers have several theories. SAMe may influence the expression of genes involved in depression or alter the function of different receptors and structures that transport neurotransmitters in the brain. The molecule also may be directly involved in the creation of neurotransmitters.

“Most antidepressants we use are acting on neurotransmitters in the brain,” said Dr. J. Craig Nelson, professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco, and author of an editorial accompanying the study. “It may be that SAMe is facilitating the synthesis of the neurotransmitters that the drugs then act on. That’s probably the best hypothesis.”

Other studies have suggested that SAMe can relieve symptoms of depression. A 2002 analysis of depression trials conducted by the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality found that SAMe use resulted in clinically meaningful benefits to depressed patients compared to placebo, and that the supplement worked as well as tricyclic antidepressants, a category of prescription drugs.

In his editorial, Dr. Nelson notes that SAMe is typically not covered by insurance companies, and that although the cost is relatively low, it is still more than the drug co-payments required by most health plans. A monthly supply of the same brand of supplement studied would be about $143, the editorial notes.

Dr. Nelson, who was not involved in the Harvard study, said the results need to be replicated in a larger study, and that more information is needed on dosing, side effects and long-term treatment with SAMe, among other things. Dr. Papakostas agrees the study “needs replication” but said he is hopeful about the potential for future research.

“It’s a huge advancement in terms of expanding the types of medications we have to treat depression,” Dr. Papakostas said. “In the last 60 years of depression research, all the treatments have focused on similar mechanisms of action. This is one of the first few studies that suggests a different mechanism. It’s a medication that works differently than everything else.”

The study was funded by a grant from the National Institutes of Mental Health, but the SAMe pills and placebo pills were provided by the dietary supplement maker Pharmavite. Dr. Papkostas, Dr. Nelson and other researchers involved in the study all disclosed several financial relationships with makers of prescription antidepressants.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent source was cited, the author of the editorial that accompanied the study. And all conflicts of interest were clearly pointed out. While, by the letter, it meets the standard for this criteria, we note two flaws:
1) The piece could’ve used a lot more balance to the lead investigator’s hopes and excitement for his research. His quotes aren’t challenged
2) A more independent source could’ve been used because Dr. Nelson and Dr. Papkostas have coauthored 3 recent studies together.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Hormone replacement therapy may work slightly better than soy at reducing menopausal hot flashes, a new study says.

Women who took such hormones had fewer hot flashes, on average, than women who took soy - and both had fewer than those who took a placebo, or “dummy pill.”

“The bottom line for someone who is very disturbed by hot flashes, the best treatment is hormones, and the next tier would be soy,” said Dr. Gloria Bachmann, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Jersey.

However, a 2002 landmark study by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) found that such treatments can increase the risk of breast cancer, heart disease and stroke. That means that if women do take hormones, Bachmann told Reuters Health, it should be the lowest dose and for the shortest possible period of time.

And not every woman needs treatment, notes Bachmann, who was not involved in the study. Women with severe or frequent hot flashes or whose hot flashes keep them up at night, should consider treatment, she said.

Women typically suffer between 30 and 150 hot flashes a month, said Dr. Rafael Bolanos-Diaz, professor of health economics at San Marcos University in Lima, Peru, who co-authored the study.

Women who took hormones had an average of 24 fewer hot flashes per month, while those who took soy had 12 per month fewer. The study did not look at whether eating soy in food has the same effect on hot flashes as supplements, Bolanos-Diaz said.

The researchers looked at 19 studies on how a treatment, either hormones or soy, compared to a placebo. They compared the average number of hot flashes in 760 women who had treatment with 770 who did not.

The study was published in Menopause: The Journal of the North American Menopause Society.

Soy hasn’t been studied as much as hormone replacement to treat hot flashes, and doctors don’t know exactly how it works. It’s thought to have similar effects to estrogen on the brain, bones, and blood vessels, Bolanos-Diaz told Reuters Health by email.

Soy supplements also have side effects: Nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the NIH. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

“For some women, hormone therapy is the best option, for some soy is best, and for some, it’s just watchful waiting until the hot flashes subside,” Bachmann said.

SOURCE: bit.ly/hBua85 Menopause: The Journal of The North American Menopause Society, online March 3, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One apparently independent expert was quoted in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (Embargoed Until Oct. 18, 2018 @ 10:05AM ET) -- A surgical technique called EDAS (encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis) significantly decreases the rate of stroke recurrence and death for patients with severe atherosclerosis of the brain arteries, according to findings of a Phase IIa clinical trial presented today at the World Stroke Congress in Montreal. Atherosclerotic disease, in which plaque buildup narrows the brain arteries, is one of the most common causes of strokes.

Neurosurgeons performing EDAS reroute arteries from the scalp and the membranes that cover the brain and place these arteries under the skull near areas of the brain at risk of stroke. Over time, new blood vessels form, creating fresh pathways for blood and oxygen to reach the brain.

The trial, led by Nestor R. Gonzalez, MD, professor of Neurosurgery and director of the Neurovascular Laboratory at Cedars-Sinai, enrolled 52 patients with severe brain atherosclerosis, also known as intracranial atherosclerotic disease, or ICAD, who showed symptoms of either a recent stroke or a mini-stroke, called a transient ischemic attack. These patients received EDAS surgery, along with intensive medical management, which included diet and lifestyle changes, blood thinners and other medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar levels.

After one year, 9.6 percent of the patients treated with the surgery experienced another ischemic stroke or died, compared with 21.2 percent of patients in a matched control group who received only intensive medical management. Two of the EDAS patients had small wound openings that required additional surgical interventions, but there were no intracranial hemorrhages or other serious adverse events, the researchers reported.

"Our findings in this intermediate-stage trial are promising for applying EDAS surgery to intracranial atherosclerotic disease," said Gonzalez said. Previously, EDAS has been used for moyamoya disease, a rare cerebrovascular disorder that affects younger patients.

Gonzalez said the new trial addressed a serious medical need. "Even under the best current treatments, ICAD carries high rates of recurrent stroke and death, compared with other causes of stroke," he said. "Developing new therapeutic strategies is crucial for ICAD patients."

Current ICAD therapies--in addition to intensive medical management--include bypass surgery to connect a blood vessel from outside the brain to a vessel inside the brain, as well as angioplasty with stenting, which involves inflating a tiny balloon inside a cerebral artery to open it up and placing a stent device inside the artery. Despite advances in medical care, annual rates of recurrent stroke and death are remain high, at 15 percent or more for ICAD patients, according to published research.

Gonzalez said his team is working with the stroke prevention working group of the National Institutes of Health to develop a proposal for a Phase III randomized clinical trial across multiple institutions to further test the effectiveness of EDAS as compared with intensive medical management. While this Phase IIa trial selected patients from previous studies as the control group, the Phase III study would enroll new ICAD patients for both the control and experimental groups, he explained.

"This clinical trial moves us significantly closer to preventing strokes and death in high-risk populations," said Keith Black, MD, professor and chair of the Department of Neurosurgery. "As a nationally renowned physician-investigator, Dr. Gonzalez personifies the dedication of Cedars-Sinai to translating the most advanced research into new cures."

Besides Gonzalez, the trial involved other investigators from the stroke centers of Cedars-Sinai and UCLA.

Funding: Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Strokes of the National Institutes of Health under award number K23NS079477-01A1.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release explains that the study was funded by grants from the National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Stroke of the National Institutes of Health.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It’s common for people who suffer from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) to also struggle with depression. Now, a small study published in the journal suggests that taking a probiotic supplement may provide relief from both conditions.

The randomized, placebo-controlled trial shows a connection between probiotics and mood improvement in people with IBS and depression or anxiety, as well as changes in brain regions related to emotional processing. Most previous research on this topic has been on healthy people without mood disorders.

For the new research, scientists from McMaster University in Canada recruited 44 adults with IBS as well as mild to moderate anxiety or depression. They were followed for 10 weeks; half took a daily dose of the probiotic , and half took a placebo. The probiotics were manufactured and provided by Nestle, which also funded the study. (Nestle was not involved in collection, analysis or interpretation of study data.)

After six weeks, twice as many people who took the probiotic had decreased depression scores compared to those who took the placebo: 64% versus 32%. Results were similar after 10 weeks, as well. When people in the study were given functional MRI scans, the researchers found that improved depression scores were associated with changes in activity of several brain areas involved in mood regulation.

Those changes in brain activity “support the notion that this probiotic has anti-depressive properties,” the authors wrote in their paper. While their data did not show significant independent changes in anxiety, constipation, diarrhea or pain, people who took the probiotic did report improvements in overall symptoms of IBS and in quality of life.

One explanation for the improved mood in the group taking probiotics could be that because their physical symptoms feel better, their mood gets better too. That’s why Dr. Roger McIntyre, professor of psychiatry and pharmacology at the University of Toronto, thinks the fMRI findings are the most interesting and important aspect of the new study: they signal that the probiotics may really be working on the brain itself.

MORE: You Asked: Should I Take Probiotics?

“We know that one part of the brain, the amygdala, tends to be red hot in people with depression, and it seemed to cool down with this intervention,” says McIntyre, who was not involved in the new research. “It provides more scientific believability that something in the brain, at a very biological level, seems to be affected by this probiotic.”

No serious side effects related to the probiotic were reported, suggesting that such a supplement could be a safe way to treat both stomach- and mood-related symptoms. Studies have looked at various types of probiotics for IBS patients, the authors wrote, and a recent review found that seemed to work better for gastrointestinal symptoms than another common probiotic, .

Some experts believe that gut bacteria influence the brain (and vice versa) mainly through systemic inflammation. But in this study, the researchers found no difference in inflammatory markers between the probiotic and the placebo group. McIntyre points out that the bowel communicates with the brain through other pathways as well, including the metabolic and nervous systems.

The study’s findings need to be confirmed in larger independent trials, and McIntyre says he wouldn’t yet recommend taking a probiotic for symptoms associated with mental disorders like depression or anxiety. (Study co-author Premysl Bercik, associate professor of medicine at McMaster University, says the formula used in the new research isn’t commercially available, anyway.) “The evidence at this point is promising,” says McIntyre, “but it is not sufficient to justify recommending to patients as a viable treatment strategy.”

But McIntyre says the results are encouraging. “They seem credible to me, and they might hint that there are other mechanisms, besides just inflammation, linking the GI tract to the brain,” he says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There is a discussion early in the story that the research was funded by Nestle. The story also incorporates opinions from a research scientist who was not involved with the study who provides additional insights about the study’s findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are lung cancer scans really ready for prime time?

News that annual CT lung scans can reduce the risk of lung cancer death among former and current heavy smokers was celebrated by national heath officials this month. A major government study found the screening scans saved the life of one person for every 300 current or former smokers who were scanned.

But now cancer and screening experts are worried that the limited findings will be used by private screening centers to promote the test to a broader group than was studied. That, in turn, could lead to thousands of unnecessary lung scans, causing excess radiation exposure and unnecessary biopsies and surgery.

Dr. Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society, said he was stunned to hear a radio advertisement for an Atlanta screening center cite the study just a few days after the government had announced the results. The wording of the ad seemed to be aimed at a broad group, ranging from heavy smokers to women who had never smoked, Dr. Brawley said.

“We really need to weigh the harms associated with screening,” he said. “The scientific community still needs to digest this. To take a trial that involves people at high risk for lung cancer and to extrapolate it and say it’s good for people with intermediate or low risk is not appropriate.”

The study, called the National Lung Screening Trial, focused on a specific high-risk group: 53,000 current and former heavy smokers, aged 55 to 74, who had smoked for at least 30 pack-years. That means someone who smoked one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years or three packs a day for at least 10 years would qualify for the study.

Former smokers who had accumulated 30 pack-years were included only if they had stopped smoking within the previous 15 years.

The smokers and former smokers were given either annual CT lung scans or chest X-rays. Compared with conventional X-rays, the CT, or computed tomography, scans create a detailed three-dimensional image of the lungs. The study was stopped when it was found that the scanning group had a 20 percent lower risk of dying from lung cancer than those being screened with X-rays.

But the early results also showed a downside of scanning: one of every four lung scans showed an abnormality, which often led to additional worry, radiation exposure from follow-up scans and, sometimes, lung biopsies and even risky surgery. But because the study was stopped early, a full analysis of the harms caused by screening scans is still months away.

Reading the scans is tricky because harmless nodules can be misinterpreted as suspect lesions. In the study, even experienced radiologists at major cancer centers had a high rate of false positives, suggesting that the rate would be even higher in the real world.

“There is a learning curve to reading spiral CTs,” Dr. Brawley said. “I’m concerned that some radiologists might be early in that learning curve and some patients may be harmed because of it.”

While the study found a benefit to scanning a specific group of high-risk smokers, that doesn’t mean other groups will get the same benefit, says Dr. Peter B. Bach, a pulmonologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. In lower-risk groups, for instance, it’s likely that thousands of people would need to be exposed to the risks of screening before a single life was saved. And it’s possible that many of those scanned unnecessarily could be seriously harmed.

“The aggregate harms to all the people’s lives who are not saved have to be taken into account,” Dr. Bach said. “Even in these highly controlled settings, about 1 percent of the people had surgery or a part of their lung removed for something they thought was cancer and it wasn’t.”

Low-dose CT scans expose patients to about the same radiation levels as mammograms.

For now, most consumers who want a scan will have to pay for it themselves, although it is expected that insurance companies eventually will approve scanning for those in high-risk groups. (Medicare officials have indicated that they will soon reconsider paying for the screening tests.) The government has estimated the cost at about $300 a scan, but some centers may charge $1,000 or more.

The day the government announced the study results, Westside Medical Imaging of Beverly Hills, Calif., issued a press release saying that the study “should once and for all settle the controversy” about whether CT lung scans save lives.

In the release, Dr. Norman E. Lepor said the scans were an “indispensable” part of annual exams for patients who have smoked for 10 years.

In an interview, Dr. Lepor said that he only offers lung scans to those at high risk, and that he turns people away who are at low risk but want the scan anyway because “they just want to know.”

Dr. Lepor said it would be “imprudent” not to incorporate the latest study data into his practice right away.

“There are people who, with good conscience and their take of the data, say it’s not ready for prime time, and there are people who look at the same data and they come to other conclusions,” Dr. Lepor said. “This is not the first study that has supported screening. We know from our own anecdotes that we have saved a lot of lives.”

Dr. Lepor said that he had just met a woman who had smoked for 50 years and was concerned about her risk. “She’s the poster person for this test,” he said.

Dr. Brawley said he’s worried that the few early press releases and radio advertisements are just the beginning of widespread promotion of screening lung scans.

“It was sort of ominous to be working Sunday evening in my home office and this thing comes on the radio,” he said. “A lot of people run out when there is a new announcement and get the new test. We’re very frightened some people are going to be harmed because of this.”

A version of this article appeared in print on Nov. 16, 2010, on page D5 of the New York edition of The Times.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Good sourcing – including quotes from one who promotes the scans and the study findings and from two who have concerns and are skeptical or worried about the impact.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 17, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Combining two drugs that target an aggressive type of breast cancer known as HER2-positive appears to work better than using either drug alone, researchers report.

The dual-drug approach greatly boosted the chances of eliminating microscopic signs of early cancer by the time a woman was due to have surgery, said researcher Dr. Jose Baselga, chief of hematology/oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School.

The study was published online Jan. 17 in The Lancet.

The two drugs are Tykerb (lapatinib) and Herceptin (trastuzumab). Using both together resulted in a 51 percent response, compared with a 30 percent response in women given Herceptin alone. Those given Tykerb alone had a 25 percent response.

"What we observed was a massive improvement in response," Baselga said.

GlaxoSmithKline, the maker of Tykerb, helped fund the study.

"Lapatinib was approved for advanced breast cancer in 2007," Baselga said. "The question we had was, what is the efficacy if we give it in early-stage breast cancer prior to surgery?"

Baselga and his colleagues conducted a trial treating 455 women from 23 countries. All had HER2-positive breast cancers. All had tumors larger than about three-fourths of an inch.

In HER2-positive breast cancer, test results are positive for a protein called human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, which promotes cancer cell growth.

In the study, 154 women got Tykerb, 149 Herceptin and the other 152 both drugs. All had the drug regimen before surgery, with Taxol (paclitaxel), a standard chemotherapy, added after six weeks. After 12 more weeks of treatment, the women had surgery.

At that point, researchers evaluated who had better responses. The women continued the treatments for one more year, allowing researchers to follow them and see how the approaches affected survival.

Baselga stressed that the study looked only at women with early-stage HER2-positive breast cancers, and that the drug Tykerb is approved now only for advanced breast cancers.

The study is well done and important, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society. The two drugs, he said, "affect the same pathway but do it in a different way."

While the combination showed a better response rate, "there is also an increased level of side effects," he noted.

While no major heart problems occurred, those on Tykerb alone or the two-drug combination had more diarrhea. Liver-enzyme alterations were also more frequent when Tykerb was used.

GlaxoSmithKline notes that liver toxicity with the drug may be severe and that deaths have been reported, although the cause of the deaths has not been determined.

The important question, however, has not been answered yet, Lichtenfeld said. That's the effect on overall survival in using the two-drug approach. The researchers are continuing to evaluate that.

Cost is another consideration: Tykerb runs about $4,000 a month wholesale, and retail prices could be higher.

In another study, published online Jan. 17 in The Lancet Oncology, researchers from Germany reported that Tykerb is less beneficial than Herceptin as a single-drug therapy.

They assigned 620 women with HER2-positive breast cancer to get standard chemotherapy plus Herceptin or Tykerb.

They looked to see which drug was better at eliminating invasive cancer in the breast and metastatic cells in the lymph nodes. While 30 percent of those in the Herceptin group had this response, 23 percent of the Tykerb group did. The study was funded by drug makers GlaxoSmithKline, Roche and Sanofi-Aventis.

Baselga reports receiving honoraria from Roche; other co-authors report receiving speaking fees or honoraria from GlaxoSmithKline and fees from other drug companies.

To learn more about breast cancer, including HER2-positive cancers, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent source quoted.  Drug company funding of the study was noted.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Women with mutations in the well-known BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes who have their breasts and ovaries removed are much more likely to survive than women who do not get preventive surgery, U.S. researchers said on Tuesday.

The study shows the benefits of genetic tests that give women with a family history of cancer the chance to take steps to increase their chances of survival, they said.

“This is the first study to prove women survive longer with these preventive surgeries and shows the importance of genetic testing when there is a family history of early breast or ovarian cancer,” Dr. Virginia Kaklamani of Northwestern University in Chicago wrote in a commentary about the study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Women with mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes have a 56 to 84 percent higher risk of developing breast cancer during their lifetimes.

Those with the BRCA1 mutation also have a 36 to 63 percent higher risk of ovarian cancer and those with the BRCA2 mutation have a 10 to 27 percent higher risk of ovarian cancer.

Because of this, many women make the difficult choice to have their breasts or ovaries and fallopian tubes surgically removed to reduce their risk.

Dr. Susan M. Domchek of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia and colleagues studied the effectiveness of these procedures in 2,482 women with BRCA mutations, including 247 women who had risk-reducing surgery to remove their breasts and 993 who had risk-reducing surgery to remove their ovaries.

No woman who had a mastectomy developed breast cancer during the three years of follow-up testing.

Seven percent of women who decided against a mastectomy were diagnosed with breast cancer in the same period.

“Our results confirm that risk-reducing mastectomy is associated with a significant reduction in breast cancer risk,” Domchek and colleagues wrote.

Women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations who had their ovaries and fallopian tubes removed had similar results.

About 10 to 20 percent of breast and ovarian cancers are due to BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. “Most of these women will die of ovarian cancer, so you can save 20 percent of them with the prophylactic surgery,” Kaklamani said.

“And you can save the majority of women who would have died of their breast cancer,” she added.

She said primary care physicians, gynecologists and women “need to be more aware that these tests exist.”

Dr. Sandhya Pruthi, a breast cancer expert at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, who counsels women with BRCA mutations, said the study adds more evidence that the surgery can help save lives, but the choice is never easy.

“It’s not cookie-cutter medicine,” Pruthi, who was not involved in the study, said in a telephone interview.

She said women need to come to terms with the psychological issues involved in having their breasts removed, and younger women who have their ovaries removed must contend with early menopause symptoms.

“It’s not a decision made on a single visit,” she said.

According to the American Cancer Society and the International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1.3 million new breast cancer cases are diagnosed around the world every year and it kills 465,000 women annually, making it the leading global cancer killer of women.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml"/>



The story includes comments from an author of an editorial in the journal and one other expert who was not involved in the study. Although the story does not report financial or other information about the sources, the study was funded by a variety of grants from public agencies and foundations and neither the researchers nor the editorial writers reported any relevant financial disclosures.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Sarah, a petite 34-year-old woman from who asked that only her first name be used, considered implants, but said she didn’t want her breasts to “look hard or fake or extremely unnatural.” So she had Dr. Roger K. Khouri, a plastic and reconstructive surgeon in charge of the Miami Breast Center, take fat from her thighs and buttocks to fill out her chest.

“I love that it’s just mine, my own fat,” she said. “I didn’t have to put anything foreign in my body.”

At the October meeting of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Dr. Khouri presented a long-term study that suggested liposuctioned fat was now a “viable alternative to breast implants.” It tracked 50 women, ages 17 to 63, for an average follow-up of 3.5 years. (For weeks, participants wore a cumbersome bra-like tissue expander at night that was created by Dr. Khouri to create a scaffolding for their fat.) The study, which Dr. Khouri plans to publish in a peer-reviewed journal, found that the procedure does not impede the reading of mammograms and that on average, 85 percent of transplanted fat survived to give patients natural-feeling larger breasts.

This kind of is a two-fer: trim fat where you don’t want it and put it where you do. Another advantage is not having to worry about an implant breaking or hardening.

But the disadvantages cannot be discounted. It’s usually more expensive than implants, it takes a year to see how much fat survived, and breast volume can fluctuate with weight. Dr. Scott L. Spear, the chairman of the plastic surgery department at Hospital, has enlarged a patient’s breasts only to have the patient undo his handiwork by losing weight. “They decide to run a marathon and their breasts go away,” he said.

But a far worse scenario is that a doctor’s technique is so wanting that much of the transplanted fat dies and complications ensue. “Anyone can take fat and inject it into the breast, and the patient will look good immediately afterwards,” Dr. Khouri said, but a few months later, the fat injected by a doctor with sub-par skills may result in “oil cysts, masses, and scarring.”

To some, this kind of fat recycling seems simple. But Dr. Michael F. McGuire, the president of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, cautioned: “How you take the fat, how you process it, how you inject it are all factors in how successful fat survival is going to be.”

In some cases, radiologists can distinguish between innocuous and suspicious calcifications, said Dr. Sameer A. Patel, a plastic and reconstructive surgeon at Fox Chase Center in . But when they can’t, biopsies may be done. So he fears that fat injections for breast enlargement could increase unnecessary biopsies.

Last month, new guidelines from the recommended that most women should start mammograms at 50, instead of 40, to try to reduce the number of tests, including biopsies for false positives.

But a baseline mammogram for a woman considering breast augmentation (or reduction) is a must, said Dr. Emily F. Conant, a radiology professor and the chief of breast imaging at the Medical Center.

In recent years, fat injections have been used to correct irregularities from reconstructive breast surgery after a or a . Because much smaller volumes of fat are used, some plastic surgeons felt comfortable, for example, filling in a dent in the cleavage area.

But Dr. Stephen F. Sener, a professor of surgery at the Keck School of Medicine at the , wrote in an e-mail message: “I’ve seen enough injections of fat after mastectomies to tell you that fat necrosis is a real problem.” It can result in a “palpable mass” that needs to be biopsied to establish malignancy or infection, wrote Dr. Sener, the former president of the .

It’s a pivotal time to set the record straight on fat grafting to the breast. Recently, television news segments have featured doctors touting “natural breast augmentation.” In one segment available on YouTube.com, from an ABC station in , a patient said she grew two cup sizes after injections. Most doctors injecting fat for breast augmentation say implants are a better choice for such an increase.

The pleased mother of three in the news clip said her breasts grew “overnight,” which is misleading. Typically, doctors wait months to assess whether transplanted fat is there to stay. Others wait longer. “Unless you go a year, you can’t say ‘we succeeded,’ ” Dr. Spear said.

Yet, marketing for fat-enhanced breasts has ramped up. The Web site naturalaugmentation.com lists several doctors, mostly ob-gyns and family medicine physicians, not plastic surgeons, who offer coupons for “natural augmentation” and even something called “stem-cell breast augmentation.”

A company called makes a machine used in that concentrates the cells within fat tissue that aren’t strictly fat cells, including . The company hopes that its Celution 800 system can “double the cells that act as fertilizer, so it’s possible to achieve a more predictable graft,” said Tom Baker, the director of investor relations.

But Cytori’s machine hasn’t been approved by the . Nor has “concentrating” cells in fat been proved to make a difference in controlled studies, said Dr. Karol A. Gutowski, chairman of the plastic-surgery society’s task force.

That hasn’t stopped Dr. Todd Malan, a board-certified ob-gyn in , Ariz., who is the surgeon in the ABC news clip, from anointing himself the “First in U.S. to perform Stem Cell Enhanced Breast Augmentation!” on his Web site.

Dr. Coleman, who was part of the task force, said, “it’s easy to kill fat,” and worried that Johnny-come-latelies won’t be meticulous. “Suddenly everyone is claiming to have 10 years of experience,” said Dr. Coleman, who is a paid adviser to Cytori.

Dr. Coleman has that experience. In 1998, when augmenting breasts with fat was “unheard of,” Linda Francipane, a hairdresser in Manhattan, had her modest chest filled out by him. “The best part is I’m in my 40s and I have these nice perky breasts,” she said. “They look like teenager breasts.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml"/>



The story included more than one independent expert and it identified the professional affiliations and some of the financial arrangements between experts who were quoted and companies or practices that profit from fat grafting.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Jane Adrian, 61, a landscape architect in Glendale, Calif., saw her parents and two co-workers suffer from the painful, blistering condition known as shingles, so when the vaccine became available, she got it.

Even though the vaccine is only about 55 percent effective, "it's better than nothing," she said. "Now I feel relieved."

A study of a cross-section of adults enrolled with a health-management organization in southern California shows that the vaccine provides protection for many older adults without many side effects.

The findings are published in the Jan. 12 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Shingles is caused by the herpes zoster virus and only strikes people who have had chicken pox. It usually starts as a rash on one side of the face or body, often causing pain, itching and tingling. About a million cases occur in the United States each year, and attacks can last two to four weeks.

"Even after the rash has healed, the pain can last for months or even years," said lead study author HungFu Tseng, a research scientist at the Kaiser Permanente Division of Research and Evaluation in Pasadena, Calif.

Zostavax, as the vaccine is called, was approved in 2006, based on the results of clinical trials. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends the shot for eligible people aged 60 and older.

Tseng's team wanted to test the vaccine's real-world performance, so they compared 75,761 vaccinated members of the Kaiser Permanente health plan to 227,283 members who elected not to have the shot. Kaiser funded the study.

In vaccinated individuals, the rate of shingles was 6.4 cases per 1,000 people in a year while it was twice that -- 13 per 1,000 -- in the unvaccinated population, the investigators found.

The vaccine also reduced the risk of ophthalmic herpes zoster (infection that affects the eye) by 63 percent and hospitalization by 65 percent.

Those who had been vaccinated were more likely to be white, female and in better overall health than the unvaccinated people, the researchers noted. Lack of awareness, concerns about effectiveness or safety, and cost may have kept some people from getting the shot, Tseng said.

"People 60 and over can consider talking to their physician about the possibility of receiving the vaccine to reduce their risk, and the doctor can evaluate if they are eligible," said Tseng.

Patients with leukemia, lymphoma, HIV or an allergy to any ingredients in the vaccine are ineligible for the shot.

"It does bolster our confidence that it's effective in the real world," said Dr. Bruce Hirsch, an attending physician in infectious diseases at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., who was not involved with the study.

But the vaccine can cost a couple of hundred dollars, he said, perhaps making it out of reach for those with limited resources.

Because shingles is not contagious and doesn't present a risk of death, Hirsch said he would recommend the flu vaccine and the pneumococcal vaccine over this one for uninsured patients who would have to pay out-of-pocket.

"This study helps me in terms of advising patients and prioritizing," Hirsch added.

While less reliable than some childhood vaccines, which are usually 90 percent effective in preventing certain illnesses, the shingles vaccination is still worthwhile, said Dr. Ciro Sumaya, professor of health policy and management at Texas A&M Health Science Center School of Rural Public Health.

"I think it's a very good vaccine, and it's a safe vaccine, but obviously there needs to be continuing surveillance of usage of the vaccine to make sure there are no adverse effects that are seen in one in a 100 million cases versus one in five or 10,000 people," said Sumaya, also a member of CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.

For now, he advises getting it. "It's protecting against a severe disease, particularly in elderly adults," he said, "so the benefit, I think, is overwhelming that we should be using this because it's recommended."

The CDC has more on the shingles vaccine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


This story includes more than one independent source. The comments from these sources add valuable perspective on this study and the larger context of shingles vaccination. The story reports that the Kaiser Permanente health plan funded the study. However, it does not tell readers that some of the researchers have received funding from vaccine companies for other studies or consulting.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Take charge of your biological clock,” the invitation urged.

It beckoned women to an evening seminar in Manhattan. There, they received a coupon for the latest in fertility management: a genetic test marketed as a way to help maximize their chances of becoming pregnant.

The hitch: Top reproductive endocrinologists point out that there’s no evidence the $950 DNA test can actually help women conceive. And even the company’s founder and CEO acknowledges the test can’t provide clear and definitive answers on which treatments women should try next if they’re struggling with infertility.

The Fertilome test hit the market at the start of this year and the company behind it, Celmatix, said more than 50 doctors have already ordered it for hundreds of women seeking scientific guidance on questions such as whether they should freeze their eggs for future use, or whether it’s worth it to try another round of in vitro fertilization. The Celmatix CEO, Piraye Yurttas Beim, said her team has heard of a small wave of “Fertilome babies” on the way.

Some reproductive specialists are enthusiastic. But others caution that Fertilome is just the latest genetic test promising more than it can deliver — and, in this case, playing to the fears of women who are anxious about becoming a mother. (Another example: a new $89 test that claims to tell women how their DNA could influence the level of a beneficial fatty acid in their breast milk.)

The Fertilome test, which must be ordered by a doctor, analyzes a woman’s DNA for 49 genetic variants that have been linked to various conditions that can sometimes cause fertility problems. A couple weeks later, the doctor gets back a long report listing the odds that a patient has certain conditions.

For example, she might be 4.4 times more likely than women without a particular genetic variant to have a condition known as primary ovarian insufficiency, characterized by irregular periods and diminished fertility before age 40.

That sounds alarming, and might prompt a younger woman who’s planning to delay pregnancy to freeze her eggs to be sure she has them available down the road. But the report does not explain that the condition is fairly rare — affecting just 1 in 1,000 women by age 30 and 1 in 250 women by age 35 — so the absolute risk is still very small.

And just because women have an elevated genetic risk for a condition doesn’t mean they actually have it.

Many of the other conditions that the test screens for are also quite rare. But the report doesn’t explain the prevalence.

So a patient may see a table showing that her genetic variants make her twice as likely to have a condition known as recurrent pregnancy loss, defined as repeated miscarriages. But the report doesn’t note that just 1 percent of women have that condition in the first place, making the odds still overwhelmingly in her favor. The doctor ordering the test, or a genetic counselor, is supposed to provide that information.

Without the proper context, “some of this can be very misleading and very frightening to patients,” said Dr. John Petrozza, chief of the division of reproductive medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital.

Petrozza said he worries that women might wrongly interpret a long litany of genetic risks to mean that their hopes to start a family are “doomed.” He also said he sees the test as “very costly for what it’s trying to do — and not really giving, at least at this point, what I would consider meaningful information.”

The Fertilome test was eight years in the making. It draws on more than 5,000 studies that have found associations between particular genetic variants and conditions that can cause fertility problems, company spokeswoman Colleen McMillen said.

Beim, the Celmatix CEO, said the test is already bringing “tremendous” value, in part by providing guidance that can act as a “tiebreaker” to help patients and their doctor decide which treatment to prioritize.

“It will help save a lot of heartache and time if we could know from the very beginning that [a given patient] is at risk for a uterine factor, or if it’s more her eggs,” said Dr. Angie Beltsos, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in Chicago who ordered the Fertilome test for one of her patients for the first time last month.

What the test can’t do: provide evidence-backed answers on what patients should try next. Nor can it tell patients whether they’re wired to get pregnant from IVF — or wired to fail it. “We’re not there. We’re not claiming we’re there,” Beim said.

Beim trained as a molecular genetics researcher. As a Ph.D. student at Weill Cornell in the 2000s, she worked on an early project in what’s now called precision medicine: identifying the specific genetic alterations in the tumors of lung cancer patients that seemed to predict whether they would respond to a certain drug.

After shifting her research focus to embryology, Beim found herself frustrated that the fertility field wasn’t benefiting from the same boom in translational genetics that was reshaping oncology. So she started her own company.

Celmatix also sells software, called Polaris, that pulls from the medical histories of hundreds of thousands of women to try to predict which fertility treatments are likely to work in different circumstances.

Fertilome — not to be confused with a line of weed killers and other gardening products with the same name — launched in January with a $1,900 price tag. Insurers don’t cover it; after it became clear that patients were balking at the bill, Celmatix cut the price in half.

Celmatix is mostly marketing the test to reproductive specialists, who are largely using it in the toughest infertility cases, Beim said.

But the company is also beginning to market directly to women — including younger women who aren’t trying to get pregnant yet.

The company has recently started promoting social media ads, like one that asks: “Are you getting the right fertility treatments for your DNA?” Another asserts: “Over 60% of millennial women are open to #eggfreezing. The Fertilome test can help you decide if it is right for you.”

The company’s website also features testimonials from women who say they have used Fertilome to help guide their decisions. There’s Ella, a 30-year-old with dark hair and stylish clothing who decided to freeze her eggs after taking the Fertilome test. Then there’s Maxine, a 27-year-old medical school graduate with short hair and a warm smile who used the test to help her juggle the timing of starting a family and starting her career.

The wrinkle: The images of Ella and Maxine are actually stock photos, available for purchase online.

After questions from STAT, the company added a disclaimer acknowledging that testimonials are not quite as they were promoted from the start: the names, images, and details of patients’ stories have been changed to safeguard their privacy.

Along with its social media outreach, Celmatix has held several after-work events for New York City-area women. It hosted one, on a Wednesday night in April, in its offices on Wall Street.

And on a Tuesday evening earlier this summer, the company partnered with a women’s group to host a conversation about “proactive steps you can take today to reach your future family building goals.” Appetizers, wine, and beer were served — and, in a gesture to the crowd full of women with pregnancy on their minds, non-alcoholic beverages were on the menu, too.

The company is also trying to reach OB-GYNs whose patients aren’t yet trying to get pregnant — or may be just beginning to try. Celmatix held webinars earlier this summer for OB-GYNs, telling them that the test could help “optimize management plans from the very start.”

Dr. Aimee Eyvazzadeh, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in the Bay Area, is among a few doctors who’ve been given vouchers by the company to offer the test for $500. She’s been ordering the Fertilome test for her patients about five times a week.

Eyvazzadeh said the test recently helped her counsel a patient to forgo a third round of IVF, because the patient had a genetic profile that suggested it would be unlikely to work and wasn’t in a financial position to gamble on such slim odds. (A round of IVF can cost $13,000.) That patient is now considering an egg donor.

Another one of Eyvazzadeh’s patients is 31-year-old Tara Smith.

For Smith, who works as a foster parent providing intensive care in Northern California, there’s nothing more important than family. She’s dreamed of having her own baby since she was a child herself.

That’s why Smith and her husband have spent about $70,000 over the past four years trying, without success, to get pregnant. They’ve seen doctors in St. Louis and Las Vegas, taken countless blood tests, and tried two rounds of IVF and several cycles of intrauterine insemination. Smith has long known that she has a condition called polycystic ovary syndrome, which can make it harder to get pregnant, but no one could figure out exactly why none of the treatments were working.

“It’s gut-wrenching. You’re almost like this alien,” Smith said. “Nobody knows what’s going on, and you can’t fix the problem.”

So when Eyvazzadeh suggested that she take the Fertilome test, Smith jumped at the possibility of finally getting answers. Eyvazzadeh walked her through the results last month before showing her the report, so Smith had an idea of what to expect. Still, Smith said, “my heart sank” when she saw her results for the first time.

She was 2.88 times more likely to have endometriosis, a painful disorder of the uterus, than a woman without a certain genetic variant. She was 1.54 times more likely to have primary ovarian insufficiency. She also carried three genetic variants that elevated her risk of having recurrent pregnancy loss. And she had 24 additional genetic variants that are more weakly associated with various conditions that can play a role in fertility problems.

Despite it all, Eyvazzadeh had a plan. Because many of Smith’s genetic variants were involved in immune response regulation, she instructed Smith to focus on minimizing inflammation.

At Eyvazzadeh’s recommendation, Smith spent about $200 buying dietary supplements like fish oils, turmeric, cayenne pepper, resveratrol, and berberine from Amazon and Walmart. Smith also embarked on a new diet, cutting out dairy and red meat. (A 2015 review of the evidence on the optimal diet to promote fertility — and the utility of supplements — found the data “conflicting.”)

They also plan to have Smith get infusions of intralipids — a cocktail of soy bean oil, egg yolks, and other fatty acids — during her third round of IVF, which she’s embarking on now. (Intralipid infusions are increasingly popular, but the practice was found not to help in a 2016 study of older women with a history of miscarriage.)

Smith has mostly positive feelings about her Fertilome test. Having a concrete plan based on what’s in her DNA gives her a new sense of hope. “Now I feel like we’re armed with information,” she said. But at the same time, she said, knowing what may be wrong with her makes her apprehensive about whether she’ll ever get pregnant.

After all, so far, the test has pointed her only to try nutritional tweaks of uncertain value. It doesn’t offer any definitive answers.

And that’s what gives Dr. Valerie Baker pause. A reproductive endocrinologist at Stanford, she recently suggested the test to a patient with longstanding infertility. The patient asked a good question: What would we do differently if we had this genetic analysis?

“I don’t know,” Baker recalled responding. “I probably wouldn’t do anything differently.”

She did not end up ordering the test.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The company’s CEO is clearly identified. Physicians who serve as sources and who have used the test are distinguished from those who have not.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
AUGUSTA, Ga. (March 9, 2017) - The first year of free lung cancer screening in the Augusta, Georgia area found more than double the rate seen in a previous large, national study as well as a Massachusetts-based screening for this number one cancer killer.

The higher rates, coupled with the majority of cases being found in early, treatable stages, point toward the need for ongoing, accessible free screening in high-risk populations and underserved regions, say researchers at the Georgia Cancer Center at Augusta University. High risk includes those who have smoked a pack of cigarettes daily for two or three decades and, if they've quit smoking, did so less than 15 years ago.

The screening of 264 high-risk individuals within a 150-mile radius of Augusta found 3 percent had lung cancer and 75 percent of those were caught early, said Dr. Carsten Schroeder, thoracic oncology surgeon at the Georgia Cancer Center and Medical College of Georgia at AU. The researchers note that a percentage of the patients presenting at screening had early symptoms, like a persistent cough, so the rate of cancer detection in patients who showed no indication of disease was 2.2 percent, still double the rates of previous studies.

"Lung cancer is still the number one cancer killer in the United States and in our world," Schroeder said. "If we catch it in the early stages, ideally before symptoms surface, we can operate and patients can have an overall survival rate of 90 percent." Five-year survival rates are closer to 5 percent in more advanced disease.

The pioneering National Lung Screening Trial, which began in 2002 and included 33 largely urban centers, found 292 cases of lung cancer among the 26,722 high-risk individuals screened in the first year, for a rate of 1.1 percent. That study also provided the first broad evidence that low-dose computed tomography, or LDCT, was a more effective screening tool than the traditional chest X-ray. A decade later, the Massachusetts-based Lahey Hospital & Medical Center, on which the Augusta screening was modeled, found a .6 percent prevalence in the first 10 months of screening.

Like the previous experiences, the Augusta area screening that started in 2014, also reiterated the ability of LDCT to find lung cancer early, said Schroeder, corresponding author of the study in Southern Medical Journal.

Six of the eight cases found in the screening were considered potentially curable with surgery. Positive results were communicated directly to the participant's primary care provider; negative results were communicated to primary care docs and participants, along with a reminder for another screening in a year.

Participants, particularly from surrounding, more rural communities, have limited access to health care, Schroeder said. The area's median household income is 27 percent lower than the national average and the poverty level is 67 percent higher, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. The Augusta-area experience found generally younger patients, who started smoking earlier in life and had multiple risk factors. Augusta area participants were an average of 60 years old, about half male and female, more than 68 percent were white and nearly 20 percent were black.

"It doesn't matter how old you are, if you have smoked 30 years, you might want to consider a lung-cancer screening," Schroeder said, referencing the reality that some adults started smoking as children. Part of his drive to start a screening program in the Augusta area was that, when he relocated here three years ago from the Cleveland area, he found patients were often referred to him with later, less-treatable disease. In the Cleveland area where Schroeder previously practiced as a faculty member at Case Western Reserve University and where access to health care and/or health insurance was more widely available, early lung cancers might even be detected incidentally when patients had CT scans for a variety of other reasons.

Augusta researchers were able to offer free screening by utilizing natural downtime of the combined positive emission tomography, or PET, and computed tomography, or CT, scanner, said Dr. Norman B. Thomson III, chief of general/cardiothoracic radiology in the MCG Department of Radiology and Imaging and study co-author.

The combination technology is often used to visualize other tumor types throughout the body and many patients require an injection of sugar dye, which will be taken up by the tumor but must first circulate for about an hour before the scan is done. That means the machine is staffed at times when it is not able to be fully used for other diagnostic procedures, time that provides a natural window for lung screening using just the CT imaging capability in under five minutes from arrival to exit, Thomson said. More typically, a scan could cost between $100-$250.

In the last decade, CT technology has gotten increasingly adept at picking up early, small nodules, Thomson said. Low radiation doses work well in the lungs, which are mostly filled with air that provides a blank background for nodule surveillance. Thomson notes that means LDCT is also adept at finding things like scar tissue and small inflammatory nodules, that also are more common in the lungs of smokers. Nodules a third of an inch or smaller tend not to be cancer and more solid masses tend to be, Thomson said. They may follow up on smaller nodules in six months, then if the nodule is stable, go back to annual reviews.

And while some lung cancers are super aggressive, screening also may uncover some slow-growing versions that - like some prostate cancers - will not threaten life but need to be treated and/or closely followed once found.

"That's why the acid test for screening is not how many cancers you find or what stage the cancer is," Thomson said, rather what screening does to lung cancer death rates. Current evidence definitely supports screening, he said. Also, like lung cancer has been coincidently found in CT scans for other reasons, physicians like Thomson and Schroeder are now incidentally finding cardiovascular disease in their lung cancer screening.

To date about 700 individuals have been screened in the Augusta area and Schroeder is working to expand statewide, hoping to use the state public medical school's extensive campus network that has students learning from physicians at practices and hospitals across Georgia, as a natural base.

"We want to reach as many people as we can as early as we can," he said. Also, about half of patients screened continue to smoke so screening might also be a logical point for smoking intervention, Schroeder said.

The original National Lung Screening Trial, orchestrated by the National Cancer Institute and the American College of Radiology, was launched in 2002 and enrolled nearly 54,000 patients nationally. Five-year survival rates were about 70 percent for early cancers and about 5 percent for lung cancer found late.

Following the trial, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, a nonprofit organization of cancer centers that develop guidelines for cancer diagnosis and treatment, along with the United States Preventive Services Task Force, which makes recommendations for preventive medicine, recommended screening high-risk individuals on a slightly broader scale, which the Lahey and Augusta area screening used. The group recommends screening for those age 55-80 with a 30-pack year or greater history who have stopped smoking for 15 years or less and those age 50 or older with a 20-pack year smoking history and an additional risk factor other than secondhand smoke, such as family history of lung cancer or a personal cancer history. A pack year means smoking one pack a day for 30 years, or a variation like two packs daily for 15 years. After 15 years of not smoking, the lung cancer risk tends to diminish but never vanishes. Schroeder would prefer the screening still not stop there.

A total of 398 individuals signed up for the Augusta area screening, 350 qualified and 264 actually had LDCT. More than 80 patients were not screened in the first year, primarily because of socioeconomic and travel limitations that created a six-week backlog.

Ninety percent of lung cancer is related to cigarette smoking, the leading cause of preventable disease and death in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Symptoms of lung cancer include persistent, intense coughing, shortness of breath, pain in the chest, shoulder or back and changes in the color and/or volume of phlegm or mucus, hoarseness and coughing up blood.

A 2015 survey of smoking by adults by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found about 15 percent of adults in the country smoked, rates for Georgia and adjacent South Carolina were between 16-20 percent. Rates in Massachusetts, where the Lahey screening occurred, are 12.8 to 16.4 percent. Rates were highest in certain demographics. As examples, smoking rates were highest among those without a graduate education degree certificate and lowest among those with a graduate degree; higher among those living below the poverty level versus above it; and higher among some minorities such as American Indians and Alaska Natives, multiple- race individuals and blacks.

For more information about free lung cancer screening at the Georgia Cancer Center and MCG, call 706-721-4726 or email lung@augusta.edu.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: While the story doesn’t explicitly state where the funding for the initiative came from, it’s also not clear whether there was any external source of funding. Based on the description, the study comes across as a clinician-driven initiative designed to make use of down time on diagnostic equipment. There does not appear to be a conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Women who take bone drugs for several years have a slightly increased chance of suffering an unusual type of thigh fracture, according to a large Canadian study.

The findings add to earlier concern over the medicines, called bisphosphonates, whose U.S. labels have been required since October to include a warning about the thighbone fracture risk.

However, researchers stress the drugs are effective at preventing fractures of the hip or spine, which are much more common in elderly people with the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis.

And the actual risk of having one of the unusual fractures was low, said Laura Y. Park-Wyllie, of St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto, who worked on the new study.

“Women with osteoporosis who are at high risk of fractures should not stop taking their treatment,” she told Reuters Health.

Some 10 million Americans currently suffer from bone thinning, according to the National Osteoporosis Foundation. The majority are postmenopausal women.

Park-Wyllie and colleagues tapped into data on more than 205,000 Ontario women at least 68 years old who had taken the bone drugs. Their findings appear in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Overall, 716 women suffered the unusual type of thighbone fracture after starting the bone drugs, and nearly 10,000 had typical hip fractures.

The risk of a thighbone fracture differed depending on how long the women had been taking the medicine. After taking bone drugs for five years, about one in 1,000 women went on to suffer a thigh fracture over the next year.

That works out to nearly three times the risk of those who’d taken the drugs for roughly three months or less, after accounting for other risk factors.

On the other hand, longer treatment was tied to a 24-percent decrease in hip fractures, which along with wrist and spine fractures affect about half of all people with osteoporosis.

There are several alternative ways to treat osteoporosis, including hormone treatment for women. And one preliminary study, published along with the Canadian findings in JAMA, hints that the common heart medication nitroglycerin might also boost bone health.

So far, however, the cheap and effective bisphosphonate bone drugs remain the most popular treatment option. But some experts worry that negative media coverage might have led to more fractures and possibly deaths by dissuading patients from taking the drugs.

“The bad news is that overstating the levels of risk of side effects with these drugs — which the media have been doing for some time now — has led people to stop the drugs when they should be taking them,” said Dr. Ethel S. Siris, who heads the Toni Stabile Osteoporosis Center at Columbia University in New York.

Apart from atypical fractures, the most serious side effect of the bone drugs is bone death, or osteonecrosis, of the jaw. But that’s a very rare problem, experts say, which only affects about one in 100,000 people on bisphosphonates.

“If you’re taking the drugs and you’ve been on them for a while, but aren’t sure if you’re at high risk, you should ask your doctor about it,” Park-Wyllie advised.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal expert panel, recommends screening all women over 65 for osteoporosis.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Reuters gives us two voices in this piece, including a study author and a treating physician. We are not told anything about whether the treating physician has any ties to the industry, but we couldn’t find any in a brief online search.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have developed a score that predicts an individual's risk of dying within 5 years for people aged between 40 and 70 years old in the UK, according to new research published in The Lancet.

The score, which uses measures that can be obtained by simple questionnaires without any need for physical examination, such as self-rated health and usual walking speed, could be used by individuals to improve awareness of their health status, and by doctors to identify high-risk individuals for further treatment, say the authors.

Individuals can calculate their personalised 5-year mortality risk and what the study authors call an 'Ubble age' [1]?the age where the average mortality risk in the population is most similar to the estimated risk of the individual?through an online questionnaire, using the dedicated interactive website [2]. The site was developed with Sense About Science [3], a UK charity that that equips people to make sense of scientific and medical claims in public discussion.

"The Ubble website allows anybody in the UK between forty and seventy years old to calculate their 'Ubble age' and their risk of dying within the next five years compared to the general population, using a simple set of a dozen or so questions," says study co-author Professor Erik Ingelsson from Uppsala University, Sweden. "This is the first study of its kind which is based on a very large study sample, and is not limited to specific populations, single types of risk, or requiring laboratory testing." [4]

To create the score, Professor Ingelsson and Dr Andrea Ganna, from the Karolinska Institutet in Sweden, analysed data collected between 2006 and 2010 from nearly half a million adults aged between 40 and 70 years from the UK Biobank [5]. They used a statistical survival model to assess the probability that 655 specific demographic, lifestyle, and health measurements could predict death from any cause and six specific causes, in men and women separately.

The results allow researchers to compare the predictive ability of a large number of health-related risk factors which were formerly studied separately and using different populations, although the predictive ability of risk factors does not necessarily imply they are causally related to the risk of dying.

For example, the research shows that self-reported information, such as usual walking pace and illness and injuries in the past 2 years, is generally a stronger predictor of death and survival than biological measurements, such as pulse rate and blood pressure. Surprisingly, self-reported walking pace is a stronger predictor of death risk in both men and women than smoking habits and other lifestyle measurements.

Self-rated overall health [6] emerged as the single most powerful predictor of death in men, and previous cancer diagnosis the strongest predictor in women (see figure 1 of the Article). When excluding individuals with serious diseases or disorders, smoking habits were the strongest predictors of mortality from any cause (figure 3).

Using these findings, the researchers then developed an easy-to-calculate risk score for an individual's risk of dying in the next 5 years, based on the most predictive self-reported information, including 13 questions for men and 11 for women. The performance of the score was validated in 35810 participants enrolled at two Scottish centres which were not used to develop the score, and was found to have around 80% accuracy in men and women (table 2). UK life tables and census information were used to calibrate the score for the overall UK population.

According to study co-author Dr Ganna, "The fact that the score can be measured online in a brief questionnaire, without any need for lab tests or physical examination, is an exciting development. We hope that our score might eventually enable doctors to quickly and easily identify their highest risk patients, although more research will be needed to determine whether it can be used in this way in a clinical setting. Of course, the score has a degree of uncertainty and shouldn't be seen as a deterministic prediction. For most people, a high risk of dying in the next five years can be reduced by increased physical activity, smoking cessation, and a healthy diet." [4]

Writing in a linked Comment, Simon Thompson and Peter Willeit from the University of Cambridge in the UK say, "One appealing aspect of the website is the representation of an individual's estimated 5 year mortality risk as what the authors call "Ubble age" (the age where the average risk in the population is most similar to the estimated risk of the individual); this concept is similar to that of heart age developed for communicating cardiovascular risk. Whether this will help individuals improve self-awareness of their health status, however, or only lead to so-called cyberchondria, is a moot point. Moreover, 5 year mortality is easier to predict than long-term morbidity, or quality of life and life expectancy, all of which are more important to individuals and to society."

This study was funded by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council.

[2] For preview login details for the Ubble website, please email daisy.barton@lancet.com.

[3] See http://www. for more information.

[4] Quotes direct from author and cannot be found in text of Article.

[5] UK Biobank http://www. recruited half a million people aged between 40 and 69 years in 2006-10 from across the country. Information on sociodemographics, physical measures, health and lifestyle factors, medical history, and blood measurements were taken. All participants agreed to have their health followed. The resource has been open to bona fide health researchers for 18 months. So far more than 1800 scientists have registered with UK Biobank to study a wide range of diseases.

"UK Biobank will only be limited by the imagination of the researchers using it," said Professor Rory Collins, UK Biobank Principal Investigator. "As an open access resource, scientists will be able to scrutinise each other's work, build upon their results or undertake their own novel studies to improve the health of future generations."

[6] Assessed using the question: In general how would you rate your overall health? Excellent/Good/Fair/Poor.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funders are clearly identified in the notes at the bottom of the press release.  The investigators assert the absence of conflicts of interest in the journal article itself.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lost Posture: Why Some Indigenous Cultures May Not Have Back Pain

Editor's note, June 10: We have added an acknowledgement of several sources that Esther Gokhale used while developing her theories on back pain. These include physiotherapy methods, such as the Alexander Technique and the Feldenkrais Method, and the work of anthropologist Noelle Perez-Christiaens.

Back pain is a tricky beast. Most Americans will at some point have a problem with their backs. And for an unlucky third, treatments won't work, and the problem will become chronic.

Believe it or not, there are a few cultures in the world where back pain hardly exists. One indigenous tribe in central India reported essentially none. And the discs in their backs showed little signs of degeneration as people aged.

An acupuncturist in Palo Alto, Calif., thinks she has figured out why. She has traveled around the world studying cultures with low rates of back pain — how they stand, sit and walk. Now she's sharing their secrets with back pain sufferers across the U.S.

About two decades ago, Esther Gokhale started to struggle with her own back after she had her first child. "I had excruciating pain. I couldn't sleep at night," she says. "I was walking around the block every two hours. I was just crippled."

Gokhale had a herniated disc. Eventually she had surgery to fix it. But a year later, it happened again. "They wanted to do another back surgery. You don't want to make a habit out of back surgery," she says.

This time around, Gokhale wanted to find a permanent fix for her back. And she wasn't convinced Western medicine could do that. So Gokhale started to think outside the box. She had an idea: "Go to populations where they don't have these huge problems and see what they're doing."

[Added June 10] So Gokhale studied findings from anthropologists, such as Noelle Perez-Christiaens, who analyzed postures of indigenous populations. And she studied physiotherapy methods, such as the Alexander Technique and the Feldenkrais Method.

Then over the next decade, Gokhale went to cultures around the world that live far away from modern life. She went to the mountains in Ecuador, tiny fishing towns in Portugal and remote villages of West Africa.

"I went to villages where every kid under age 4 was crying because they were frightened to see somebody with white skin — they'd never seen a white person before," she says.

Gokhale took photos and videos of people who walked with water buckets on their heads, collected firewood or sat on the ground weaving, for hours.

"I have a picture in my book of these two women who spend seven to nine hours everyday, bent over, gathering water chestnuts," Gokhale says. "They're quite old. But the truth is they don't have a back pain."

She tried to figure out what all these different people had in common. The first thing that popped out was the shape of their spines. "They have this regal posture, and it's very compelling."

And it's quite different than American spines.

If you look at an American's spine from the side, or profile, it's shaped like the letter S. It curves at the top and then back again at the bottom.

But Gokhale didn't see those two big curves in people who don't have back pain. "That S shape is actually not natural," she says. "It's a J-shaped spine that you want."

In fact, if you look at drawings from Leonardo da Vinci — or a Gray's Anatomy book from 1901 — the spine isn't shaped like a sharp, curvy S. It's much flatter, all the way down the back. Then at the bottom, it curves to stick the buttocks out. So the spine looks more like the letter J.

"The J-shaped spine is what you see in Greek statues. It's what you see in young children. It's good design," Gokhale says.

So Gokhale worked to get her spine into the J shape. And gradually her back pain went away.

Then Gokhale realized she could help others. She developed a set of exercises, wrote a book and set up a studio in downtown Palo Alto.

Now her list of clients is impressive. She's helped YouTube CEO Susan Wojcicki and Matt Drudge of the Drudge Report. She has given classes at Google, Facebook and companies across the country. In Silicon Valley, she's known as the "posture guru."

Each year, doctors in the Bay Area refer hundreds of patients to Gokhale. One of them is Dr. Neeta Jain, an internist at the Palo Alto Medical Foundation. She puts Gokhale's method in the same category as Pilates and yoga for back pain. And it doesn't bother her that the method hasn't been tested in a clinical trial.

"If people are finding things that are helpful, and it's not causing any harm, then why do we have to wait for a trial?" Jain asked.

But there's still a big question looming here: Is Gokhale right? Have people in Western cultures somehow forgotten the right way to stand?

Scientists don't know yet, says Dr. Praveen Mummaneni, a neurosurgeon at the University of California, San Francisco's Spine Center. Nobody has done a study on traditional cultures to see why some have lower rates of back pain, he says. Nobody has even documented the shape of their spines.

"I'd like to go and take X-rays of indigenous populations and compare it to people in the Western world," Mummaneni says. "I think that would be helpful."

But there's a whole bunch of reasons why Americans' postures — and the shape of their spines — may be different than those of indigenous populations, he says. For starters, Americans tend to be much heavier.

"If you have a lot of fat built up in the belly, that could pull your weight forward," Mummaneni says. "That could curve the spine. And people who are thinner probably have less curvature" — and thus a spine shaped more like J than than an S.

Americans are also much less active than people in traditional cultures, Mummaneni says. "I think the sedentary lifestyle promotes a lack of muscle tone and a lack of postural stability because the muscles get weak."

Everyone knows that weak abdominal muscles can cause back pain. In fact, Mummaneni says, stronger muscles might be the secret to Gokhale's success.

In other words, it's not that the J-shaped spine is the ideal one — or the healthiest. It's what goes into making the J-shaped spine that matters: "You have to use muscle strength to get your spine to look like a J shape," he says.

So Gokhale has somehow figured out a way to teach people to build up their core muscles without them even knowing it. "Yes, I think that's correct," Mummaneni says. "You're not going to be able to go from the S- to the J-shaped spine without having good core muscle strength. And I think that's key here."

So indigenous people around the world don't have a magic bullet for stopping back pain. They've just got beefy abdominal muscles, and their lifestyle helps to keep them that way, even as they age.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: In addition to Esther Gokhale, the story cites two physicians. The story clearly notes that one of the physicians refers patients to Gokhale.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Pleasantville, N.Y., developmental pediatrician won’t allow drug marketers in his office, and says he doesn’t always prescribe medication for children diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Yet Dr. Bertin has recently changed the way he talks about medication, offering parents a powerful argument. Recent research, he says, suggests the pills may “normalize” the child’s brain over time, rewiring neural connections so that a child would feel more focused and in control, long after the last pill was taken.

“There might be quite a profound neurological benefit,” he said in an interview.

A growing number of doctors who treat the estimated 6.4 million American children diagnosed with A.D.H.D. are hearing that stimulant medications not only help treat the disorder but may actually be good for their patients’ brains. In an interview last spring with Psych Congress Network, an Internet news site for mental health professionals, Dr. Timothy Wilens, chief of child and adolescent psychiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital, said “we have enough data to say they’re actually neuroprotective.” The pills, he said, help “normalize” the function and structure of brains in children with A.D.H.D., so that, “over years, they turn out to look more like non-A.D.H.D. kids.”

Medication is already by far the most common treatment for A.D.H.D., with roughly 4 million American children taking the pills — mostly stimulants, such as amphetamines and methylphenidate. Yet the decision can be anguishing for parents who worry about both short-term and long-term side effects. If the pills can truly produce long-lasting benefits, more parents might be encouraged to start their children on these medications early and continue them for longer.

Leading A.D.H.D. experts, however, warn the jury is still out.

“Sometimes wishful thinking gives us hope that the impressive short-term relative benefits of medication over other treatments will persist beyond childhood, but I haven’t seen it,” said James Swanson, director of the Child Development Center at the University of California at Irvine. Dr. Swanson, a co-author of a landmark federally funded study, the Multimodal Treatment of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, said that follow-up research found overall improvement but no greater long-term benefits after three years for children who were treated with medication compared to those who weren’t. One possible reason, as the report noted, was that many children refuse to continue taking medication after a year or so, something most parentsof such children well know.

Research has shown that the brains of people with A.D.H.D. on average look and function differently than those who don’t have the disorder, particularly when it comes to processing two important neurotransmitters: dopamine and norepinephrine. For most people with A.D.H.D., stimulants can temporarily boost focus, motivation and self-control by increasing the availability of these chemical messengers. The question is whether these effects can last once the drugs have left the bloodstream.

In arguing for “normalization,” Dr. Wilens cited a major review in the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry in late 2013, which looked at 29 brain-scan studies. Although the studies had different methods and goals, the authors said that, together, they suggested that stimulants “are associated with attenuation of abnormalities in brain structure, function, and biochemistry in subjects with A.D.H.D.”

But other A.D.H.D. experts challenge this conclusion. Dr. F. Xavier Castellanos, director of research at the New York University Child Study Center, called assertions that stimulants are neuroprotective “exaggerated,” adding: “The best inference is that there is no evidence of harm from medications – normalization is a possibility, but far from demonstrated.”

A.D.H.D. is an exceptionally controversial diagnosis, with particular controversy zeroing in on researchers, including Dr. Wilens himself and some of the authors of the 2013 report he cited who have received financial support from pharmaceutical firms. In an email, Dr. Wilens said he had not received “any personal income” from the pharmaceutical industry since 2009.

As several experts noted, a major impediment to determining the long-term impacts of A.D.H.D. medication is that a “gold-standard” study would require researchers to assign children randomly to groups that either received medication or didn’t. Such a practice has been deemed unethical due to the widespread belief that the medication can help struggling children, at least in the short-term.

And other research has raised new concerns. One peer-reviewed 2013 study co-authored by Dr. Swanson suggested that the stimulants may change the brain over time so as to undermine the long-term response to the medication and even exacerbate symptoms when people aren’t taking them.

Dr. Peter Jensen, the former associate director of child and adolescent research at the National Institute of Mental Health, cautioned that parents should not try to force children with A.D.H.D. to take medication when they don’t want to, adding that “most kids don’t want to.”

Dr. Jensen, who now heads the REACH Institute, a national nonprofit organization concerned with children’s mental health, once surveyed 100 parents of sons and daughters in their 20s who had been diagnosed with A.D.H.D., asking what made the most difference.

“Eighty percent of them said ‘Love your child. Help him or her advocate for themselves, and find a doc who’ll work with you through thick or thin whether you medicate or not,” Dr. Jensen said. “Only a minority of these parents mentioned medication.”

Katherine Ellison is a Pulitzer Prize-winning former foreign correspondent and author and co-author of seven books, including the forthcoming “What Everyone Needs to Know about A.D.H.D.” (Oxford University Press), co-authored with Stephen Hinshaw, Vice-Chair for Psychology, Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco.

Katherine Ellison is an author or co-author of four books about A.D.H.D. and education, including “Buzz: A Year of Paying Attention.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The best feature of this story is the presentation of experts with different perspectives who outline the reasons for their views. It also notes concerns about financial ties between some experts and the pharmaceutical industry.
While we’ll award a satisfactory rating, we wish the story had put more emphasis on some of these researchers’ checkered history with respect to conflict disclosure. Notably, the lead author of the study cited as evidence for a normalizing effect on brains reportedly failed to disclose payments totaling more than $1.6 million dollars from drug companies. And the source citing that study, Dr. Timothy E. Wilens, failed to disclose similar payments.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If you're loading up on vitamin C and zinc to stave off the sniffles, you should try an earlier bedtime instead. People who regularly sleep six hours or less each night are four times more likely to get a cold than people who sleep just an hour longer, a new study finds.

"It's almost alarming how strong the effects are," says Aric Prather, an assistant professor in the department of psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco and lead author of the study, published Monday in the journal Sleep.

The study provides more evidence of the link between healthy sleeping habits — which experts say means at least seven hours of sleep each night — and overall good health.

To conduct the study, the researchers asked 164 healthy participants with an average age of 30 to wear a wrist actigraph — a device that monitors sleep — for one week to establish their baseline sleep habits. Later, they sequestered the participants in a hotel and, using nasal drops, dosed each of them with a rhinovirus— aka the common cold bug.

The found the chronic poor sleepers became sick more often: those who slept for five hours or less each night were 4.5 times more likely to catch the cold than people who slept seven hours or more. Participants who slept for six hours each night did only slightly better -- they were 4.2 times more likely to develop a cold than the seven-hour-a-night folks.

In fact, sleep was more important than any other factor, including age, stress or income level, in predicting who would get sick after being exposure to the cold virus, the researchers say.

"Sleep is part of our own nature's defense against illness," says Dr. M. Safwan Badr, former president of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine and chief of the division of pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine at Wayne State University School of Medicine in Detroit. He calls the study's results "powerful."

The study is unique because it used objective measures to show that poor sleep habits make people more vulnerable to a cold virus, says Badr, who was not involved in the research. The actigraphy measured sleep in a much more accurate way than information researchers get from self-reports, he says. Furthermore, the researchers actually gave the subjects the virus, assuring that everyone was exposed to the same bug.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes remarks from Dr. M. Safwan Badr, who was not involved with the study. He brings some useful perspective as far as what is new about the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a first-of-its-kind finding, a new stroke-healing gel helped regrow neurons and blood vessels in mice with stroke-damaged brains, UCLA researchers report in the May 21 issue of Nature Materials.

"We tested this in laboratory mice to determine if it would repair the brain in a model of stroke, and lead to recovery," said Dr. S. Thomas Carmichael, Professor and Chair of neurology at UCLA. "This study indicated that new brain tissue can be regenerated in what was previously just an inactive brain scar after stroke."

The results suggest that such an approach may someday be a new therapy for stroke in people, said Dr. Tatiana Segura, a former Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at UCLA who is now a professor at Duke University. Carmichael and Segura collaborated on the study.

The brain has a limited capacity for recovery after stroke and other diseases. Unlike some other organs in the body, such as the liver or skin, the brain does not regenerate new connections, blood vessels or new tissue structures. Tissue that dies in the brain from stroke is absorbed, leaving a cavity, devoid of blood vessels, neurons or axons, the thin nerve fibers that project from neurons.

To see if healthy tissue surrounding the cavity could be coaxed into healing the stroke injury, Segura engineered a gel to inject into the stroke cavity that thickens to mimic the properties of brain tissue, creating a scaffolding for new growth.

The gel is infused with molecules that stimulate blood vessel growth and suppress inflammation, since inflammation results in scars and impedes regrowth of functional tissue.

After 16 weeks, stroke cavities in mice contained regenerated brain tissue, including new neural networks - a result that had not been seen before. The mice with new neurons showed improved motor behavior, though the exact mechanism wasn't clear.

"The new axons could actually be working," said Segura. "Or the new tissue could be improving the performance of the surrounding, unharmed brain tissue."

The gel was eventually absorbed by the body, leaving behind only new tissue.

This research was designed to explore recovery in acute stroke, or the period immediately following stroke - in mice, that is five days; in humans, that is two months. Next, Carmichael and Segura are determining if brain tissue can be regenerated in mice long after the stroke injury. More than 6 million Americans are living with the long-term outcomes of stroke, known as chronic stroke.

In addition to Carmichael and Segura, other authors of the paper are Lina Nih and Shiva Gojgini, both of UCLA.

The study was supported by funds from the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding is listed as from the NIH. The authors stated they had no financial conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 2, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- An implanted device that monitors brain activity may offer a way to predict seizures in people with uncontrolled epilepsy, a small pilot study suggests.

The findings, reported online May 2 in the journal Lancet Neurology, are based on only 15 patients, and the device worked far better in some than others. But experts said the results are promising, and should prompt further studies.

"We just wanted to see if this is feasible, and this study shows that it is," said lead researcher Dr. Mark Cook, of the University of Melbourne and St. Vincent's Hospital in Australia.

The prospect of being able to predict seizures is "very exciting," he said, in part because it's the uncertainty of the disorder that can dim people's quality of life.

If people know a seizure is coming, Cook said, they can avoid driving or swimming that day, for example. They might also be able to adjust their medication use.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder in which the brain's normal electrical activity is temporarily disrupted, leading to a seizure. Seizures can be obvious, causing unconsciousness or convulsions, but often they trigger subtler changes in a person's perceptions or behavior -- like a short staring spell, confusion or an altered sense of taste or smell.

Epilepsy is usually managed with medication, but for 30 percent to 40 percent of people with the condition, drugs don't keep seizures at bay. The new study included 15 people who were having at least two to 12 "disabling" seizures a month that were resistant to drug therapy.

Cook's team implanted each patient with the experimental device, which consists of electrodes placed between the skull and the brain, plus wires that run to a unit implanted under the skin of the chest.

That unit wirelessly sends data to a hand-held device that flashes a red warning light if there is a "high likelihood" of an impending seizure. (A white light signals a "moderate" likelihood, while a blue light means the odds are low.)

For the first four months, the devices collected data on patients' seizures without actually flashing warnings. For 11 of the 15 patients, the implants seemed capable of correctly predicting a high risk of seizure at least 65 percent of the time. Those patients went on to the next four-month phase, where the devices were activated to give warnings.

Over those four months, the implants worked fairly well for eight patients -- correctly giving the high-risk warning anywhere from 56 percent to 100 percent of the time.

There are plenty of questions left, said Dr. Ashesh Mehta, director of epilepsy surgery at the North Shore-LIJ Comprehensive Epilepsy Care Center in Great Neck, N.Y.

"This study is an important first step," said Mehta, who was not involved in the research. "The next step would be to implant these in a larger sample of patients. And you need to see which groups of patients might be good candidates for this."

Mehta said someone who has seizures only once in a while might not get enough benefit to outweigh the downsides of false alarms, for example. And someone who has many seizures each month might get little added information from the warning system, he said.

It may be the people who fall in the middle -- who have disabling seizures at unpredictable intervals -- who would stand to benefit the most, he said.

But any benefits need to be weighed against the risks. Besides false alarms and unnecessary anxiety, the implant itself can cause problems. In this study, three patients had serious complications, including one with an infection and one whose chest device moved and caused her pain. Two patients ultimately had the implants removed.

Still, Mehta agreed that the technology could prove helpful to some people with epilepsy. If they know a seizure is coming, they might take an extra dose of their medication, for example.

An implanted device like this could also give patients and their doctors more information about their epilepsy, he added. In this study, the implants revealed that most patients were suffering more seizures than they thought; one patient who reported 11 a month was actually having more than 100.

In real life, Mehta said, it can be hard to know if you're feeling bad because of side effects from epilepsy medication or because you're having a lot of seizures. A device like this could help sort that out.

But what's still needed is evidence that this device does improve the quality of patients' lives, Mehta said.

The study was funded by NeuroVista, the Seattle-based company developing the technology. Several of Cook's co-researchers work for the company.

Learn more about epilepsy from the Epilepsy Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent expert source contributed important cautious perspectives.  The fact that the study was funded by the device manufacturer and that several of the authoring researchers work for the company was disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - Patients with atrial fibrillation (AF), a rapid irregular heartbeat caused by pooling blood in the heart which can lead to heart failure and stroke, are often treated with an ablation, a minimally invasive procedure used to remove the tissue which causes the pooled blood. Following this procedure, patients are often prescribed long-term, daily oral anticoagulation medications -- also known as blood thinners. However, a new study shows the use of novel anticoagulants for AF prescribed on an "as-needed basis" guided by diligent pulse monitoring, can be a safe and effective alternative to lowering overall risk of stroke. Researchers from the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania presented their findings today at the Heart Rhythm Society's 37th Annual Scientific Session in San Francisco.

Oral anticoagulation therapy is recommended in patients with infrequent AF and high risk of stroke, however, prolonged use of blood thinners is associated with a higher bleeding risk. To determine an alternate but effective therapy, the researchers enrolled 100 patients age 45-78 with significant stroke risk and coupled with diligent pulse monitoring -- manually or by using a smartphone - twice a day with "as needed" anticoagulants for the treatment of AF. Patients were provided with novel oral anticoagulants and were instructed to start taking the medication if they suspected or detected an AF episode lasting longer than one hour.

"This kind of approach to anticoagulation therapy requires an open line of communication between the patient and the care team, and calls for a specific type of patient. We call them "highly motivated patients," said lead author Monica Pammer, PA-C, a physician assistant in Electrophysiology at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. "These are patients who were actively seeking, preparing for and are committed to the alternate treatment method, and who are informed about how to diligently and effectively monitor their pulse throughout the day."

Researchers followed the participates for approximately 23 months, during which time 28 patients started taking the blood thinner at least once for a suspected or detected AF episode, and only 10 patients transitioned back to chronic oral anticoagulation therapy for recurrent AF. No patients experienced a stroke or transient ischemic attack - also called a mini-stroke -- and there was only one mild bleeding incident that required medical attention.

"It is extremely common for patients with AF to seek treatment that does not involve the use of chronic oral anticoagulants therapy, as there are other risks associated with their long term use," said co-author Francis E. Marchlinski, MD, FHRS, director of Electrophysiology for the University of Pennsylvania Health System and Richard T. and Angela Clark President's Distinguished Professor in the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. "The goal of this study was to find a safe and effected treatment option, and our initial results support 'as-needed' blood thinners and pulse monitoring as the alternative."

All patients enrolled had no AF recurrences during an extended period of telemetry monitoring before the study began, and were willing and able to check their pulses manually or by a smartphone-enabled device twice a day. Of these patients, 84 had been ablated, sixteen were being treated with drug therapy, and three had implanted devices that served as a quality control check.

"While this is an observational study with a relatively small patient sample, further research is certainly needed to better understand alternate treatment options," said Pammer. "And, we stress that 'as-needed' blood thinners should not be considered unless the patient qualifies as highly motivated."

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania (founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $5.3 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 18 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $373 million awarded in the 2015 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2015, Penn Medicine provided $253.3 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It seems that the funding sources are very transparent as is the involvement of the researchers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Aug. 6, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Treatment with growth hormone-releasing hormone improves memory and focus in healthy adults and in those who already show some signs of mental decline, new research finds.

"Growth hormone-releasing hormone doesn't target one specific area in the body and brain," said study lead author Laura Baker, an associate professor of psychiatry and behavioral science at the University of Washington School of Medicine, in Seattle. "It stimulates a whole cascade of hormones in the body and brain; it stimulates normal function of a system that was working at a younger age so that cells can do what they were programmed to do at birth."

Results of the study are published in the Aug. 6 issue of the Archives of Neurology.

As levels of growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) decrease with age, so too do other hormones stimulated by GHRH, such as growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor 1. All of these hormones are believed to play a role in brain health, and decreasing levels of these hormones are suspected to play a role in the development of Alzheimer's disease.

In a previous study, Baker and her colleagues demonstrated that treatment with GHRH provided a short-term boost in memory and concentration for healthy adults. In the current study, they wanted to see if GHRH could help restore some function in people who were showing signs of a condition known as mild cognitive impairment. People with this condition don't yet have Alzheimer's disease, but they do have problems with memory and focus, and they're at higher risk of developing Alzheimer's disease, according to the Alzheimer's Foundation.

In all, 137 adults, including 61 with mild cognitive impairment, completed the current study. The study volunteers were between 55 and 87 years old, with an average age of 68, according to the study.

The study participants were randomly assigned to receive a daily self-administered injection of growth hormone-releasing hormone or a placebo injection for 20 weeks. The study medications were supplied by the manufacturer of the growth hormone-releasing hormone.

Study funding was provided by grants from the U.S. National Institute on Aging and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.

Tests to measure mental prowess were given at the start of the study, and at 10, 20 and 30 weeks after treatment began.

Baker said the researchers saw benefits in healthy adults and those with mild cognitive impairment who received GHRH. They saw improvement in "planning, organizing, focusing and shifting from one task to another" -- tasks collectively known as executive function. Baker said the researchers also saw a mild improvement in verbal memory in those treated with GHRH, but the results weren't as strong as for the executive function tasks.

Treatment with GHRH boosted levels of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) by 117 percent, according to the study. "IGF1 is a hormone we all have from birth that increases through development until it starts to decline in our early 50s. It promotes all kinds of growth in the body and brain, but if you have excess IGF1, it may put you at risk for cancer," said Baker, who added that people with Alzheimer's disease tend to have low levels of IGF1.

Benefits from the treatment lasted as long as people stayed on the treatment. When treatment was stopped, the benefits gradually tapered off, Baker said.

Insulin levels also spiked during treatment with GHRH, but only in the group already having memory problems. Baker said it wasn't clear why this happened, but she suspects the body may be trying to compensate for an insulin shortage in the brain in people with memory problems. Insulin helps glucose (sugar) enter cells to provide fuel for those cells.

Dr. Joel Zonszein, an endocrinologist from Montefiore Medical Center, in New York City, praised the study but said some questions still remain.

"This was an impressive study showing how GHRH can have a positive effect on cognitive function," Zonszein said. "The question is, how can we use this in normal individuals? When GHRH goes down with aging, it's a physiological adaptation. And, we don't know what would happen if we gave it chronically."

For instance, "would you alter the feedback mechanism that keeps IGF1 levels from increasing cancer risk? Would it start to lose some of its effect long term?" he said.

"There may be both good and bad effects," Zonszein added.

The researchers said larger and longer trials are needed to assess the hormone's therapeutic potential.

Learn more about mild cognitive impairment from the Alzheimer's Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent expert’s input was important at the end of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Botox injections may provide some relief from arm tremors caused by multiple sclerosis, according to a small study published Monday. Botulinum toxin type A is sold under different brands, but it’s best known by the Allergan brand-name Botox.

Botox gained fame for smoothing aging skin — by blocking nerve signals and relaxing muscles under the skin — but the product has a number of medical uses. In the U.S., Botox is approved to treat conditions like chronic migraine, excessive sweating and certain symptoms of MS: overactive bladder and muscles spasms in the arms.

The new study, published in the journal Neurology, tested the effects of Botox injections on MS-related arm tremors, which affect up to two-thirds of people with MS. Researchers found that when they gave injections to 23 patients, the treatment typically eased their tremors and improved their writing ability.

Right now, there’s no good way to treat MS arm tremors, said Nicholas G. LaRocca, vice-president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society. Physical therapy and exercise have been studied, but are usually not very effective, said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study. Surgery is sometimes used in severe cases, but it’s risky and may not even have lasting benefits.

“Exploring new treatments is important, and it’s heartening to see there’s some promise here,” LaRocca said of the current findings. But there’s still a lot to be learned, he cautioned in an interview.

“This study is fairly preliminary, and it had a small number of patients,” LaRocca said. Larger studies, of more-diverse groups of MS patients, are needed, he said.

The study’s lead researcher agreed on the need for more work. “There are several questions that need to be answered by doing larger and longer-term studies,” Dr. Anneke van der Walt, a neurologist at Royal Melbourne Hospital in Australia, said in an email.

One is how long the benefits of repeat Botox injections might last: this study tested the effects of just one Botox treatment over three months.

In real life, the injections would have to be repeated every few months, or possibly every six months for some people, according to van der Walt. Another question is whether the side effects change over time. Muscle weakness was the most common side effect in this study, van der Walt said. It affected 42 percent of the study patients, though it went away within two weeks.

Muscle weakness is a potential concern in MS patients, LaRocca noted, since that problem often comes with the disease itself.

The study included 23 MS patients with mild to moderate arm tremors. Each patient received a round of Botox injections and a round of placebo injections (containing saline), three months apart. Half of the patients got the Botox first, the other half the placebo.

On average, the patients’ tremor “scores” had gone from a 5 to a 3 six weeks after Botox treatment — which essentially means moving from “moderate” to “mild,” LaRocca said. Their ability to write and draw a straight line had also improved by week six, and the benefits were still there at week 12.

In contrast, there were no improvements after the placebo injections.

Larger studies, van der Walt said, should look at whether Botox is more effective for some tremors than others. Tremors limited to the hand and forearm, for instance, might respond better than tremors that also affect the shoulder. If Botox is eventually approved for this MS symptom, LaRocca said it will be important for doctors to get training in how to give the injections — since the drug has to go into carefully chosen locations in the muscle.

“So practitioners will have to be up to speed,” LaRocca said. There will also be the matter of cost. That will vary from patient to patient, depending on how many injections are needed per treatment.

According to van der Walt, the cost could range from $500 to $1,000 Australian dollars, which are roughly equal to U.S. dollars. In the U.S., Botox treatments can cost $455-$575 per injection site.

Botox maker Allergan supplied the product for the study, and two of the researchers on the work have financial ties to the company. The study itself was funded by the Box Hill MS Research Fund and the Royal Melbourne Hospital.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Actually, most of the quotes came from an independent perspective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Each year, five million people have wisdom teeth removed, but it's up in the air whether all of those surgeries were necessary.

Wisdom teeth, also called the third molars, are four teeth that grow at the very back of each corner of the mouth. For most people, they start to grow in between ages 17 and 25. They're thought to crowd out other teeth or cause tooth decay, which is why many dentists and oral surgeons think it's better to just nip those problems in the bud and take them out as a preventative measure.

But there's a serious debate between dentists and oral surgeons: should they preemptively remove someone's wisdom teeth if the patient doesn't have any symptoms?

Simply put, there's no right answer. It comes down to what you, as a patient, want. Here's what you need to know to figure that out.

Dentists and oral surgeons are fighting over wisdom teeth

Dentists and oral surgeons agree across the board that there's cause to remove wisdom teeth if a patient is in pain or if there are signs of disease popping up, like tooth decay or infection. That's an obvious choice. But taking out wisdom teeth when there aren't any symptoms is where the professionals get into it.

Many dental professionals stick with a watch and wait approach with wisdom teeth to avoid surgery if possible. "Many people don’t have adequate space in their jaw for the teeth to come into full position, but that alone isn’t justification of having them all removed," says Dr. Scott Tomar of University of North Carolina's School of Dentistry. Tomar says that as a dentist he feels the risks of complication, including infection and hitting nerves during surgery, outweigh any benefits of preventative removal.

In 2007, oral surgeon Dr. Jay Friedman called the preventative removals a public health hazard in the American Journal of Public Health. The American Public Health Association has sided with this argument since 2008, when it formally opposed the preventative removal of wisdom teeth. (The same thing happened with tonsils, which doctors no longer remove just to get rid of the chance of infection later on.)

Americans spend an estimated $3 billion a year having their wisdom teeth removed

Some doctors, though, still see preventative oral surgery as being two steps ahead of the problem. If you're going to need your wisdom teeth out eventually, why not have them removed when you're younger and are more likely to recover more easily? Some think of removing the wisdom teeth early on as a way to lessen the crowding of other teeth

"You might not have symptoms now, but you can't assume it's gonna be that way for the rest of your life," says Dr. Ray White, an oral surgeon working at University of North Carolina. Rather than let the teeth cause problems later on, many oral surgeons remove them.

But a 2012 Cochrane review of randomized clinical trials found there's no evidence that removing wisdom teeth will prevent or reduce crowding of other teeth down the line. And a different Cochrane review found that watching and waiting can "may reduce the number of surgical procedures by 60 percent or more.

The question comes down to which side of the fence medical professionals fall on

It's worth noting that oral surgeons make a good chunk of their paychecks by removing wisdom teeth, so there is a financial incentive involved.

"Are there people gaming the system? Sure. You don't get paid much for not doing anything," White says. "But I'd hope we can get past that."

The American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial surgeons says, "There is no pat answer, cookbook recipe, or flow chart that is universally accepted regarding the decision making process" in these cases. So the question comes down to which side of the fence medical professionals fall on, and what works best for their patients.

The risks and benefits of removing your wisdom teeth

There's a chance that if you opt not to have your wisdom teeth taken out, they might be fine for the rest of your life.

There's also a chance that they'll need to come out later. If that's the case, you can't always plan for it. Opting to have them removed gives patients time to plan around the procedure, which leaves people out of commission for about three days.

But inconvenience isn't the only risk. "The risk for complications increases as people get older, and the duration of disability after the operation gets longer as people get older," says oral surgeon Dr. Thomas Dodson.

In some cases, the extraction can be more painful if you wait, Dodson says. That's because the tooth is easier to remove if its roots aren't fully developed.

The common risks related to the surgery include poor wound healing, infection, pain, and uncontrolled bleeding. Nerve injury, in rare cases of wisdom teeth removal, can leave people with permanent numbness around the face and mouth, according to the APHA.

Americans spend an estimated $3 billion a year having 10 million wisdom teeth removed, according to the American Public Health Association. That's a hefty bill for something we may or may not need. How much it costs depends on how the molars are situated. A simple surgical extraction for a wisdom tooth that's showing through the gums should run about $230, according to Healthcare Bluebook. If it's impacted (pushed against another tooth and unable to fully come through the gum), the cost jumps to about $400 per tooth.

Update: Added information about the number of teeth removed.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Sources include a dentist and two oral surgeons as well as numerous published reports and professional association position reports. The story also reminds us that “oral surgeons make a good chunk of their paychecks by removing wisdom teeth, so there is a financial incentive involved.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new form of cataract surgery using a patient's stem cells has restored vision in babies for the first time, and someday the technique may hold promise for millions of older Americans who undergo traditional cataract eye surgery every year, say scientists who developed the new procedure.

Eye experts across the country who spoke with CBS News are alternately excited and cautious about the findings, published Wednesday in the journal Nature.

The procedure, developed by researchers at the University of California San Diego and China, is less invasive than traditional cataract treatment, said the scientists.

Cataracts are most common in older adults. As most people age, an opaque film slowly forms over the lens -- the part of the eye that helps with focusing on images at various distances. It clouds vision and can lead to blindness.

In cataract surgery, which has been around for several decades, eye surgeons make an incision in the front of the eye and remove the lens from its supporting capsule. Then they replace it with an artificial lens.

The new procedure described in Nature involves making a slim incision at the side of the lens capsule, removing the entire lens, yet preserving the empty capsule bag or "scaffold." A certain kind of stem cell, called endogenous stem/progenitor cells, when left intact, then begins to repopulate the damaged lens and essentially grow a new, healthy lens.

Study author Dr. Kang Zhang, the chief of ophthalmic genetics at UC San Diego's Shiley Eye Institute, told CBS News, "Unlike [the] current way of cataract surgery, which destroys over half of lens stem cells and requires implantation of a plastic intranet ocular lens, we devised a new surgery to make a very small opening at the side of a cataractous lens bag, remove [the] cataract inside, allow the opening to heal, and promote dormant lens stem cells to regrow an entirely new lens with vision."

The experimental procedure was done in 12 infants who were born with a congenital cataract condition.

By using a less invasive procedure, Zhang and his colleagues report that they were able to leave the lens epithelial stem cells, also called LECs, intact. These LECs regenerated the eye's lens in the children, eliminating the need for implants. The same technique was also successfully performed in animals.

In little ones with congenital cataracts, eye surgeons need to intervene early so that light can get to the brain and allow for normal, healthy growth, said Suraj Bhat, associate professor of ophthalmology and director of the Vision Molecular Biology Laboratory at the UCLA Stein Eye Institute. Bhat was not involved in the new research, but said it's "extremely exciting" because it offers an alternative to "an extraordinarily invasive" procedure.

"In early childhood cataracts are very bad. We need light to enter into the eyes at a young age to get proper brain function, otherwise, information does not get transferred to the developing brain," said Bhat.

Traditional surgery can cause opacity in the line of a child's vision and, because the eye is still growing, it is difficult to provide good vision with eye glasses, explained Julie T. Daniels, from University College London Institute of Ophthalmology, in an accompanying commentary in Nature.

Many children also later go on to suffer from glaucoma.

Daniels wrote that to correctly refract light onto the retina at the back of the eye, the cornea and lens must remain transparent throughout life. Current treatments for the cornea and lens involve donor transplants or artificial implants, but the procedures can be risky. She said the new procedure, which coaxes stem cells to regenerate normal tissue in the body, offers promise.

"The study's stem cell engineering has led to the regeneration of transparent lens tissue in children, showing that the concept offers a potential therapeutic approach," Daniels wrote.

She noted a second study in Nature that used transplant tissue grown in the laboratory from stem cells to treat damaged corneas, saying it also holds promise.

Zhang said their results need to be validated in a large number of patients "and with a longer follow-up period."

Will it work in older eyes?

One major question remains to be answered: Can it be applied to age-related cataracts, the leading cause of blindness?

According to the National Eye Institute, about 24.4 million Americans suffer from cataracts. Between 2000 and 2010, the number of cataract cases in the U.S. went up by 20 percent, and it's expected to continue to grow as the population ages.

"We are now planning a study to test this approach in this old patient population. In addition, we are testing if this approach can be used in treating other leading causes of blindness, such as macular degeneration and glaucoma," said Zhang.

He hopes the surgery will be available to the general population within four to five years.

"I would anticipate that it may be available after several independent studies with a large number of patients," he said.

Some other experts in the field saw great promise in the research.

"Everyone's working on this. Stem cells are like the Holy Grail of vision research," Dr. James Tsai, M.D., president of the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai, told CBS News. "To me, it's very exciting data. They may be on to something."

But he tempered the hope the study offers by noting that the lens regeneration work is also "very controversial" and could impact a multimillion-dollar industry.

"This is potentially a new surgery. If you think about the implications in the long run, lens implants may not be necessary," he said. "There are a lot of doctors who will want to see more data."

He also pointed out that the study involved infants, and that adults -- the most common cataract patients -- have a different regenerative capacity of lens epithelial stem cells.

In the meantime, Tsai said it's hopeful news for some babies with congenital cataracts like the children who participated in the study. "As a glaucoma specialist, the way we do congenital cataracts, there's a great risk these babies will develop glaucoma for a lifetime and maybe with this new surgery, they won't have that glaucoma risk."

Dr. Maria Valeria Canto-Soler, assistant professor of ophthalmology and director of the Retinal Degeneration Research Center at Johns Hopkins Wilmer Eye Institute, said she was impressed by the research.

"The main excitement for me is the ability to regenerate an organ or a tissue within an organ," said Canto-Soler, a retina specialist.

"From what I know, I'd say this is the first demonstration where you can use endogenous stem cells for replacing tissue within the eye. It's something we are all looking for. They have actually done it in humans."

She said, even without answers to the question of whether it will work in aging eyes, it creates hope for children with congenital issues. "If you can create it in children, that's a big thing. You are giving sight back to little kids and that change their lives."

Dr. Kathryn Hatch, an ophthalmologist at Massachusetts Eye and Ear in Boston, told CBS News the procedure "seems very exciting," but more research is needed.

"I'd need to see a larger study with more eyes, and we need to see some reproducibility, and see how long it would take for the lens -- if it's able to regenerate -- what are the visual results. Because that's what patients really care about. Their vision. If it takes months to get to an outcome, it's not superior to the lens technologies we have now. I'm not sure what the advantage is. Most patients don't even want to wait. They want to get back to work, their life," Hatch added.

She also had questions about how the procedure was done with such a tiny incision. "I don't understand how they're doing the surgery with such a tiny hole without tearing the capsule. If we make a three millimeter incision [in traditional cataract surgery], that's really small in an adult."

Cataract surgery is "traditionally done by hand with a bent needle. That's one of the most difficult steps to learn as a surgeon. One of most important steps to learn," she said and there could be major eye damage if a surgery was compromised by a tear.

She also noted that baby eye surgery is different from adults in that the infant cataract is much softer compared to an adult's harder cataract.

UCLA's Bhat noted another limitation in the study: "These are all genetic cataracts. This study wasn't long enough. They [cataracts] may come back," he said, but it's also possible the genetic defect may not reappear.

He's said it's unclear if the results will be mirrored in older cataract patients, the same concern expressed by others in the field.

"Cell division is slower in older people," Bhat said. "The biggest problem as we grow older, particularly beyond 50, is cell division which keeps on decreasing. Our ability to make new cells is significantly lost. The process that these people are depending upon is tremendously dependent on cell division."

Bhat said he also paused when he read the statement in the paper that claimed a 100 percent success rate three months after surgery.

"I don't know them. I can't second guess them. You've got to believe the written word."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We were pleased to see multiple independent sources interviewed for this story. Seeking out multiple viewpoints can often surface new details about the illness or field of study, and place it in the context of wider research efforts and the typical patient experience.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"Cannabidiol should not be viewed as a panacea for epilepsy, but for patients with especially severe forms who have not responded to numerous medications, these results provide hope that we may soon have another treatment option," says lead investigator Orrin Devinsky, MD, professor of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry and director of the Comprehensive Epilepsy Center at NYU Langone Medical Center. "We still need more research, but this new trial provides more evidence than we have ever had of cannabidiol's effectiveness as a medication for treatment-resistant epilepsy."

Cannabidiol, or CBD, is a compound in the cannabis plant that does not contain psychoactive properties that induce a high. The study included a liquid pharmaceutical formulation of CBD, called Epidiolex, which is manufactured by GW Pharmaceuticals and has not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. GW Pharmaceuticals funded the clinical trial.

For the study, 120 children and adolescents with Dravet Syndrome between the ages of 2 and 18 years were randomized across 23 sites in the United States and Europe to receive either CBD 20 mg/kg or placebo added to their existing treatment over a 14-week period. Seizure frequency was tracked for one month prior to the study for baseline readings, and during the course of the study.

Specifically, seizure frequency dropped in the CBD-treated group by 39 percent from a median of nearly 12 convulsive seizures per month before the study to about six; three patients' seizures stopped entirely. In the placebo group, there was a 13 percent reduction in seizures from about 15 monthly seizures to fourteen. The difference in the degree of seizure reduction between the CBD group and the placebo group was both statistically significant and clinically consistent.

Side effects – experienced by 93.4 percent of patients in the CBD group and 74.6 percent of those treated with placebo – were generally reported as mild or moderate in severity. The most common side effects in the CBD group were vomiting, fatigue and fever. Eight participants from the CBD group withdrew from the trial due to side effects compared to one participant in the placebo group.

The new study confirms results from a December 2015 open-label expanded access program led by Dr. Devinsky that reported reductions in seizure frequency. In that program, both the researchers and patient's families knew they were receiving CBD, which may have introduced a bias into the results. This new, randomized, controlled clinical study eliminated those concerns as participants and their physicians did not know if they were on CBD or placebo, say the study authors.

Future research will look at whether safety and tolerability might be improved and whether efficacy of CBD can be maintained at lower doses. Longer term studies of CBD for Dravet Syndrome as well as for other forms of treatment-resistant epilepsy are also underway.

In addition to Dr. Devinsky, the co-authors in this study were: J. Helen Cross, PhD, FRCPCH, Linda Laux, MD, Eric Marsh, MD, Ian Miller, MD, Rima Nabbout, MD, Ingrid E Scheffer, MD, PhD , Elizabeth Thiele, MD, and Stephen Wright, MD on behalf of The Cannabidiol in Dravet Syndrome Study Group. Judith Bluvstein, MD, and Daniel Friedman, MD, also served as co-authors at the NYU Langone site involved in the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that the trial was funded by GW Pharmaceuticals, the manufacturer of Epidiolex.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With the memory of Memorial Day cheeseburgers and bratwursts still lingering, many of us may be relieved to hear that a new study suggests that a meaty, high-fat, Atkins-style diet can do more than contribute to rapid weight loss. It may also be less unhealthy for the heart than many scientists had feared — provided you chase the sausage with a brisk walk.

“It took people less time to lose 10 pounds” on a high-fat diet-and-exercise program, about 45 days on average, than the 70 days it took for those who exercised and followed a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet constructed using guidelines from the American Heart Association, said Kerry J. Stewart, director of clinical and research exercise physiology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and lead author of the report. And at least in the short term, there were no apparent harmful effects. The findings are being presented on Friday at the annual meeting of the American College of Sports Medicine in Denver.

Such fatty, low-carbohydrate Atkins-type diets are well established as a means of successful weight reduction, Dr. Stewart said. But a unique worry raised by these regimens, extending back to the heyday of the original Atkins diet in the 1970s, was that indulging in repeated fatty, glistening meals would lard your arteries and cause heart disease. (In the current study, participants followed a diet based on the New Atkins for Life approach, which includes more vegetables than the original Atkins diet, Dr. Stewart said, adding that he and his colleagues have no ties to and receive no financing from the Atkins diet organization.)

To date, however, scientific data have been inconsistent. Some studies have reported that such diets contribute to cardiovascular disease, while others found no increased risk. Few of the programs studied, though, included exercise.

Hoping to bring some clarity to the issue, the Johns Hopkins researchers recruited a group of 46 healthy but overweight men and women and randomly assigned half to a high-carbohydrate, low-fat, American Heart Association-approved diet, consisting of fruits, grains, vegetables and low-fat meats. The other 23 volunteers were assigned to a meatier, cheesier, high-fat, low-carbohydrate spread, with about 55 percent of calories derived from fat; the diet avoided trans fats. Both approaches reduced volunteers’ normal daily caloric intake by about 750 calories.

The volunteers also began a supervised exercise program, which included moderate endurance training, likes brisk walking or jogging, and weight lifting. The sessions lasted for at least 30 minutes three times a week.

At the start of the program, the volunteers all had healthy blood vessels, as determined by a blood-pressure cuff test in which researchers tighten the cuff, release it and track the resulting gush of blood to the volunteers’ fingertips. During such a surge, healthy vessels dilate, or relax, but unhealthy ones stiffen and narrow, impairing blood flow and indicating possible incipient heart disease.

The researchers then waited for each person to lose 10 pounds. Retested with the blood pressure cuff, the group eating the American Heart Association-style diet continued to display normal, healthy blood flow. But so did the low-carbohydrate, high-fat group. Their blood vessels dilated just as well as those eating a lower-fat diet. “There was no evidence of any harmful vascular effects from the low-carb diet,” Dr. Stewart said.

The results, though, come with several caveats. The study did not include a control group of men and women who performed no exercise, making it impossible to tease out the exact physiological role that exercise played, Dr. Stewart said.

And like most of the recent studies about the health effects of low-carbohydrate diets, “these are very short-term results,” said Dr. Dena Bravata, an internist and research associate at the Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research at Stanford University, who was not involved with this experiment but has conducted dietary studies. “Those on the high-fat diets showed no harmful impacts” after 45 days or so, she said. “But what about in 5 or 10 years, if they remain on the diet?”

This study also reported on a single marker of cardiovascular health, she continued. “It would be nice to have information about whether people’s cholesterol and triglyceride levels changed,” she said.

The data being presented on Friday represent only interim results from a longer-term, larger study, Dr. Stewart pointed out. The full study will monitor the volunteers for six months and include additional measures of cardiovascular health after both diets.

Still, the early results are thought-provoking. The volunteers, all of whom exercised, generally became more physically fit during the study, Dr. Stewart said. Most increased their VO max, a measure of maximal oxygen-carrying capacity that is associated with lower cardiovascular disease risk.

They also lost substantial inches from their waistlines, which may be an important consideration for heart health, said Shane Phillips, an assistant professor in the department of physical therapy at the University of Illinois at Chicago. In a study overseen by Dr. Phillips and published earlier this year, sedentary people on a low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet lost pounds but few inches from around their middles. They also showed signs of impaired blood vessel health after six weeks on the diet. “There seems to be something about fat” around the waistline that negatively affects heart health, even if someone loses weight with a high-fat diet, Dr. Phillips said.

Dr. Stewart also has amassed some intimate anecdotal evidence. For a small pilot study several years ago, he became a test subject, adopting a low-carbohydrate diet and regular exercise routine. For three years, he has maintained both the diet and the workouts. He is 40 pounds lighter these days and, he said, continues to ace tests of his blood-vessel health.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several individuals who were not connected with the study reported provided comments and context for thinking about the diets discussed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Wilmington, DE -- A Delaware team including Erin Crowgey, PhD, associate director of Bioinformatics with Nemours Biomedical Research, has published a study in the peer-reviewed journal BMC Bioinformatics, showing that DNA patterns in circulating blood cells can be used to help identify spastic cerebral palsy (CP) patients (Crowgey et al.).

The work represents a collaboration among researchers at Nemours, the University of Delaware (UD) and Genome Profiling LLC (GenPro for short). Co-authors of the paper include Robert Akins, PhD, the project principal investigator, who directs the Center for Pediatric Clinical Research and Development at Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children; UD molecular biologist Adam Marsh, PhD, who is chief science officer at GenPro; and Karyn Robinson, MS and Stephanie Yeager, MS, of Nemours Biomedical Research.

Cerebral palsy is a common yet understudied neurodevelopmental problem in the U.S. In fact, there is no national surveillance here, but the CDC estimates that 1 in 323 American children have the condition. CP is a group of disabilities with a wide spectrum of severity. Spastic CP, the most common type, is a lifelong condition characterized by joint stiffness, spasms, and muscle tightness that affects movement and posture and restricts the activity of affected children.

Although most children (85-90%) with cerebral palsy are born with it, diagnosis may be delayed until 2+ years of age. A diagnosis is made by monitoring motor milestones; infants thought to be at risk for CP are enrolled in early intervention programs where their progress is closely watched. New and better ways to identify infants with CP are needed so that interventions can start earlier for more children.

Nemours, internationally recognized for its CP center at Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, serves a diverse population of more than 3,000 children and young adults with CP, one of the largest programs in the U.S. Clinicians and researchers at Nemours continuously seek to improve the diagnosis and care of CP patients. Funding from the Swank Foundation enabled Nemours to develop a cerebral palsy tissue bank that stores blood and tissue samples from hundreds of surgical patients at Nemours.

In the study, the research team profiled blood samples collected in a blinded study from children and adolescents 9-19 years to explore whether patients with spastic CP showed differences at the cellular level that routine orthopedic patients (needing ACL repairs, spinal fusions or other surgeries) did not. The researchers identified a strong set of methylation markers, or patterns, that indicate differences in the genome between children with spastic CP and those without it. In a second study, using samples from children aged 2-5 years, the researchers were able to validate their results and predict with 73 percent accuracy whether the blood samples came from children who had CP.

"The evidence suggests that there is some epigenetic connection," said Crowgey. "If we can do a better job of screening for these at time of birth versus waiting for the disorder to be diagnosed at 2 years of age, then potentially we'll be able to deliver earlier therapeutics and have better outcomes and lower medical costs." Medicaid data show that annual medical costs for a child with CP are 10 to 26 times higher than for those without CP.

The power of data science, analytics and machine learning

The study leverages a unique statistical method and software platform originally developed by Dr. Marsh at UD and commercialized by GenPro to measure methylation patterns in DNA (a cell's genetic code) using next generation sequencing (NGS) data. NGS is a technique that enables scientists to decode DNA faster and more cheaply than traditional DNA sequencing methods. Each person's genome, or complete set of DNA, is like a word that's the length of 3 billion characters; but spelled with only the letters A, T, C or G. Traditional DNA sequencing techniques decode sections of DNA 700 characters at a time, while NGS takes advantage of parallel computing capabilities, enabling scientists to decode millions of DNA fragments. Subtle changes in a patient's physical health are paralleled by changes in DNA methylation, making it a useful tool to understand disease.

"Many of the signals that we pick up are based on immune system shifts--meaning the way a person's immune system responds to external stress events. When we find that epigenetic response, or signal, in the genetic sequencing, it provides another line of evidence for clinicians to use in making decisions," said Marsh.

The approach uses sophisticated machine learning techniques and algorithms to sort through hundreds of gigabytes of NGS data looking for these distinct DNA methylation patterns. "The data set is massive. It's not something a human can do. You need infrastructure, machine learning, data analysis, and data science," said Crowgey.

While the study findings indicate that there is a consistent signal present in circulating blood cells of children with spastic CP that remains from early childhood to the teenage years, the researchers say they need to further study samples from different age groups, including teenagers, toddlers, and infants from birth to 2 years. Learning more about methylation signals across ages will allow the approach to be further refined to identify cases and also could provide researchers new clues to understanding the cellular processes involved in advancing CP, and consequently, new therapeutics to manage the disease.

"We're still in the early phases, but the results are extremely promising and we're excited about the sensitivity of the test that we are seeing in our retrospective analysis," said Crowgey. If successful, the researchers say the type of blood test in development also may be useful for other disorders, such as infant leukemia.

Akins was optimistic. "This is an example of the kind of innovation that can happen when people with different skill sets collaborate. The experimental testing went from idea to validated execution in less than 12 months. We're now working toward a goal of eventually forming a clinical diagnostic test and applying it to a broad population." Akins added that Nemours is in a unique position for such an undertaking with its large CP population, its growing strength in data science and analytics, and its recent acquisition of newborn screening for the state of Delaware. "Many issues will need to be addressed, but we predict routine screening for CP in the near (<10 years) future," he said.

This research is funded by the Delaware Bioscience Center for Advanced Technology, the National Science Foundation, the American Academy for Cerebral Palsy and Developmental Medicine, and Nemours.

"This blood test could be a game changer. The earlier the diagnosis, the earlier we can direct therapies at the child. Specifically, high intensity physical therapy and possibly early surgery to prevent more significant problems in the future, and hopefully improve overall function and quality of life." M. Wade Shrader, MD, Chief, Cerebral Palsy Center, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children

Nemours is an internationally recognized children's health system that owns and operates the two free-standing children's hospitals: the Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children in Wilmington, Del., and Nemours Children's Hospital in Orlando, Fla., along with outpatient facilities in six states, delivering pediatric primary, specialty, and urgent care. Nemours also powers the world's most-visited website for information on the health of children and teens, KidsHealth.org, and offers on-demand, online video patient visits through Nemours CareConnect. Nemours ReadingBrightstart.org is a program dedicated to preventing reading failure in young children, grounded in Nemours' understanding that child health and learning are inextricably linked, and that reading level is a strong predictor of adult health.

Established as The Nemours Foundation through the legacy and philanthropy of Alfred I. duPont, Nemours provides pediatric clinical care, research, education, advocacy, and prevention programs to families in the communities it serves.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release names the various funding sources for this work and is clear in pointing out the commercial role, and potential economic benefit, to some of the authors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ANN ARBOR, Michigan -- Even as treatment options for laryngeal cancer seemed to improve, survival rates did not. For the most advanced patients, 50 percent survival was the norm, whether patients had surgery to totally remove the voice box or alternative treatment with chemotherapy and radiation to try to avoid surgery.

But the head and neck oncology team at the University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center came up with a different approach: Give patients a single dose of chemotherapy and see who responds to it. The responders can continue with combination chemotherapy and radiation. The non-responders can be referred immediately for surgery.

After a decade of using this approach, researchers are reporting "exceptional" survival rates nearing 80 percent, even for the most advanced patients. The team published their outcomes in JAMA Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery.

"In trying to match the biology of the tumor to the treatment, all of the patients get better outcomes," says study author Gregory T. Wolf, M.D., professor and chair emeritus of otolaryngology - head and neck surgery at Michigan Medicine.

"This approach allows us to enhance quality of life for all of our patients. Many patients can spare their voice box by having chemotherapy and radiation. But that's only good if the treatment works. For patients who must go on to receive surgery, by selecting them up front, we can spare them the complications that may occur when the voice box is removed following multiple cycles of chemotherapy with radiation," adds study author Francis Worden, M.D., professor of hematology/oncology.

The Michigan Medicine team first tested the idea in 1995. They found that patients whose tumor shrunk by more than half after one round of chemotherapy were more likely to do well with chemotherapy and radiation and have an excellent chance of saving their voice box. If the tumor did not respond after that first dose, patients would likely fail on the chemotherapy and would do better going straight to surgery.

In a clinical trial, they saw disease-specific survival rates of 80 percent in patients with advanced disease. This was unheard of. And it wasn't just those who responded to the chemotherapy. The non-responders who were immediately referred for surgery had better outcomes too.

"We adopted the treatment approach and started offering it to all our laryngeal cancer patients," Wolf says. As part of a Specialized Program of Research Excellence, or SPORE, grant, the team was already maintaining long-term follow-up data on patients. Wolf suggested they look back and see if they were still maintaining such strong outcomes with this approach. The results surprised even him.

Over 10 years, 153 stage 3 and 4 laryngeal cancer patients were treated at Michigan Medicine, with about half receiving the induction chemotherapy. The remainder elected to proceed straight to surgery or chemo-radiation without the induction dose.

Average disease specific survival at five years for the induction chemotherapy patients was 79 percent - equivalent to the results in patients with early stage disease, and significantly better than the 66 percent survival for patients who had chemo-radiation without the induction strategy.

"This adds ammunition to the idea that we need to pick individual therapies more carefully. Both chemo-radiation and surgery are difficult treatments with their share of challenging long-term effects. But if we tailor treatments to the individual biology of the tumor and characteristics of the patient, we'll get the best results," Wolf says.

The study did find lower functional preservation of the larynx in the induction chemotherapy group compared to those who elected chemoradiation. Two-thirds of the induction group achieved organ preservation, while more than three-quarters of the chemo-radiation patients did.

Wolf notes, however, that chemoradiation often severely damages the larynx, which may cause problems with eating or swallowing years later.

The induction approach can be done anywhere, but requires intense collaboration among surgeons, medical oncologists and radiation oncologists. All three must be involved to assess the patient and refer to the appropriate therapy.

Even that single dose of chemotherapy can be debilitating and toxic for some patients. Wolf hopes future research will reveal a way to tailor treatment without the need for the induction chemotherapy.

Funding: National Cancer Institute grants P50 CA097248 and P30 CA046592, and the Sinabaldo and Diane Tozzi Research Fund
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding sources are clearly noted in the release and there do not appear to be relevant conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There’s some good news and some bad news for women who took estrogen to help them get through menopause until the health risks of taking the hormone were discovered.

A new analysis of the landmark Women’s Health Initiative, the federal study that discovered the health risks, indicates that women who stopped using estrogen after the dangers were uncovered are no longer at increased risk for strokes and blood clots about 10 years after they stopped. At the same time, the women continued to be at a lower risk for breast cancer. That’s the good news.

The bad news is that there is no benefit of being less likely to develop heart disease, and any reduction in the risk of hip bone fractures evaporates with time, according to a report in the latest issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.

For years, women took estrogen or a combination of estrogen and progestin to help alleviate hot flashes and other symptoms of menopause, and in the belief that the drugs had a host of health benefits, including protecting their hearts. But the Women’s Health Initiative stunned doctors and women when researchers reported that the risks of the hormones outweighed any benefits. Hormone use plummetted, but women who had been using the drugs were left to wonder whether they were still at risk.

In the new analysis, researchers analyzed data collected from 7,645 women who were in the part of the study examining the effects of taking estrogen alone an average of 10.7 years, after the study was halted because of the evidence the drugs were harming women. The women had taken estrogen for about six years.

The researchers found that the risk for heart disease during the follow-up period was similar to that seen while the women were taking the hormone. But the increased risk for strokes and blood clots disappeared and the protective effect for breast cancer persisted. The protective effect for hip fractures disappeared. In fact, the women who took the hormone ended up being at somewhat higher risk for fractures.

In an editorial accompanying the study, Emily Jungheim and Graham Colditz of Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis wrote that the findings indicate that while there “may still be a role for short-term use of unopposed estrogen for treating some women with menopausal symptoms ... this role may be vanishing as existing and emerging data continue to be better understood.”

Rowan Chlebowski, one of the researchers who worked on the analysis, stressed that the study only looked at women who were taking estrogen alone. Women who took a combination of estrogen and progestin face increased risk for breast cancer, previous studies have shown, Chlebowski said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt here, as it at least cited an accompanying editorial – although, as noted in the “evidence” criterion above, the NY Times did a better job in eliciting clear quotes about context from its sources. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Although effective for the treatment of diabetes, exercise is sometimes difficult for overweight or elderly people. A new wearable medical device developed by Kumamoto University has been found to effect visceral fat loss and improve blood glucose (sugar). The current study reports clinical trial results for optimal use frequency.

Type 2 diabetes is a disease of systemic organ failure due to chronic hyperglycemia and inflammation from the accumulation of excess visceral fat. Metabolic disorders such as hyperglycemia attenuate stress resistance in the human body and exacerbate insulin resistance. The ability of insulin to lower blood sugar levels is reduced and insulin secretion is decreased.

The heat shock response (HSR) is activated as a response to stress in the human body, but its function decreased in those with type 2 diabetes. A research team from Kumamoto University, Japan has found that by restoring the function of HSP72, the main protein of HSR, improved glucose-related abnormalities. The team found that a suitable combination of mild electrical stimulation (MES) with heat shock (HS) activated HSP72 more efficiently.

The researchers developed a belt-type medical device that uses a special type of rubber to transmit MES and HS at the same time. They then performed a clinical trial of MES + HS on 40 obese men suffering from type 2 diabetes. Results showed a decrease fasting glucose levels, a loss of visceral fat, improve insulin resistance, and a significant (-0.43%) improvement in glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) values. About half of all subjects (52.5%) achieved less than 7.0% HbA1c, which is a treatment goal for diabetes. The first trial showed that activation of the HSR produced a large therapeutic effect.

In the researcher's next clinical trial, 60 obese patients with type 2 diabetes from both genders were given a 12-week treatment with the belt-shaped MES+HS medical device. Trial subjects received treatments for 60 minutes each time, and were separated into three groups of 2, 4, and 7 treatments per week. This determined the most effective treatment frequency.

The reduction in the visceral fat area was 5.37 sq. cm in the 2 treatment per week group, 14.24 sq. cm in the 4 per week group and 16.45 sq. cm in the 7 per week group. Declines in HbA1c were 0.10%, 0.36%, and 0.65% in the 2, 4, and 7 treatment-per-week groups respectively. Improvements in chronic inflammation, fatty liver markers, renal function and lipid profile were also shown. Furthermore, adding the MES+HS treatment to a DPP-4 inhibitor, which is the most often used therapeutic drug for diabetes in Japan, showed an even stronger blood glucose improvement.

"This device is very easy to use since it simply attaches to the abdomen, and it has a low-impact on the patient. One can expect the effects to be similar to exercise therapy," said Dr. Tatsuya Kondo, who lead the research. "Even in patients who have difficulty exercising, such as those who are overweight, elderly, or have some form of disability, this device can be expected to provide acceptable treatment in addition to conventional diabetic medical care."

This research was posted online in the nature.com journal Scientific Reports on October 19th, 2016.

T. Kondo, R. Goto, K. Ono, S. Kitano, M. A. Suico, M. Sato, M. Igata, J. Kawashima, H. Motoshima, T. Matsumura, H. Kai, and E. Araki, "Activation of heat shock response to treat obese subjects with type 2 diabetes: a prospective, frequency-escalating, randomized, open-label, triple-arm trial," Scientific Reports, vol. 6, p. 35690, 2016. 

DOI: 10.1038/srep35690
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release notes that the study was funded by the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development, Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research. The journal article in Scientific Reports also acknowledges the belt device was provided by the Tsuchiya Rubber Co., Ltd. (Kumamoto, Japan).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Most heart patients who take low-dose omega-3 fatty acid supplements don't appear to gain any additional protection against further cardiac trouble, new Dutch research cautions.

In fact, neither low doses of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), which are found in fish oil, nor of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), derived from nuts and several vegetable oils, provided any benefit to the vast majority of heart patients, the study showed.

The scientists focused on patients who were already taking medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and potential clotting. So, the researchers theorized that the poor performance of the supplements may simply reflect the overwhelming power of the medications.

Study author Daan Kromhout, from the division of human nutrition at Wageningen University in the Netherlands, is to present the findings Sunday at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Stockholm; the study will appear online in the New England Journal of Medicine simultaneously.

In the study, researchers focused on a group of more than 4,800 Dutch heart attack patients between the ages of 60 and 80, slightly more than three-quarters of whom were men.

All had experienced a heart attack at some point in the decade leading up to the study, and all were taking blood pressure medications, anti-clotting drugs and statins.

At the study's start, the patients were instructed to consume (over a period lasting a little over three years) one of four different types of margarines: one supplemented with omega-3 fatty acids; one supplemented with the plant-derived ALA; one supplemented with both omega-3 fatty acids and ALA; and one with no supplements.

The amount of supplementation added to the various margarines was deemed to be "low-dose." During the study, the patients consumed an average of 18.8 grams of margarine per day, which meant ingestion of an average of 226 milligrams of EPA combined with 150 milligrams of DHA omega-3 fatty acids and/or 1.9 grams of ALA.

By the study's end, almost 14 percent of the heart attack patients had experienced another "major cardiovascular event," with some cases ending in death.

None of the low-dose supplements seemed to stave off such events in most of the patients. One exception appeared to be among women ingesting ALA; researchers saw a 27 percent reduction in the risk for further cardiac complications, although that reduction did not quite reach statistical significance.

"The bottom-line finding of the Alpha Omega Trial is that [omega]-3 fatty acids did not reduce the primary endpoint major cardiovascular events," Kromhout said, noting that the ALA finding needs further confirmation.

Dr. Murray A. Mittleman, director of the cardiovascular epidemiology research unit at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said he was "not that surprised by these results."

"Other studies have shown no benefit from omega-3, other than specifically protecting against cardiac death linked to arrhythmia among patients who have just survived a heart attack," Mittleman noted. It is during this acute post-attack period, he explained, when patients are most vulnerable to a subsequent event.

"But here, in some cases the patients they looked at are years following their first heart attack when they start taking these supplements," he stressed. "So, that's a big difference in what kind of patient they're examining. And they're also not just looking at preventable fatalities but all heart-related events that follow. And on top of that, the supplement doses they use here are very low, much lower than those used in prior studies."

"So it might be big differences in study design that account for this new finding," Mittleman cautioned. "In any case, I would say this is absolutely worth further investigation."

Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, agreed.

"It is possible that improvements in other treatments for heart attack patients have made fish oil supplementation less important for reducing cardiovascular risk," he acknowledged. "But it's also possible that the different dosing used in this study relative to previous work made a difference in the outcome. The dosing here may have been just too low, whereas higher doses given immediately following an initial heart attack might have been protective."

"So I would say," Fonarow added, "that this is by no means the final word regarding omega-3s and cardiovascular health."

For more on omega-3 fatty acids, visit the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  The story included comments from several individuals without direct ties to the study reported on but with active research programs examining the potential of benefit from omega-3 fatty acids.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Jan. 1, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Three-quarters of patients undergoing surgery for stubborn sinusitis saw significant improvements in their quality of life, new research shows.

Most of the remaining 25 percent also saw some improvement, just not as dramatic, said Dr. Timothy Smith, lead author of a study appearing in the January issue of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery.

"Certainly this reinforces our belief that sinus surgery increases the quality of life of patients, and I see that clinically as well as scientifically," added Dr. Jordan S. Josephson, a sinus and allergy specialist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Previous studies have been single-center studies, and this is a bigger study using multiple centers and using a fairly large population, so it further says sinus surgery is a really good thing to do if you need it."

Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) affects a sizable minority -- 14 percent to 16 percent -- of U.S. residents. The condition, marked by symptoms such as sinus pain and pressure, headache, stuffy nose and sneezing, can compromise quality of life more than even congestive heart failure, back pain or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the study authors said.

Endoscopic sinus surgery has been performed in the United States since the mid-1980s, said Smith, who is director of the Oregon Sinus Center at Oregon Health & Science University in Portland.

"It's a minimally invasive type of surgery performed with a telescope that goes into the nostril," then basically snips away abnormal and interfering tissue while leaving normal tissue behind, Smith explained.

Smith and his co-authors studied 302 patients with CRS from three academic medical centers, following them for an average of a year and a half after their surgery.

"These were patients who have chronic sinusitis so, by definition, they have at least three months of symptoms and they have evidence of an ongoing inflammation or infection of their nose and sinuses on either a CT scan or an examination of the nose and sinuses," Smith said.

Following the surgery, about 76 percent of patients had "clinically significant" improvement in quality of life, as measured by various validated scales.

Patients with worse disease at the outset seemed to fare the best after the procedure, as did those undergoing surgery for the first time. This second finding is probably explained by the fact that people going for second or further surgeries were probably sicker to begin with, Josephson said.

None of which is to say that patients shouldn't try medical therapies first, he added.

"I don't think it means everyone with CRS should consider surgery. They should try medical therapy, and if medical therapy fails and the surgeon feels that part of the problem is anatomic, then surgery would be a good tool for them to use," Josephson said. "Some people with stage 1 and 2 diseases may even get cured. This is a wonderful renewed hope of feeling better."

The U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases has more on sinusitis.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If the high-pitched whir of a dentist's drill as it bores into your molar terrifies you, good news! There could be fewer fillings in your future. A painless way to prevent cavities in adults is gaining traction.

"OK, Alice, we are going to put the fluoride varnish on your teeth," says Marion Manski, director of the dental hygiene program at the University of Maryland School of Dentistry. Fluoride varnish is standard practice for children's teeth, but Manski's patient, Alice Clash, is 91 years old. Like many older patients, Clash is taking medications that cause dry mouth, which puts her at high risk for cavities.

So Manski takes a skinny brush and a little pot of yellowish liquid and paints the varnish on Clash's teeth. "We know that saliva helps us wash away bacteria and food in the mouth," Manski says. "The fluoride varnish will help that."

One way fluoride helps is by seeping into the enamel and drawing the calcium and phosphate that's naturally present in the saliva. The minerals boost the teeth's natural healing process and make them more resistant to future decay. But there are other theories about how fluoride works. It strengthens the enamel before the tooth erupts, which is why it's so important for children. And it attacks the acid-producing bacteria in the mouth. One study shows fluoride makes it more difficult for these bacteria to stick to the teeth.

It takes about a minute, and the fluoride treatment is done. Some patients are also given a prescription for a concentrated fluoride gel that can be used at night.

"These preventative approaches work on adults just as well as they do on children," says Norman Tinanoff, a professor of pediatric dentistry at the University of Maryland. He says part of what's making fluoride treatments popular for adults is a move to make dental care personal, with an individual treatment plan for each patient. To do that, you have to weigh a patient's risk of getting cavities.

One of the biggest proponents of this approach is John Featherstone, dean of the University of California, San Francisco School of Dentistry. Featherstone came up with a comprehensive way of measuring a person's risk for caries, or tooth decay. It includes testing the level of bacteria in the mouth, and looking at dietary habits, medical conditions, medications, saliva flow and history of tooth decay. When Featherstone put his patients on personal treatment plans, he found the strategy worked.

"It really proved that drilling and filling did not fix the disease," Featherstone says. "Putting in a filling fixes that hole in the tooth, but it doesn't deal with the bacteria in the rest of the mouth." Most bacteria are friendly, but a couple of bad actors can cause cavities. These guys feed on sugars and expel acid that eats away at the enamel.

Traditionally, dentists were taught that the only way to deal with decay was to drill it out. That's still important in some cases, Featherstone says, but without fixing the underlying problem of bad bacteria, patients just keep coming back for more fillings. Featherstone saw another way. "It's a little bit like your car is starting to rust," he says. "If you can stop the rust before the rust goes right through the body of the car, then you're in good shape."

Like rust, tooth decay is a slow process. A full-on cavity is a hole that needs to be fixed. But if you catch decay early, Featherstone says, it can be reversed using fluoride treatments like varnish and concentrated toothpaste and gels.

"In the past we believed tooth decay was a rapidly progressive disease. But research shows it's slowly progressive," says Wendell Evans, associate professor of dentistry at the University of Sydney in Australia. He recently published a study that found using these techniques reduced the need for fillings in adults by 30 to 50 percent.

Striking as these results seem, the concept isn't new. This shift to a preventive model of dentistry is decades in the making. "Some of the stuff in our study has been known for 50 years," Evans says, referring to the use of fluoride treatments.

"Prevention has always been a part of the world of dentistry," says Richard Valachovic, president of the American Dental Education Association. "What we're seeing is a generational shift," Valachovic says. As dentists have come to better understand the microbiology of the mouth, more effective preventive techniques have followed.

But cost has been an issue. Insurance companies routinely pay for fluoride treatments for children, but not so much for adults. The National Association of Dental Plans couldn't give a definitive answer about coverage, but calls to some individual carriers and dental offices suggest it depends entirely on the type of plan you have. Some higher-end plans cover two fluoride treatments per year, while cheaper plans tend not to cover any. If you pay out of pocket, a varnish treatment costs from $23 to $55, compared with a filling, which ranges from $86 to $606, according to the American Dental Association.

Cost could also be a factor for dentists. Featherstone and Wendell say some dentists may be reluctant to embrace the preventive methods because they worry they'll lose money if they they do fewer costly procedures.

At this point, Featherstone says, two-thirds of dental schools in the U.S. teach some kind of disease management model based on a thorough risk assessment. And he expects that at some point all dentists will follow a preventive protocol.

"It will happen," Featherstone says. "It's just a matter of time."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes a number of sources discussing this trend in dentistry, instead of just relying on one dentist.
But the piece would be more balanced had it included at least one source pointing out that some of the techniques advocated in the story could be overkill or wasteful for many people who are at just average risk for tooth decay. As the piece was written, all the sources are very rosy about more aggressive preventive dental care. We also found via an internet search that source John Featherstone has accepted consultation fees from dental companies that make products for these purposes. However, since he wasn’t specifically endorsing one of these products in this story, we’ll give this a pass.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Treating gum disease reduced symptoms of prostate inflammation, called prostatitis, report researchers from Case Western Reserve University School of Dental Medicine and the Departments of Urology and Pathology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center.

Previous studies have found a link between gum disease and prostatitis, a disease that inflames the gland that produces semen. Inflammation can make urination difficult.

"This study shows that if we treat the gum disease, it can improve the symptoms of prostatitis and the quality of life for those who have the disease," said Nabil Bissada, chair of Case Western Reserve's Department of Periodontics and the new study's corresponding author.

The researchers reported their findings in the Dentistry article, "Periodontal Treatment Improves Prostate Symptoms and Lowers Serum PSA in Men with High PSA and Chronic Periodontitis." Naif Alwithanani, a graduate student in the dental school, led the investigation as part of his residency in periodontics.

Bissada explained that gum disease not only affects the mouth, but is a system-wide condition that can cause inflammation in various parts of the body. The dental school has previously found a link between gum disease and fetal deaths, rheumatoid arthritis and heart disease.

Researchers studied 27 men, 21 years old and older. Each had had a needle biopsy within the past year that confirmed inflammation of the prostate gland, and a blood test that showed elevated prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels--possible signs of inflammation and cancer.

The men were assessed for symptoms of prostate disease by answering questions on the International-Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) test about their quality of life and possible urination issues.

Researchers found 21 of the 27 participants had no or mild inflammation, but 15 had biopsy-confirmed malignancies. Two had both inflammation and a malignancy.

The men also had to have at least 18 teeth and were examined for signs of gum disease, such as increased levels of inflammation and bleeding and/or loose teeth due to attachment and bone loss.

All the men had moderate to severe gum disease, for which they received treatment. They were tested again for periodontal disease four to eight weeks later and showed significant improvement.

During the periodontal care, the men received no treatment for their prostate conditions. But even without prostate treatment, 21 of the 27 men showed decreased levels of PSA. Those with the highest levels of inflammation benefited the most from the periodontal treatment. Six participants showed no changes.

Symptom scores on the IPSS test also showed improvement.

Bissada is now conducting follow-up research to support the first study's findings. He hopes to make periodontal treatment a standard part of treating prostate disease, much like cardiac patients are often encouraged to visit their dentist before undergoing heart procedures and a dental checkup is advised for women who are pregnant or considering pregnancy.

Case Western Reserve dental researchers Nishant Joshi, Catherine Demko and Robert Skillicorn; and University Hospitals Case Medical Center researchers Donald Bodner, Lee Ponsky, Sanjay Gupta and Gregory T. MacLennan contributed to the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release doesn’t discuss funding, but the paper says that the study was sponsored by the authors’ departments at the university. There’s really no harm in leaving this information out, so we’ll rule this Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When 57-year-old Dean Cowles suddenly suffered a heart attack, he was lucky that he worked at a company that made defibrillators,reports.

"Once we started CPR, Steve hooked one of the paddles and I hooked the other," says co-worker Oscar Rojas. "He started rendering the compression and I started mouth to mouth."

It's a story that still gives Cowles chills.

"Every time I hear this story, I get goose bumps," Cowles says. "It shakes me every time I hear that story, but yes, I was dead."

His colleagues managed to restart his heart. But what helped save his brain — and left him remarkably undamaged — was a simple procedure in the ER: chilling his body. It's called induced hypothermia. The idea is that cooling a comatose patient after a heart attack prevents brain damage.

"Anytime you can take someone who comes into the hospital after having cardiac arrest, who may not ever wake up, and you can potentially change that to someone who can wake up and become back the person they were the day before, it's an amazing thing," says Dr. David Likosky, a neurologist.

Research has shown it can improve the survival rate by 14 percent.

"We know how to use it but we really don't know how it works," says cardiologist Mark Vossler. "We know that people's neurologic outcomes are likely to be better if they get it but we don't completely understand what's happening in the brain for sure when the body is cooled."

Says Likosky: "If you cool the brain down, it may be that it uses less energy and (is) less likely to damage itself over that first 24 hours."

Ice packs can do the job, but new devices make it easier to reduce and regulate temperature. Pads are placed on the chest and legs, and cold water circulates through the pathways.

"The cooling pads are applied, and we bring their body temperature down to 91 to 93 degrees. We keep them at that temperature for the first 24 hours, at which time we re-warm them," Likosky explains.

The American Heart Association recommended more than a year ago using induced hypothermia for cardiac arrest patients who are stable. But most hospitals don't. It requires training and a lot of coordination.

"It should be more widely used. In medicine, in general, we have many very expensive treatments that may make a marginal difference — treatments that are potentially painful, that cost a lot," Likosky says. "This is ice, and it's a treatment that's very simple, and it's a treatment that makes a big difference: the difference between waking up and not."

Chilling the body may work miracles, but only if the patient survives to reach the hospital. Thanks to CPR and defibrillators, that's happening more often — and Dean Cowles is living proof.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A patient who underwent this treatment and had a good outcome as well as two physicians (a neurologist and a cardiologist) at a hospital which uses this treatment were interviewed for this story.
It would have been helpful to understand why only a limited number of hospitals include this treatment in their management of heart attack.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Step inside the lounge at Evolved Science and you’ll find a cocktail menu unlike any you’ve ever seen.

The ritzy Manhattan medical office — which says it serves high-powered clients and celebrities — shakes and stirs up tailored IV infusions using a slurry of vitamins and amino acids. There’s a Jet Lag Eraser, for use after hopping off a long international flight, a Detoxification saline smoothie for “improving alertness and mental acuity,” and a Late Night Rescue cocktail to undo the effects of too many actual cocktails the night before.

The company claims liquid vitamins, minerals, and amino acids delivered straight to the bloodstream can protect users from getting a cold, boost athletic performance, “annihilate toxins,” and stave off headaches. “We put together the ideal combination for them to obtain the results they want: clearer skin, clearer mind, better hair, better nails,” said Dr. Erika Schwartz, who runs the clinic.

And though the IV lends a medical air to the procedure, the infusions suffer from the same problem as many supplements taken orally — there isn’t any robust evidence to back up their health claims.

“Supplements don’t fix anything and they don’t prevent anything. It’s simple,” said Dr. Pete Miller, a clinician and nutrition researcher at Johns Hopkins.

Vitamin IV infusions aren’t anything new. Celebrities from Simon Cowell and Rihanna to the Real Housewives have proclaimed their love for vitamin drips. They’re part of a huge — and wildly popular — supplement industry which goes largely unregulated. Supplement makers aren’t allowed to claim that their products can cure or treat a particular condition, but they are allowed to make sweeping claims that the products promote health.

The infusion treatments can be traced back to an intravenous supplement known as the Myers’ cocktail, a slurry of magnesium, calcium, B vitamins, and other products developed decades ago by a Baltimore physician. There is a published review on the use of Myers’ cocktail — but it’s just a collection of anecdotal evidence. The author, Dr. Alan Gaby, has long promoted the use of intravenous vitamins for a wide range of clinical conditions.

The research on injectable vitamins of any kind is thin and the results unimpressive. One study looked at injectable vitamins to treat asthma, but there was no placebo group to compare outcomes against. Two studies have examined intravenous vitamin use in fibromyalgia patients. One didn’t turn up any significant improvement in patients who received the infusions. The other — which was also missing a placebo group — involved just seven patients and showed only short-term improvement in symptoms.

Schwartz, though, said the supplements are completely safe.

“We’re doing it in a sterile environment, it’s administered by a nurse, and everything is sterile,” she said. “The only difference is it’s kind of a beautiful environment.”

Customers at Evolved Science shell out anywhere from $325 to $875 for an infusion. For first-time clients, Schwartz recommends weekly injections for the first month or so, and then a routine infusion once a month. Patients kick back in cream-colored chairs together while they’re hooked up to IVs in the “infusion lounge.”

“It doesn’t look like a doctor’s office. It’s very relaxed, not like a spa. But like a private club. It’s a SoHo house kind of thing,” said Schwartz, a former trauma surgeon.

But as for whether they’ll help a client prepare for an important presentation?

“There is not not substantial evidence that vitamin supplements have a large impact on cognitive function,” said Dr. Francine Grodstein, a public health researcher at Harvard who has studied the subject. A longitudinal study would be needed to back those claims with evidence, she added.

Still, the trend seems to be going strong. The I.V. Doc — an in-home vitamin infusion service — offers on-demand nutrient drips in places including Boston, Los Angeles, Chicago, and the Hamptons. In Las Vegas, hangover buses deliver pick-me-up infusions on the go.

And despite a lack of sound evidence, experts expect consumers to keep coming back for infusions.

“What drives the market is not the science,” said Miller. “In spite of that lack of evidence, there’s still a market for it.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story chose sources who were outside the retail industry selling supplements, and we didn’t detect any potential conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new form of therapy has for the first time been shown to improve the symptoms and behaviour of autistic children, offering a potential breakthrough in care for millions of families.

Six years after parents were trained to better understand and interact with their preschool children, researchers found that the therapy had moderated the behaviour of those who had been severely autistic, unresponsive or unable to speak.

A child who might have run around a supermarket squealing, heedless of their parent, putting objects in their mouth and pushing past shoppers to try to press the buttons at checkout, might instead wait in the queue and even help load the trolley, the research found.

The success of the preschool autism communication trial (Pact) has surprised even the researchers who designed it. There are no drugs to treat the condition, which typically sets in around the age of two, and many families have tried intensive training of their children by therapists, with mixed results. Pact instead trained the parents to help their children.

Prof Jonathan Green at the University of Manchester, who led the study published in the Lancet medical journal, said they had not found the cure for autism, but he and his team believed it had great potential and hoped it would be widely adopted.

“The advantage of this approach over a direct therapist-child intervention is that it has potential to affect the everyday life of the child,” he said. “Our findings are encouraging, as they represent an improvement in the core symptoms of autism previously thought very resistant to change.

“This is not a cure, in the sense that the children who demonstrated improvements will still show remaining symptoms to a variable extent, but it does suggest that working with parents to interact with their children in this way can lead to improvements in symptoms over the long term.”

The trial involved 152 children aged two to four. The families visited a clinic twice a week for six months, where parents were videoed with their children and a box of toys. Autistic children might not interact with their parents at all, but when eventually a child did offer a toy or made a noise that could be interpreted as a request, the incident was rerun on video and the parent encouraged to respond. If the child offered a toy, the parent reciprocated. If the child said a word, the parent repeated it and added something. The practice was repeated at home every day.

The therapy continued with the parents for the next six months with less intensity. At the end of the first year, the researchers could see the children had improved, but the most dramatic development was seen at the follow-up six years later. At the start of the trial, 50% of those in the control group who did not get the therapy and 55% of those who did were assessed as severely autistic. The children in the intervention group, though, got better. The proportion assessed as severe in the control group was 63% by the end of six years, compared with 46% in the intervention group.

Other experts applauded the work. “I can see why these researchers are excited,” said Dorothy Bishop, professor of developmental neuropsychology at the University of Oxford. “These results at follow-up are pretty consistent in showing the benefit of this early intervention for autism across a range of measures. My impression is that this is an intervention that reduces the severity of autistic symptoms, rather than curing autism. Nevertheless, for parents of children with autism, even a modest reduction would be worthwhile.”

Dr Max Davie, of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said it offered “a hugely cheering message for families”, while Uta Frith, emeritus professor of cognitive development at University College London, called it “a remarkably positive story, because the intervention itself was neither intensive nor invasive”.

The absence of any hope, as well as the very sudden regression in children’s behaviour, led many parents to believe in the discredited theory of Andrew Wakefield that the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine was the cause of autism.

“Parents commonly tell us that they fight for a diagnosis but when they finally get it the cupboard is bare, with little information or tailored support available to them,” said Dr James Cusack, director of science at the charity Autistica. “Too often, parents fall victim to the false claims of charlatans who prey on desperate families. These results look promising for the many thousands of parents who want to find early interventions for their children based on solid science.”

The researchers said children’s communication with their parents was improved at the end of the six years. The parents said there were also improvements in relations with other children, in social communication and in repetitive behaviours. But there was no change in child anxiety, challenging behaviours or depression in the autistic children and they would still need a lot of support while growing up.

About 1% of children and young people are affected by autistic spectrum disorder, which ranges from mild to severe. The lifetime costs to the UK, which include health, social care and education costs as well as productivity losses, are estimated at £1m to £1.5m per child and between $1.4m and $2.4m in the United States.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Outside sources were included in evaluating the impact of the study, including one from an autism advocacy group. But none of the experts noted limitations or cautions about over-interpreting the data in the long-term follow up. Almost every source was cheerleading.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The two syndromes differ, though, in their constellation of symptoms. For example, psoriatic arthritis manifests most often in the lower extremities and is associated with the autoimmune skin condition called psoriasis, in which raised red, scaly patches appear on the skin. Although psoriatic rashes most often precede the onset of the arthritic stage, the reverse can also be the case.

Three of the 10 top-selling drugs in the United States in dollar sales — adalimumab, etanercept and infliximab — are biologics prescribed for psoriatic arthritis as well as for the more common rheumatoid arthritis. These three drugs share a common property: They block the action of a pro-inflammatory substance called tumor necrosis factor. Secreted by various immune cells, TNF stimulates the immune response and accompanying inflammation.

However, despite the availability of TNF inhibitors, “only about half of psoriatic arthritis patients who are given TNF inhibitors get better,” said Genovese.

Although the ultimate cause of the disease remains unknown, there was a good clinical rationale for hoping it might be responsive to ixekizumab. For the last decade or so, Genovese said, another pro-inflammatory substance called IL-17 has been drawing the attention of immunologists focusing on psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Ixekizumab works by blocking IL-17. The drug, an injectable monoclonal antibody, is already commercially available for the treatment of psoriasis, for which it has been remarkably effective, said Genovese. And in an earlier Lilly-sponsored phase-3 trial, ixekizumab was shown to be effective for psoriatic arthritis patients who had not yet been treated with biologic drugs such as TNF inhibitors. (Another approved monoclonal-antibody that targets IL-17, secukinumab, was approved in 2016 for psoriatic arthritis.)

Over the 24-week duration of the latest trial, 109 participants received ixekizumab every two weeks; 94 received placebo injections every two weeks; and 111 alternated every two weeks between getting injections of ixekizumab and the placebo. While 19.5 percent of patients who received only the placebo injections were judged to have met the trial’s specified clinical endpoint — at least a 20 percent reduction in the number of tender and swollen joints — the response rate among those getting the real drug every four weeks was 53.3 percent. Those getting the drug every two weeks didn’t do any better and were slightly more prone to side effects, such as a mild reaction at the injection site.

Although any treatment that works by blocking the immune system’s ability to mount an inflammatory response should be carefully monitored for its potential to render the body vulnerable to infectious disease, there were few observed differences in this category between recipients of placebo versus active drug given every four weeks, Genovese said.

Lilly has filed for approval of the drug by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Genovese has served as a consultant to Lilly.

Other co-authors of the study are affiliated with multiple institutions in diverse locations, including the University of Queensland, in Australia; Guy’s & Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, in London; St. Luke’s International University, in Tokyo; Memorial University, in Newfoundland, Canada; Lapeyronie Hospital, in Montpelier, France; Charite University Medicine Berlin, in Germany; and Eli Lilly and Company, in Indianapolis.

Stanford’s Department of Medicine also supported the work.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release states that the manufacturer paid for the trial and the key spokesperson, the principle investigator served as a consultant to Eli Lilly.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“These data support the vision that we have long had for fundamentally changing the treatment for hepatitis C,” Dr. Robert Kauffman, Vertex’s chief medical officer, said in a conference call with securities analysts.

The results also keep Vertex at the front of a crowded field that has made hepatitis C one of the fiercest battlegrounds in the pharmaceutical business. Merck is expected to announce late-stage trial results of a similar drug, boceprevir, this year. And numerous other companies, from pharmaceutical giants to small start-ups, are in hot pursuit.

Both Vertex’s telaprevir and Merck’s boceprevir block an enzyme known as protease that is made by the virus. Most of the other new drugs also work by blocking viral enzymes. This direct antiviral approach has been used with great success in treating H.I.V. and AIDS.

Vertex itself says it expects results from two additional Phase 3 trials of telaprevir in the third quarter and will then apply to the Food and Drug Administration for approval of the drug.

Some 2.7 million to 3.9 million Americans are estimated to have hepatitis C, and 12,000 die from it each year, according to a recent report by the Institute of Medicine.

The disease can cause cirrhosis, which is a scarring of the liver, as well as liver cancer. The virus is transmitted by blood, so most people who have hepatitis C either have injected illegal drugs or received blood transfusions or blood products before the early 1990s.

The existing treatment is a combination of alpha interferon, which is injected, and ribavirin, an oral drug. It is not quite clear how those drugs work.

For patients with the type of hepatitis most prevalent in the United States, which is called Genotype 1, the treatment lasts nearly a year and can cause side effects that include flulike symptoms, anemia and depression. It is so arduous that many patients opt not to get treated or drop out before completing the course.

But in Vertex’s trial, about 70 percent of those who achieved an effective cure were able to do so in 24 weeks, or about six months. That shorter time line, plus a higher chance of success, could entice more people to be treated, experts say.

“If you can promise them six months with a reasonable chance of a cure, that’s a meaningful advance,” said Dr. Scott L. Friedman, chief of the division of liver diseases at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York.

If approved, telaprevir would have to be used initially with the existing drugs to prevent the virus from evolving resistance. But experts hope that eventually several of the pills now in development could be used together, much as AIDS is treated, doing away with the need for interferon.

Vertex’s clinical trial enrolled 1,095 patients in the United States and abroad who had Genotype 1 hepatitis C and had not been treated previously. Patients got either 12 weeks or eight weeks of telaprevir or a placebo. The standard therapy of interferon and ribavirin was given for either 24 weeks or 48 weeks, depending on how the patients were faring after four weeks and 12 weeks.

Of those who got 12 weeks of telaprevir, 75 percent had a sustained viral response, meaning the virus was not detectable in their blood 24 weeks after completing treatment. That is seen as essentially a cure. The rate was 69 percent for those who got eight weeks of telaprevir.

The drug can cause a nasty rash and increases the rate of anemia. About 7 percent of the patients getting telaprevir dropped out of the trial, about double the figure for the control group.

Lorren Sandt, chairwoman of the National Viral Hepatitis Roundtable, an advocacy group, called the trial results impressive. But she added, “The community hopes that if telaprevir is approved by the F.D.A. that it will be accessible and affordable to everyone.”

Vertex, which is based in Cambridge, Mass., has not said what it would charge. But analysts expect the drug to cost tens of thousands of dollars for a course of treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We would have liked to have seen independent voices inject more context into the story, but the reporter did at a minimum take these results to another legitimate researcher. The reporter also went to a patient advocacy group that, unfortunately, just spat out the standard "we welcome any cure" spiel.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 15, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A newer type of genetic test is better at detecting abnormalities that predispose a child to autism than standard genetic tests, new research has determined.

Researchers offered about 933 people aged 13 months to 22 years who had been diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder three genetic tests: G-banded karyotype testing, fragile X testing or chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), which has been available only for the past few years.

Karyotype tests identified chromosomal aberrations associated with autism in about 2 percent of patients, while the fragile X genetic mutation was found in about 0.5 percent of patients.

CMA detected chromosomal abnormalities in slightly more than 7 percent of patients, making it the best available genetic test for autism spectrum disorders, the study authors said.

"The CMA test alone has triple the detection rate of karyotyping or fragile X," said co-senior author Bai-Lin Wu, director of the Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory at Children's Hospital Boston. "CMA should be added to first-tier genetic testing for autism spectrum disorders."

The study appeared online March 15 and will be published in the April print issue of Pediatrics.

"When parents have a child diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder, one of the first questions they often ask is 'how did this happen?' " said Dr. Robert Marion, a pediatric geneticist at Children's Hospital at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City.

"In the vast majority of cases, we believe there is at least a genetic predisposition to autism, but the ability to identify a specific genetic cause has been very elusive," Marion said. "Part of that is because of the technology that's been available. A larger part is at this point, we just don't fully understand what the genetic mechanism that leads to autism is."

Standard practice is to offer children with autism two tests as a first-line genetic work-up: karyotype and fragile X testing, the researchers said.

In karyotyping, forms of which have been around since the 1960s, geneticists use a microscope to look for chromosomal abnormalities that are associated with autism, explained Dr. David Miller, a clinical geneticist and assistant director of the Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory at Children's Hospital Boston, which conducted the new research along with Boston's Autism Consortium.

Like karyotyping, CMA also looks for chromosomal abnormalities, but does so at 100 times the resolution of the earlier test, Miller said. CMA, a genome-wide test, can identify sub-microscopic deletions of duplications of DNA sequences, called copy-number variants, known to be associated with autism, he said.

"Think of chromosomes as a library full of books and each book as a gene," Miller said. "What we look for are shelves of books that have gone missing, which represent a missing fragment of a chromosome, or extra fragments of chromosome, that could contain genes related to autism."

While both Children's Hospital Boston and Montefiore have offered CMA testing for several years, not all hospitals do, nor does all insurance pay for it, the researchers noted.

The main purpose of genetic testing of children with autism is to help parents determine if they're at a higher risk of having another child with autism, Marion said.

If tests pinpoint an autism-related chromosomal abnormality in the child, the parents are then offered testing. If a parent is also found to have the abnormality, geneticists conclude that the couple is at higher risk of having a child with autism. (The precise risk depends on what the variant is.)

But if the parents don't have the abnormality, geneticists conclude that the deletion or duplication happened by chance, and the parents are probably not at any greater risk of having another child with autism than the general population, Marion said.

Still, there is much geneticists can't tell parents. Between 10 percent and 15 percent of autism cases can be traced to a known genetic cause, the researchers noted. Of that, CMA alone can detect 7 percent of those.

There are a few other genetic tests that can explain another few percentage points of autism cases.

But that leaves 85 percent or more families with little explanation for the disorder, Marion said.

"CMA is better, but it's not great," Marion said. "The vast majority of children who have autism have no identifiable genetic markers that will help in genetic counseling for future pregnancies. That is very frustrating."

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more on autism.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This story included perspective from a pediatric geneticist unaffiliated with the research. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS, Aug. 22, 2018 -- Breastfeeding is not only good for babies, there is growing evidence it may also reduce the risk for stroke in post-menopausal women who reported breastfeeding at least one child, according to new research in Journal of the American Heart Association, the Open Access Journal of the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.

Stroke is the fourth leading cause of death among women aged 65 and older, and is the third leading cause of death among Hispanic and black women aged 65 and older, according to the study.

"Some studies have reported that breastfeeding may reduce the rates of breast cancer, ovarian cancer and risk of developing Type 2 diabetes in mothers. Recent findings point to the benefits of breastfeeding on heart disease and other specific cardiovascular risk factors," said Lisette T. Jacobson, Ph.D., M.P.A., M.A., lead author of the study and assistant professor in the department of preventive medicine and public health at the University of Kansas School of Medicine-Wichita.

This is among the first studies to examine breastfeeding and a possible relationship to stroke risk for mothers, as well as how such a relationship might vary by ethnicity.

Researchers analyzed data on 80,191 participants in the Women's Health Initiative observational study, a large ongoing national study that has tracked the medical events and health habits of postmenopausal women who were recruited between 1993 and 1998. All women in this analysis had delivered one or more children and 58 percent reported ever having breastfed. Among these women, 51 percent breastfed for one-six months, 22 percent for seven-12 months and 27 percent for 13 or more months. At the time of recruitment, the average age was 63.7 years and the follow-up period was 12.6 years.

After adjusting for non-modifiable stroke risk factors (such as age and family history), researchers found stroke risk among women who breastfed their babies was on average:
• 19 percent lower in women who had breastfed for up to six months. A longer reported length of breastfeeding was associated with a greater reduction in risk.

"If you are pregnant, please consider breastfeeding as part of your birthing plan and continue to breastfeed for at least six months to receive the optimal benefits for you and your infant," Jacobson said.

"Our study did not address whether racial/ethnic differences in breastfeeding contribute to disparities in stroke risk. Additional research should consider the degree to which breastfeeding might alter racial/ethnic differences in stroke risk," Jacobson said.

Because the study was observational, it couldn't establish a cause-and-effect relationship between breastfeeding and lower stroke risk, meaning that it is possible some other characteristic that distinguishes between women who breastfeed and those who don't is the factor changing the stroke risk. However, because the Women's Health Initiative is large, researchers were able to adjust for many characteristics, and the effects of breastfeeding remained strong, Jacobson said.

"Breastfeeding is only one of many factors that could potentially protect against stroke. Others include getting adequate exercise, choosing healthy foods, not smoking and seeking treatment if needed to keep your blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar in the normal range," Jacobson said.

The study was also limited by the relatively small number of strokes that occurred during the follow-up period (just 3.4 percent of the women experienced a stroke during the study period and 1.6 percent reported having had a stroke prior to the study) and by the Women's Health Initiative's exclusion of women who had already had severe strokes at the time of recruitment.

Currently, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the World Health Organization recommend exclusive breastfeeding for six months, with continuation of breast feeding for one year or longer. For babies health, the American Heart Association recommends breastfeeding for 12 months with transition to other additional sources of nutrients beginning at about four - six months of age to ensure sufficient micronutrients in the diet.

Frontiers: The Heartland Institute for Clinical and Translational Research and the Wichita Center for Graduate Medical Education-Kansas Bioscience Authority funded the study. The WHI was supported by the National Health, Lung, and Blood Institute.

Co-authors are Erinn M. Hade, Ph.D.; Tracie C. Collins, M.D., M.P.H., M.H.C.D.S.; Karen L. Margolis, M.D., M.P.H.; Molly E. Waring, Ph.D.; Linda V. Van Horn, Ph.D., R.D.; Brian Silver, M.D.; Maryam Sattari, M.D., M.S.; Chloe E. Bird, Ph.D.; Kim Kimminau, Ph.D.; Karen Wambach, Ph.D.; and Marcia L. Stefanick, Ph.D. Author disclosures are on the manuscript.
• Available multimedia including photos and an audio interview are on the right column of the release link - https:/
• Story on previous JAHA study (June 21, 2018): Breastfeeding may reduce a mother's heart attack and stroke risk
• For updates and new science from JAHA, follow @JAHA_AHA

Statements and conclusions of study authors published in American Heart Association scientific journals are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the association's policy or position. The Association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability. The Association receives funding primarily from individuals. Foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The Association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations and health insurance providers are available at https:/ .

The American Heart Association is devoted to saving people from heart disease and stroke - the two leading causes of death in the world. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat these diseases. The Dallas-based association is the nation's oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke. To learn more or to get involved, call 1-800-AHA-USA1, visit heart.org or call any of our offices around the country. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly discloses the source of research funding. The release also notes that “author disclosures [regarding potential conflicts of interest] are on the manuscript.” It would have been much better to simply disclose the conflicts on the release itself by saying: “The authors report no potential conflicts of interest.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 2, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new treatment might open the door for more patients with advanced kidney disease to get a transplant, a preliminary study suggests.

Of the 100,000-plus Americans waiting for a donor kidney, about one-third are "sensitized," said Dr. Robert Montgomery, director of the Transplant Institute at NYU Langone in New York City.

Those patients face a tough situation: They harbor immune system antibodies that are primed to attack a donor organ.

The antibodies can form when a person is exposed to foreign tissue, Montgomery explained. So a patient who's had a prior kidney transplant may be highly sensitized -- meaning they have a large number of the offending antibodies.

It can also happen to patients who've had blood transfusion or ever been pregnant, Montgomery said.

It's almost impossible to find a compatible donor for those patients. But they might be able to receive a kidney from an incompatible donor if they first undergo an extensive "desensitization" process.

That involves various treatments -- including IV drugs called immune globulin and rituximab -- that try to quash the antibodies that would attack the donor organ.

Now the new research suggests a simple approach -- an infusion of a particular enzyme hours before the transplant -- could offer a better alternative.

Researchers found that the treatment -- dubbed IdeS -- quickly wiped out the dangerous antibodies, allowing all but one of 25 patients to have a successful transplant.

The findings were published in the Aug. 2 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. Funding for the study came from the company developing IdeS -- Hansa Medical.

Montgomery, who was not involved in the study, said he's "never seen anything like it."

"When you give this, all of the antibodies are gone," Montgomery said. "I'm hopeful that this will turn out to be a game-changer."

However, he stressed, many questions remain.

Critically, the enzyme does not banish the antibodies forever. They come back, Montgomery said -- and the results of that comeback vary from patient to patient.

In the study, 10 patients had an episode of antibody-mediated rejection anywhere from two weeks to five months after their transplant. That means antibodies started to attack the new kidney.

Those patients were all successfully treated with standard anti-rejection drugs, according to the researchers.

Still, it's not yet clear how the patients will fare in the long term, said Dr. Julie Ingelfinger, a professor at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Ingelfinger, who wrote an editorial published with the study, echoed Montgomery's cautious optimism.

If larger, longer studies bolster the current findings, she said, "this could potentially be practice-changing."

"But," Ingelfinger stressed, "only time will tell."

Lead researcher Dr. Stanley Jordan agreed that more work is necessary.

But the findings mark another step forward for patients like these, according to Jordan, who is medical director of the kidney transplant program at Cedars-Sinai, in Los Angeles.

Traditionally, highly sensitized patients in need of a kidney have languished on waiting lists because it's so hard to find a compatible donor.

But in the past 15 years or so, desensitization has emerged as an alternative.

Last year, a landmark study proved that patients who receive transplants after desensitization live significantly longer than those who stay on dialysis.

"The outcomes have been good," Jordan said.

But, he added, there's clearly room for improvement.

Ingelfinger agreed. "The desensitization protocols now in use are time-consuming, and they don't always work," she said, noting that they can leave dangerous antibodies behind.

Desensitization adds about $20,000 to $30,000 to the cost of the transplant, according to the University of Wisconsin's transplant center.

The new approach is quite different, Ingelfinger said.

Patients receive one infusion of an enzyme called IdeS four to six hours before the transplant.

The enzyme is derived from a strain of Streptococcus bacteria, and it essentially chops up the antibodies that would attack the organ.

Jordan acknowledged that the source "sounds scary," but stressed that patients do not receive the bacteria itself -- but an engineered version of the enzyme.

In all, 25 U.S. and Swedish patients received an infusion of IdeS before their kidney transplant. All but one had a successful transplant, and none had detectable antibodies immediately afterward.

IdeS patients still received additional treatment -- including a week of immune globulin and rituximab infusions.

And as with all transplants, they needed standard anti-rejection drugs.

Because IdeS so readily banishes the offending antibodies, it might make transplants feasible for even the most highly sensitized patients, Montgomery said.

But the "$65,000 question" remains, he said: Can it extend the survival of the donor kidney and, ultimately, patients' lives?

IdeS is still experimental, and the only way patients could receive it is through a clinical trial. It will be "a few years" before it could be more widely available, Montgomery said.

The National Kidney Foundation has more on kidney transplantation.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article duly discloses that the study was conducted or somehow supported by Hansa Medical, the maker of the enzyme infusion, and quotes at least two experts not involved in the study itself.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, May 29, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Taking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) -- which include medicine cabinet staples such as aspirin, Motrin and Aleve -- appears to significantly lower the risk for developing several major forms of skin cancer, a new Danish study reveals.

What's more, the apparent protective impact of both prescription and nonprescription NSAIDs on skin cancer risk seems to be stronger the longer someone takes them.

Over-the-counter NSAIDs are used to control pain, fever and swelling. NSAIDs also include prescription medicines called COX-2 enzyme inhibitors, such as Celebrex (celecoxib).

"Our study showed that users of common painkillers, known as NSAIDs, have a lower risk of the three major types of skin cancer, [including] malignant melanoma, basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma," said study lead author, Sigrun Alba Johannesdottir, at the department of clinical epidemiology at Aarhus University Hospital in Aarhus, Denmark.

"The greatest effect," she noted, "was found for squamous cell carcinomas and malignant melanoma, especially when [these painkillers were] taken frequently and over a long time period."

The study appears in the May 29 online issue of the journal Cancer.

The authors noted that prior work supported the notion that NSAIDs may offer some measure of protection against cancer (most notably colorectal cancer), by specifically impeding the cancer-causing activities of COX-2 (cyclooxygenase) enzymes.

However, the team suggested that past investigations into how NSAIDs may affect skin cancer risk, in particular, had key design problems that undercut efforts to nail down any NSAID-skin cancer connection.

For the new study, the researchers analyzed prescription databases and health information registries including the Danish Cancer Registry and the Danish Civil Registration System.

The team focused on diagnostic and death records concerning nearly 2,000 cases of squamous cell carcinoma, about 13,300 cases of basal cell carcinoma and nearly 3,250 cases of malignant melanoma diagnosed between 1991 and 2009 when the patients were at least 20 years old.

In turn, prescription histories were gathered for both the cancer patient group and almost 179,000 healthy Danes. Records covered the use of both low- and high-dose aspirin (ranging from 75 milligrams to 500 milligrams), so-called "nonselective" NSAIDs (such as ibuprofen [Advil] and naproxen [Aleve]), and both older and newer types of COX-2 inhibitors. Researchers noted the number of prescriptions issued per patient and their length of use, with short-term use defined as fewer than seven years.

The result: The relative risk for squamous cell carcinoma was found to have dropped by 15 percent among those Danes who had filled more than two NSAID prescriptions, compared to those who had filled two or less.

Similarly, malignant melanoma risk fell by nearly as much (13 percent) among those filling more than two NSAID prescriptions.

However, the same dynamic was generally not seen with regards to basal cell carcinoma. But taking NSAIDs for long periods of time, and at relatively high doses, was associated with a reduced risk (between 15 and 21 percent), specifically for basal cell cases that manifested in skin regions that typically experience relatively little sun exposure (areas other than the neck or head).

On that front, long-term users and those who took NSAIDs at relatively higher doses appeared to benefit from the strongest protective effect, suggesting that when it comes to skin cancer risk reduction, more NSAID use is better.

The researchers pointed out that the NSAID-cancer connection could be affected by a range of lifestyle factors they did not account for, such as an individual's specific skin type or sun exposure patterns.

But Johannesdottir added that "we hope that our finding will inspire more research on skin cancer prevention. Also, the potential cancer-protective effect should be taken into account when discussing benefits and harms of NSAID use," she noted.

However, "other studies need to detail the association further and to examine benefits versus risks," she cautioned. "Meanwhile, the most important prevention against skin cancer remains sun protection."

Meanwhile, Dr. William Ting, a private practice dermatologist in San Ramon, Calif., praised the study despite agreeing that many factors are at play when it comes to skin cancer formation.

"Now we have a better understanding that inflammation also plays a significant role in cancer formation and even skin cancers," he said.

And, "this exciting article gives physicians and consumers a relatively simple way of diminishing one's risk of skin cancer by doing what most of us are doing already for heart health," Ting added. Ting also advised that people consult with their doctor before starting on any blood thinner.

While the study found an association between skin cancer risk and NSAIDs, it did not prove a cause-and-effect relationship.

For more on NSAIDs and cancer, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent expert was quoted, although unfortunately his comments tend to reinforce the story’s exuberance rather than restrain it. Why this private practice dermatologist was chosen as the one independent expert is unknown.  Does he have a research background?  The quote doesn’t offer any evaluation of the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using a simple device for eight hours a night to treat sleep apnea can help people with prediabetes improve their blood sugar levels and may reduce the risk of progressing to diabetes, according to a new study published online in the April 21, 2015, issue of the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine.

About 57 million Americans have prediabetes, a disorder marked by blood sugar levels that are elevated but not sufficiently high to be considered diabetic. Prediabetics are at increased risk for developing diabetes, which can damage the eyes, kidneys, nerves and blood vessels and often leads to cardiovascular disease.

Many people with prediabetes also have untreated sleep apnea, although few of them are aware of it. The most widely accepted treatment for sleep apnea is continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), a device that blows a constant pressure of air into the lungs through a tube and face mask during the night. This helps people breathe better while they sleep by keeping the upper airway open.

"Our study showed that CPAP in patients with prediabetes can lower their risk of progressing to diabetes when CPAP is used for eight hours, a full night's sleep," said the study's lead author, Sushmita Pamidi, MD, a former fellow at the University of Chicago who is now on the faculty at McGill University in Montreal, Canada.

"Although eight hours of CPAP per night can be difficult to achieve in real-life, our results should provide a strong incentive for anyone with sleep apnea, especially prediabetic individuals, to improve adherence to their treatment for cardio-metabolic risk reduction," she said.

People with sleep apnea, which is common among overweight and obese individuals, have repeated episodes where their upper airway closes during sleep. This can disrupt sleep and temporarily lower oxygen levels. It has been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, such as hypertension and stroke, and may decrease their ability to regulate blood sugar levels. This increases the risk of diabetes.

For this study, the researchers recruited 39 middle-aged, overweight or obese volunteers with prediabetes and sleep apnea. Two-thirds of them (26) were randomly assigned to two weeks of CPAP treatment. The other 13 received a placebo -- a pill containing no medicine -- to be taken 30 minutes before bedtime. They were told the study would compare the two treatments.

All participants slept in the sleep laboratory and were closely monitored with all-night sleep recordings during the treatment period. Those assigned to CPAP wore the device for eight hours a night under continuous supervision by a technician. Before and after each treatment period, participants' glucose metabolism was assessed by oral and intravenous glucose-tolerance tests.

The researchers also measured the stress hormone noradrenaline in the blood and continuously monitored blood pressure for 24 hours at home. All participants were permitted to leave the laboratory during the day and engage in their routine activities.

After two weeks, blood sugar control, as measured by an oral glucose tolerance test, improved for those in the CPAP group compared to the oral placebo group. In addition, the ability of insulin to regulate their blood sugar, estimated by the intravenous glucose tolerance test, was improved in the CPAP group compared to the oral placebo group. The CPAP group had, on average, 27 percent lower levels of the stress hormone, norepinephrine, as well as lower blood pressure than the oral placebo group.

"Despite the demonstrated efficacy of lifestyle interventions and the availability of many drug treatments, the economic and public health burden of diabetes remains enormous," said Esra Tasali, MD, assistant professor of medicine at the University of Chicago and senior author of the study. "Assessment of sleep apnea should be considered in patients at high risk for diabetes and cardiovascular disease, since our study shows that treatment of sleep apnea can reduce these risks."

The National Institutes of Health, plus the Diabetes Research and Training Center and the Institute for Translational Medicine at the University of Chicago funded this study. Additional authors include Kristen Wroblewski, Magdalena Stepien, Khalid Sharif-Sidi, Jennifer Kilkus and Harry R. Whitmore from the University of Chicago.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly identifies the sources of funding for the study, which were the National Institutes of Health and the University of Chicago’s Diabetes Research and Training Center and Institute for Translational Medicine. The release also quotes two researchers and makes clear that both researchers were authors of the paper describing the work.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy may be able to avoid the accompanying muscle loss and malnutrition by taking fish oil supplements that contain omega-3 fatty acids, new research suggests.

The finding is based on a small study involving just 40 lung cancer patients. Nevertheless, it raises hope that a simple, noninvasive intervention might go a long way towards countering the fatigue, poorer prognosis and impaired quality of life that can result from chemo-induced muscle mass loss.

"Fish oil may prevent loss of weight and muscle by interfering with some of the pathways that are altered in advanced cancer," study author Dr. Vera Mazurak, of the University of Alberta in Edmonton, Canada, said in a news release. "This holds great promise, because currently there is no effective treatment for cancer-related malnutrition."

Mazurak and her colleagues report their observations in the Feb. 28 online edition of Cancer.

To explore the therapeutic potential of fish oil supplements, the authors offered 16 cancer patients undergoing an initial 10-week chemotherapy regimen a daily dose of 2.2 grams of a particular omega-3 fatty acid called eicosapentaenoic (EPA).

While these patients took fish oil supplements throughout their chemotherapy treatment, a second group of 24 patients underwent the same regimen minus the fish oil.

The results: continual muscle and fat measurements revealed that the group that took no fish oil supplementation lost an average of just over 5 pounds; the supplement group lost no weight.

What's more, blood analyses revealed that those in the fish oil group who had the biggest bump in bloodstream EPA concentrations also had the greatest muscle mass gains.

Specifically, nearly 70 percent of those in the fish oil group either kept their pre-chemo muscle mass or gained muscle. By comparison, less than 30 percent in the non-supplement group kept their original muscle mass.

Total fat tissue measurements were unaffected by fish oil supplementation, the team noted, and no side effects were observed.

The authors concluded that fish oil supplementation appears to be a safe and effective way to prevent malnutrition among cancer patients, and may ultimately prove to be of benefit for other groups of people, such as elderly patients who also face a significant ongoing risk for muscle loss.

Lona Sandon, a registered dietitian and assistant professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Texas Southwestern Dallas, reacted with cautious optimism to the findings.

"Malnutrition is a big concern with cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy and radiation," she noted. "Because first of all they do have wasting from the cancer itself, which is very metabolically active and eats up your energy stores. And then with chemotherapy, there is some inflammation that's detrimental to the heart and muscle, as it can cause muscle breakdown. And preservation of lean muscle tissue, we know, leads to better outcomes."

"So certainly this does seem to be promising," Sandon said. "And other similar studies have looked at omega-3 and muscle preservation and have also suggested that fish oil can act to prevent inflammation caused by both disease and hardcore medications, like chemotherapy agents."

"But I would caution that the amount of pure concentrated fish oil supplement the people in this study were given is a lot," she added. "Much much more than any recommended dietary allowance, along the lines of two to three servings of fish per week."

But, she said, "I would say this is certainly worthy of continuing research and exploration. But meanwhile, people should definitely not go out and start consuming huge amounts of fish oil."

For more on chemotherapy, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Despite what we just said in the “news release” criterion above, we will give the story a satisfactory score for seeking an independent perspective, but we wonder what that dietitian reacted to:  the study itself or just a news release?  Barely satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a report on what is believed to be the first small clinical trial of its kind, researchers at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center say they have safely used immune cells grown from patients' own bone marrow to treat multiple myeloma, a cancer of white blood cells.

Results of the trial involving a particular type of tumor-targeting T cell, known as marrow-infiltrating lymphocytes (MILs), are described in the May 20 issue of Science Translational Medicine.

"What we learned in this small trial is that large numbers of activated MILs can selectively target and kill myeloma cells," says Johns Hopkins immunologist Ivan Borrello, M.D., who led the clinical trial.

MILs, he explains, are the foot soldiers of the immune system and attack foreign cells, such as bacteria or viruses. But in their normal state, they are inactive and too few in number to have a measurable effect on cancer.

Previous laboratory research by Borrello and his colleagues showed that activated MILs could selectively target and kill myeloma cells taken from patients and grown in laboratory culture flasks.

For the clinical trial, the Johns Hopkins team enrolled 25 patients with newly diagnosed or relapsed multiple myeloma, although three of the patients relapsed before they could receive the MILs therapy.

The scientists retrieved MILs from each patient's bone marrow, grew them in the laboratory to expand their numbers, activated them with microscopic beads coated with immune activating antibodies and intravenously injected each of the 22 patients with their own cells. Three days before the injections of expanded MILs, patients received high doses of chemotherapy and a stem cell transplant, standard treatments for multiple myeloma.

One year after receiving the MILs therapy, 13 of the 22 patients had at least a partial response to the therapy, meaning that their cancers had shrunk by at least 50 percent.

Seven patients experienced at least a 90 percent reduction in tumor cell volume and lived, on average, 25.1 months without cancer progression. The remaining 15 patients had an average of 11.8 progression-free months following MILs therapy. None of the participants had serious side effects from the MILs therapy. The overall survival was 31.5 months for those with less than 90 percent disease reduction, but this number has not yet been reached in those with better responses. The average follow-up time is currently more than six years.

Borrello notes that several U.S. cancer centers have conducted similar experimental treatments, known as adoptive T cell therapy, but says the Johns Hopkins team is believed to be the only one to use MILs. Other types of tumor-infiltrating cells can be used, but they are usually less plentiful in patients' tumors and may not grow as well outside the body, says Borrello.

In nonblood-based tumors, such as melanoma, only about one-half of patients have T cells in their tumors that can be harvested, and only about one-half of those harvested cells can be grown. "Typically, immune cells from solid tumors, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, can be harvested and grown in only about 25 percent of patients who could potentially be eligible for the therapy. But in our clinical trial, we were able to harvest and grow MILs from all 22 patients," says Kimberly Noonan, Ph.D., a research associate at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

Noonan says the small trial helped her and her colleagues learn more about which patients may benefit from MILs therapy. For example, they were able to determine how many of the MILs grown in the lab were specifically targeted to the patient's tumor and whether they continued to target the tumor after being infused.

Additionally, the scientists found that patients whose bone marrow before treatment contained a high number of certain immune cells, known as central memory cells, also had better response to MILs therapy. Patients who began treatment with signs of an overactive immune response did not respond as well.

Noonan says the research team has used these data to guide two other ongoing MILs clinical trials. Those studies, she says, are trying to extend anti-tumor response and tumor specificity by combining the MILs transplant with a Johns Hopkins-developed cancer vaccine called GVAX and the myeloma drug lenalidomide, which stimulates T cell responses.

The researchers say the trials also have shed light on new ways to grow the MILs. "In most of these trials, you see that the more cells you get, the better response you get in patients. Learning how to improve cell growth may therefore improve the therapy," says Noonan.

Kimmel Cancer Center scientists are also developing MILs to treat solid tumors such as lung, esophageal and gastric cancers, as well as the pediatric cancers neuroblastoma and Ewing's sarcoma.

Experts report there are more than 20,000 new cases of multiple myeloma and more than 10,000 deaths each year in United States. It is the second most common cancer originating in the blood.

Other Johns Hopkins scientists who contributed to the research include Carol Ann Huff, Janice Davis, M. Victor Lemas, Susan Fiorino, Jeffrey Bitzan, Anna Ferguson, Amy Emerling, Leo Luznik, William Matsui, Jonathan Powell, Ephraim Fuchs, Gary L. Rosner, C. Epstein, Lakshmi Rudraraju, Richard F. Ambinder, Richard J. Jones and Drew Pardoll.

Funding for the study was provided by the Commonwealth Fund (5P01 CA015396, P30 CA006973) and the Baca and Morisi Funds.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources for this research are listed in an end note in the release.  No conflict of interest information is provided in the release, although the research paper discloses no conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An herb widely used in traditional Chinese medicine might hold the key to a new osteoporosis therapy that could prevent bone loss without causing side effects.

Using a compound derived from red sage, UBC researchers have found a way to selectively block an enzyme called Cathepsin K (CatK), which plays a major role in the breakdown of collagen in bones during osteoporosis. The findings were published today in the Journal of Bone and Mineral Research.

"The development of osteoporosis drugs by pharmaceutical companies has focused heavily on blocking CatK in recent years," said Dieter Brömme, a professor in the faculty of dentistry and a Canada Research Chair in Proteases and Disease. "All clinical trials to date have failed due to side effects ranging from stroke, skin fibrosis and cardiovascular issues. We've found a way to block CatK only in bone tissue that we think will prevent these other negative effects."

The researchers tested a compound derived from red sage in human and mouse bone cells and a mouse model. They found that it prevented bone loss and increased the bone mineral density of the mice treated with the compound by 35 per cent, when compared with the control group.

The study builds on previous research by Brömme and his team that looked at the effectiveness of red sage, known as Danshen in Chinese and used to treat bone ailments, in stopping the activity of CatK in limited ways.

Enzyme blockers work like keys in locks. Most drugs in development have been so called active site-directed inhibitors, which act like master keys and lock the entire enzyme, blocking both its disease-relevant functions such as collagen degradation and its other normal functions.

"CatK is a multifunctional enzyme with important roles in other parts of the body and we think completely blocking it is what causes unexpected side effects in other drugs," said Preety Panwar, a research associate in the Brömme lab. "Our compound only locks the collagen -degrading CatK activity, preventing the unregulated breakdown of collagen in bones without any other negative impacts."

The treatment could also potentially be used to treat a variety of other bone and cartilage diseases such as arthritis and certain bone cancers.

Osteoporosis is a global health problem that will affect one out of three women and one of out five men worldwide, with a multi-billion-dollar pharmaceutical industry dedicated to finding treatments to stop its progression.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: On EurekAlert!, where the news release is hosted, we’re told that the study was funded by Canadian Institutes of Health Research grants and a Canada Research Chair award. We encourage news releases to include funders in the body of the release, too.
The authors listed no conflicts of interest in the published study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON – (February 19, 2015) – In the first clinical trial directly comparing three drugs most commonly used to treat diabetic macular edema, researchers found all were effective in improving vision and preventing vision loss. However, one drug, aflibercept, provided greater improvement for people with more severe vision loss when treatment was initiated. The trial was conducted by the National Eye Institute Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net) including researchers from Joslin Diabetes Center. The results appeared in the February online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Diabetes is a significant risk factor for developing eye diseases. The most common diabetic eye disease and a leading cause of blindness is diabetic retinopathy, which is caused by elevated blood sugar levels damaging the blood vessels of the retina and affects approximately 7.7 million Americans. About 750,000 Americans with diabetic retinopathy have diabetic macular edema (DME) in which fluid leaks into the macula, the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The fluid causes the macula to swell, blurring vision. “DME is the leading cause of moderate vision loss in working-age adults with diabetes. With the rate of diabetes increasing dramatically worldwide, many individuals will be at risk for vision loss from diabetic eye complications and DME is a major global health concern,” says Jennifer K. Sun, M.D., M.P.H., a member of the study research team and writing committee, and an Investigator in the Section on Vascular Biology, an ophthalmologist in Beetham Eye Institute at Joslin and an Assistant Professor at Harvard Medical School.

In an earlier study, Joslin researchers reported that VEGF, a major growth factor for blood vessels, is elevated in the eye fluids of patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy and DME, causing leakage and the growth of abnormal blood vessels. Over the past few years, drugs that target VEGF have become a standard treatment for DME, providing a preferred alternative or adjunct to laser treatment. The standard Medicare per-injection costs of the three anti-VEGF drugs evaluated in the study are about $1960 for aflibercept (Eylea), $1200 for ranibizumab (Lucentis) and $70 for bevacizumab (Avastin).

At the start of the trial, 660 adults with DME were enrolled: their average age was 61 years and 90 percent had type 2 diabetes. About half of the participants had 20/32 or 20/40 vision and the other half had vision of 20/50 or worse. They were randomized into three treatment groups and received the assigned study drug by injection into the eye until the DME resolved or stabilized. Participants on bevacizumab and ranibizumab received, on average, 10 injections, versus nine for those on aflibercept.

One year after starting treatment, all participants had improved vision. Those with mild vision loss (20/32 to 20/40) at baseline in all three treatment groups gained on average almost two lines on an eye chart. For participants with more severe vision loss (20/50 or worse), aflibercept improved vision on average nearly four lines, bevacizumab about 2.5 lines, and ranibizumab almost three lines.

“The results clearly remove any doubts about anti-VEGF drugs’ efficacy in treating DME. All three drugs improved vision substantially, with aflibercept showing more visual gains in patients with worse vision at the start of the trial. Physicians now have robust data to help them counsel patients and make informed decisions regarding treatment options,” says study co-author Lloyd P. Aiello, M.D., Ph.D., Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, Director of Joslin’s Beetham Eye Institute, co-head of Joslin's Section of Vascular Cell Biology, and founding chair of the DRCR Network.

In light of these positive results, “it is more important than ever for patients with diabetes to be evaluated on a regular basis for eye disease and receive treatment promptly once indicated as we now have excellent success in treating patients with DME,” says Dr. Aiello.

The trial was supported through a cooperative agreement from the National Eye Institute and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Regeneron Pharmaceutical provided the aflibercept and Genentech provided the ranibizumab for the study. The DRCR.net had complete control over the design of the study, data ownership and content of presentations and publications related to this study.

Joslin Diabetes Center, based in Boston, Massachusetts, undertakes diabetes research, clinical care, education and health and wellness programs on a global scale. Joslin is dedicated to ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives and offers real progress in preventing and curing diabetes. Joslin is an independent, nonprofit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and is recognized worldwide for driving innovative solutions in diabetes prevention, research, education, and care.

Our mission is to prevent, treat and cure diabetes. Our vision is a world free of diabetes and its complications. For more information, visit www.joslin.org.

Joslin Research comprises the most comprehensive and productive effort in diabetes research under one roof anywhere in the world. With 30‐plus faculty‐level investigators, Joslin researchers focus on unraveling the biological, biochemical and genetic processes that underlie the development of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and related complications.

Joslin research is highly innovative and imaginative, employing the newest tools in genetics, genomics and proteomics to identify abnormalities that may play a role in the development of diabetes and its complications. Joslin Clinic patients, and others with diabetes, have the option of participating in clinical trials at Joslin to help translate basic research into treatment innovations.

Joslin has one of the largest diabetes training programs in the world, educating 150 M.D. and Ph.D. researchers each year, many of whom go on to head diabetes initiatives at leading institutions all over the globe. For more information, visit www.joslinresearch.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources and the donation of drugs from the pharmaceutical companies are clearly stated. The Joslin researchers quoted in the article don’t appear to have any direct conflicts of interest with companies involved in the research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Benefits of green tea were already known; new UCLA study shows that polyphenols in both varieties alter gut bacteria

UCLA researchers have demonstrated for the first time that black tea may promote weight loss and other health benefits by changing bacteria in the gut. In a study of mice, the scientists showed that black tea alters energy metabolism in the liver by changing gut metabolites.

The research is published in the European Journal of Nutrition.

The study found that both black and green tea changed the ratio of intestinal bacteria in the animals: The percentage of bacteria associated with obesity decreased, while bacteria associated with lean body mass increased.

Previous studies indicated that chemicals in green tea called polyphenols are absorbed and alter the energy metabolism in the liver. The new findings show that black tea polyphenols, which are too large to be absorbed in the small intestine, stimulate the growth of gut bacterium and the formation of short-chain fatty acids, a type of bacterial metabolites that has been shown to alter the energy metabolism in the liver.

"It was known that green tea polyphenols are more effective and offer more health benefits than black tea polyphenols since green tea chemicals are absorbed into the blood and tissue," said Susanne Henning, the study's lead author and an adjunct professor at the UCLA Center for Human Nutrition, which is part of the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. "Our new findings suggest that black tea, through a specific mechanism through the gut microbiome, may also contribute to good health and weight loss in humans."

"The results suggest that both green and black teas are prebiotics, substances that induce the growth of good microorganisms that contribute to a person's well-being," she said.

In the study, four groups of mice received different diets -- two of which were supplemented with green tea or black tea extracts:

After four weeks, the weights of the mice that were given green or black tea extracts dropped to the same levels as those of the mice that received the low-fat diet throughout the study.

The researchers also collected samples from the mice's large intestines (to measure bacteria content) and liver tissues (to measure fat deposits). In the mice that consumed either type of tea extract, there was less of the type of bacteria associated with obesity and more of the bacteria associated with lean body mass.

However, only the mice that consumed black tea extract had an increase in a type of bacteria called Pseudobutyrivibrio, which could help explain the difference between how black tea and green tea change energy metabolism.

Dr. Zhaoping Li, director of the UCLA Center for Human Nutrition, chief of the UCLA Division of Clinical Nutrition and the study's senior author, said the findings suggest that the health benefits of both green tea and black tea go beyond their antioxidant benefits, and that both teas have a strong impact on the gut microbiome.

"For black tea lovers, there may be a new reason to keep drinking it," she said.

The findings build on a 2015 UCLA study that demonstrated that both green tea and black tea helped prevent obesity in mice that consumed a high-fat, high-sugar diet.

The new study also concluded that both green tea and black tea have different effects on liver metabolism. According to Henning, the molecules in green tea are smaller and can more readily be absorbed into the body and reach the liver directly, while black tea molecules are larger and stay in the intestine rather than being absorbed. When black tea molecules stay in the intestinal tract, they enhance the growth of beneficial bacteria and the formation of microbial metabolites involved in the regulation of energy metabolism.

The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health and the UCLA Center for Human Nutrition.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funders of the study are disclosed and there don’t appear to be any obvious conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At some doses, the medication lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, a drug approved to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, was effective compared with placebo in decreasing binge-eating (BE) days in patients with binge-eating disorder (BED), a public health problem associated symptoms of mental illness and obesity and for which there are no approved medications, according to a study published online by JAMA Psychiatry.

BED is characterized by recurrent episodes of excessive food consumption accompanied by a sense of loss of control and psychological distress. Cognitive behavioral therapy, as well as psychotherapy, can reduce BE behavior but implementation of these treatments has not been widespread. Consequently, many patients with BED are undertreated despite having functional impairments and difficulties in their social and personal lives. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not approved pharmacologic treatments for BED, according to background information in the study.

Susan L. McElroy, M.D., of the Research Institute, Lindner Center of HOPE, Mason, Ohio, and coauthors compared lisdexamfetamine with placebo in adults with moderate to severe BED in a randomized clinical trial from May 2011 through January 2012. The study included 259 and 255 adults with BED in safety and intention-to-treat analyses, respectively. The medication was administered in dosages of 30, 50 or 70 mg/day or placebo.

BE days per week decreased in the 50-mg/d and 70 mg/d treatment groups but not in the 30 mg/d treatment group compared with the placebo group, according to the study results. Results also indicate the percentage of patients who achieved four-week BE cessation was lower with the placebo group (21.3 percent) compared with the 50-mg/d (42.2 percent) and 70-mg/d (50 percent) treatment groups.

"In the primary analysis of this study of adults with moderate to severe BED, lisdexamfetamine dimesylate treatment with 50 and 70 mg/d, but not 30 mg/d, demonstrated a significant decrease (compared with placebo) in weekly BE days per week at week 11. Similarly, BE episodes decreased in the 50- and 70-mg/d treatment groups. The one-week BE episode response status was improved in the 50- and 70-mg/d treatment groups, and a greater proportion of participants achieved four-week cessation of BE episodes and global improvement of symptom severity with all lisdexamfetamine dosages. ... Confirmation of these findings in ongoing clinical trials may results in improved pharmacologic treatment for moderate to severe BED," the study concludes.

Editor's Note: Authors made conflict of interest disclosures. This study was supported by Shire Development, LLC, including funding to Scientific Communications & Information and Complete Healthcare Communications, Inc., for support in writing and editing the manuscript. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Media Advisory: To contact corresponding author Susan L. McElroy, M.D., call Jennifer Pierson at 513-536-0316 or email jennifer.pierson@lindnercenter.org
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A pharmaceutical company is identified as the funder of this study in an editor’s note at the bottom of the release, and the release notes that the study authors also disclosed conflicts of interest. Also disclosed is the fact that the sponsor paid a communications company to write and edit the manuscript.
That’s sufficient for a Satisfactory rating, although we’d add that each of the study authors (except one, who works for another company) is heavily involved with industry above and beyond this particular study. The cumulative effects of these commercial aspects is worrisome: Where does one draw the line between experiment and “experimercial”?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a landmark medical clash pitting the diagnostic merits of fancy tech versus vintage exercise machines, the new toys and old ways finished in a dead heat, cardiologists reported Saturday.

The first showdown pitting 3-D, heart-imaging exams against older stress tests atop treadmills or stationary bikes found that among 10,003 heart patients, their rates of eventually having serious heart events were the same — no matter which method doctors used to check their tickers, researchers said.

Even more surprising, the rate of bad outcomes among the heart patients studied were extremely low. In both test groups, only about 3 percent of the people had heart attacks, suffered "major" complications, needed hospitalization for chest pain or died during two years of tracking, researchers found.

Which prompts a big question: Could the use of stress tests or expensive scans become less frequent for heart patients, replaced by more watchful waiting?

"We were very pleasantly surprised," said Dr. Pamela Douglas, Ursula Geller professor of research in cardiovascular diseases at Duke University, and the study’s lead author.

Results of the federally funded trial — Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain (PROMISE) — were presented at the American College of Cardiology’s 64th Annual Scientific Session in San Diego. Findings also were published the New England Journal of Medicine.

"Knowing how well the patients did in spite having a very high cardiovascular-risk burden opens up the door to thinking differently about how we might manage those patients. And, certainly, one option is watchful waiting," Douglas said in an interview. "We now have the data to support that as a reasonable way to go for a lot of patients. We didn’t before."

The 10,000-plus patients, who visited 193 health centers in the U.S. and Canada, had no prior diagnosis of coronary artery disease. But they had new symptoms that caused physicians to suspect heart disease — and nearly all had at least one risk factor like high blood pressure, diabetes or a history of smoking.

Half were randomly selected to get a computed tomographic angiography (CTA), which creates a 3-D image of the heart's arteries, allowing physicians to spot narrowing. The rest took stress tests — either an exercise electrocardiogram, a stress echocardiography or a nuclear stress test, which uses radioactive dye. Stress tests measure the heart's response to exertion, letting doctors see or hear any disease.

"The remarkable thing about the study is ... these were quite high-risk patients, but the actual [bad] event rate was very low ... It is a real testament to how far we’ve come in the treatment of patients with suspected coronary disease," said Dr. Steven Nissen, department chair of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic. He was not part of the study.

Prevention tactics do seem to be working: Lowering cholesterol through diet and medicine, keeping blood pressure in check, and helping people to stop smoking.

"Traditionally, when you come in with chest pain, some sort of stress test or CT angiogram will be performed," Nissen said. "And I wonder if it's worth doing those tests when rates of cardiac events are so low."

Until this study, doctors have been "guessing" which form of those two diagnostic tests is best, Douglas said.

And while there's often no wrong choice between CTAs and stress tests, the new findings underscore a vital nuance, she added.

CTAs, the study found, result in fewer instances of patients with suspected heart issues undergoing unneeded catheterization procedures — only to later learn they had no artery problems.

"If you have chest pains and you needed a test," Douglas said, "and if I said to you: 'Either one of these two tests will be equally effective in preventing heart attack or death, but this one will have less chance of going to the cath lab if you don’t have blockages,' which one would you pick?"

Each year, about 4 million Americans report heart symptoms such as chest pain or shortness of breath.

But one Cleveland Clinic patient epitomizes a difference between CTAs and stress tests — and he does so just by being alive.

At age 48, David, an electrical engineer, was in great condition, biking 50 miles on a weekend. Be he'd been feeling vague sensations for a year, including chest tightness and heart palpitations. (He did not want his last name published). He easily passed several stress tests on treadmills.

But — partly because his mother had died of coronary artery disease at age 49 — David remained unconvinced by those results. He underwent a CTA at Cleveland Clinic, and it showed severely blocked arteries. He soon underwent a bypass surgery. He is healthy today, now 50.

As a result, however, David's two brothers, both close to his age, were convinced to undergo CTAs. Both were found to have blocked arteries, also requiring immediate surgeries.

"None of us had any indications," David said. "Just because I had a CTA, that had a domino effect to my brothers getting it, and it very well saved all three of our lives."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Neither the story nor the original press release indicates the presence of conflicts of interest.  That may be reasonable, as the research was funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of NIH.  The one outside scientist quoted in the story is clearly described as independent of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers report that nearly half of the cases of prostate cancer among the roughly 5,000 men in the study could be attributed to the five gene regions and a family history, with some men having one or two of the gene variants and others having all five and a family history.

Prostate cancer becomes more common as men age — autopsies of elderly men find that most had prostate cancer, whether they knew it or not. But the men in this study had an average age of about 65, when the disease is less common and more likely to kill.

William B. Isaacs, a professor of urology and oncology at Johns Hopkins University and an author of the new report, said that if research validates what has been found, men may want to get the new genetic test when they are young, 35, say. Those at high risk because of their genetics might then choose to start prostate-cancer screening earlier than the usual age of about 50, using a blood test that looks for proteins secreted by prostate tumors.

“I think that makes sense,” said Dr. Howard Sandler, a professor of radiation oncology at the University of Michigan and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

But others worry that more frequent testing could exacerbate what is already a major problem: most prostate cancers grow so slowly that they would have been harmless if left alone. But since doctors cannot tell which are dangerous, they treat nearly all that they find. And treatment has serious side effects, including, often, impotence and incontinence. Nonetheless, researchers say, the test is a harbinger of things to come.

“It’s the boutique medicine of the future,” said Dr. Peter C. Albertsen, a surgery professor and prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut. “We can know what diseases we will have to face in the rest of our lives.”

That worries him, as it does Dr. Edward P. Gelmann, deputy director of the Comprehensive Cancer Center at Columbia University. “Technology today enables us to find out a huge amount of information,” Dr. Gelmann said. “But how does the public deal with this information? How does it help them make decisions? And if they make a decision, does that lead to a day, a week, a month, of life saved?”

The study, by scientists at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, the Harvard School of Public Health, and Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, will appear in the Feb. 28 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine. It was released online on Wednesday, a journal spokeswoman said, because “it is a very active area of research with a lot of competition.”

Researchers long knew that the disease often runs in families. Though scientists spent years looking for genes, they found none that were reproducibly associated with a marked effect.

With new technology to scan the entire length of a person’s DNA, researchers tried a new approach. They began looking for small variations in tiny DNA regions that were associated with prostate cancer. That resulted in the discovery, by several groups of investigators in Iceland and the United States, of the gene variants, small alterations in gene sequences. Unlike traditional genetic links to disease, the variants are not mutations that destroy a gene’s function. In fact, no one knows what their effect is.

The next step was to ask whether those variants really could predict who had prostate cancer. So Dr. Jianfeng Xu, a professor of epidemiology and cancer biology at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, and his colleagues studied a Swedish population of 2,893 men with prostate cancer and 1,781 men who did not have it. That led to their finding that each of the five variants independently predicted prostate cancer risk.

“Each confers a moderate risk,” Dr. Xu said, adding that the effect of having just one of the variants — a 10 or 20 percent increase in a man’s chance of having prostate cancer — was not enough to justify using a single variant for screening. But, he added, because each conferred an independent risk, the risks added up so that the more men had, the greater their risk. Then they found that family history of the cancer added an independent risk. “That was very, very surprising to us,” Dr. Xu said.

The next step, Dr. Isaacs said, is to look in other populations. “We think that can happen almost instantaneously,” he said, explaining how scientists have blood samples and family histories of thousands of men who were tested for prostate cancer.

But some said that if the test leads to more screening, it is not necessarily a good thing. There is already too much prostate-cancer screening, they say, resulting in too much treatment. “To me, it is a nightmare,” Dr. Albertsen said. “We are just feeding off of this cancer phobia.”

What is needed, and what the new test does not provide, is a way to decide which cancers are dangerous and which are not, Dr. Isaacs said. Still, he said the new test could help patients if it was used with caution. “We may be premature with this idea — everyone has a different way of thinking about this — but it should not take five years to know if we are on the right track. All this can happen very rapidly.”

“We have worked with enough families that have a positive family history to know that people are anxious to know their risk of prostate cancer,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included comments from experts in the field who were not connected to the study reported on.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TITUSVILLE, N.J., May 5, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- The Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson today announced the results from two Phase 3 clinical studies of the investigational compound esketamine nasal spray in patients with treatment-resistant depression. These studies will be presented at the American Psychiatric Association Annual Meeting, taking place May 5-9 in New York, NY.

Data from a study in adults with treatment-resistant depression showed that flexibly dosed esketamine nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant demonstrated a statistically significant, clinically meaningful rapid reduction of depressive symptoms as compared to placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant. The study defined treatment-resistant as patients who had not responded to two or more currently available antidepressants of adequate dose and duration in the current episode of depression.

Data from a second study, in elderly patients aged 65 and older with treatment-resistant depression, which is the first study of its kind, showed treatment with flexibly dosed esketamine plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant demonstrated clinically meaningful effects compared to placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant. However, the study narrowly missed statistical significance for its primary efficacy endpoint.

If approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), esketamine would be one of the first new approaches to treat refractory major depressive disorder available to patients in the last 50 years.

"With about 30 percent of patients with major depression failing to respond to currently available antidepressants1, treatment-resistant depression represents a major public health need," said Husseini K. Manji, MD, Global Head, Neuroscience Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research & Development, LLC. "The positive Phase 3 results for esketamine nasal spray in adults with treatment-resistant depression are exciting, particularly as they mark the first time an antidepressant has achieved superiority versus an active comparator in any clinical trial for major depressive disorder. What makes this even more significant is that the response was rapid and this milestone was achieved in patients deemed to be treatment-resistant. We are also pleased with the clinically meaningful outcomes for esketamine nasal spray in elderly patients, a population that often has greater disability and lower response rates."

"There's a critical need for new, rapidly acting and effective treatment options for people with major depressive disorder who do not respond to existing therapies," said Mathai Mammen, M.D., Ph.D., Global Head, Janssen Research & Development, LLC. "Janssen is fully committed to exploring the newest science in the area of mood disorders and bringing these discoveries to patients in need."

Results of the Study in Adults with Treatment-Resistant Depression 

 In the Phase 3 study of adults with treatment-resistant depression, patients were randomized to flexibly dosed esketamine nasal spray (56 mg or 84 mg) added to a newly initiated oral antidepressant or placebo nasal spray added to a newly initiated oral antidepressant.

Primary Efficacy Endpoint

The primary efficacy endpoint, change from baseline in the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) total score, demonstrated the statistically significant clinical improvement in patients' depressive symptoms for esketamine nasal spray plus an oral antidepressant at day 28 (Least Squares Mean Difference Standard Error from placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant: -4.0 [1.69], 95% Confidence Interval [CI]: -7.31, -0.64; one-sided p=0.010).

Secondary and Other Efficacy Endpoints

The first key secondary endpoint (onset of clinical response by 24 hours post-dose that is maintained through day 28) numerically favored esketamine nasal spray plus an oral antidepressant vs. placebo nasal spray plus an oral antidepressant, but did not meet statistical significance (1-sided p=0.161). The other two key secondary endpoints (Sheehan Disability Scale [SDS], a subject-reported outcome measure widely used and accepted for assessment of functional impairment and associated disability, and Patient Health Questionnaire-9 [PHQ-9], a self-report scale assessing depressive symptoms) could not be formally evaluated since onset of clinical response was not statistically significant. Among other endpoints, response rate was notable with 69.3% responding in the esketamine group vs. 52% in the placebo group at 28 days (response ≥ 50% improvement in MADRS from baseline). Remission rate (MADRS total score ≤12) at day 28 was 52.5% and 31.0% for the esketamine and placebo groups, respectively.

The most common treatment-emergent adverse events (>10%) reported in the esketamine group were metallic taste, nausea, vertigo, dizziness, headache, drowsiness, dissociation, blurred vision, paraesthesia (tingling sensation) and anxiety. The most common treatment-emergent adverse events (>10%) reported in the placebo group were metallic taste and headache.

Results of the Study in Elderly Patients with Treatment-Resistant Depression 

 Janssen conducted a separate Phase 3 study in elderly patients with treatment-resistant depression. Elderly populations with major depressive disorder are historically hard to treat and often have co-morbidities and long-standing depression. To improve tolerability, patients were given a lower starting dose (28 mg) of esketamine nasal spray (flexibly dosed at 28 mg, 56 mg or 84 mg) plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant or placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant.

Primary Efficacy Endpoint

Although statistical significance for the primary endpoint for the overall patient population studied was narrowly missed, results favored the esketamine nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant group (median unbiased estimate of the difference from placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant: -3.6, 95% CI: -7.20, 0.07; one-sided p=0.029). To put this into context, an analysis of placebo-controlled data from three prior studies conducted by Duru and Fantino determined that a minimum change in MADRS of 1.9 was clinically meaningful.2 In addition, the average difference is between 2-3 points for currently approved antidepressants vs. placebo.3

Safety results were consistent with previous studies of esketamine in younger adult populations. The most common treatment-emergent adverse events (>10%) reported in the esketamine group were dizziness, nausea, headache, fatigue, increased blood pressure, vertigo and dissociation. There were no treatment-emergent adverse events reported in >10% of patients in the placebo group.

Esketamine nasal spray has an acceptable safety and tolerability profile, based on the adverse event data from both Phase 3 studies. Adverse events and associated symptoms were seen predominately on the day of dosing and were generally transient and resolved on the day of dosing.

These findings represent two of the five Phase 3 studies that comprise Janssen's treatment-resistant depression program with esketamine nasal spray. The results from these studies will inform regulatory filings for esketamine nasal spray in treatment-resistant depression, for which Janssen has received Breakthrough Therapy Designations from the U.S. FDA. Data from other Phase 3 studies will be presented later in 2018.

In both Phase 3 studies, esketamine or placebo was provided in disposable nasal spray devices containing 200 μl of solution (i.e., two sprays), and administered under the supervision of a health care professional. A bittering agent was added to placebo to simulate the taste of esketamine, to help mask the treatment assignment.

The study in adults with treatment-resistant depression was a Phase 3, double-blind, active-control, flexibly dosed, multi-center study using blinded raters, conducted at 39 sites in Czech Republic, Germany, Poland, Spain and the United States from August 2015 to November 2017. The study enrolled adults with moderate-to-severe, non-psychotic, recurrent or persistent depression, and history of non-response to ≥2 antidepressants in the current episode of depression, with one of them assessed prospectively. Non-responders were randomized (1:1) to flexibly-dosed esketamine nasal spray (56 or 84 mg twice weekly) plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant (N=114) or placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant (N=109). The primary efficacy endpoint – change from baseline to day 28 in MADRS total score – was assessed among patients who received ≥1 dose of (nasal spray and oral) study medication by mixed-effects model using repeated measures using a one-sided significance level of 0.025. (5.69). For further information about this study, visit the ClinicalTrials.gov website.

The study in elderly patients with treatment-resistant depression was a Phase 3, double-blind, multicenter, active-controlled study. Patients ≥ 65 years of age were randomized 1:1 to either esketamine nasal spray plus a new oral antidepressant (N=72) or placebo nasal spray plus a new oral antidepressant (N=66). The primary endpoint was the change in the MADRS total score from day 1 (baseline) to day 28. Statistical analysis employed mixed-effects model repeated measures (MMRM), with a weighted combination test to account for an interim analysis for sample size re-estimation, using a one-sided significance level of 0.025. For further information about this study, visit the ClinicalTrials.gov website.

About Esketamine 

Esketamine nasal spray is an investigational compound being studied by Janssen Research & Development, LLC as part of a global development program. Esketamine is a non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, also known as a glutamate receptor modulator, thought to help restore synaptic connections in brain cells in people with major depressive disorder. It has a novel mechanism of action, meaning it works differently than currently available therapies for depression.

Esketamine received Breakthrough Therapy Designations from the U.S. FDA in November 2013 for treatment-resistant depression and in August 2016 for the indication of major depressive disorder with imminent risk for suicide.4

About Major Depressive Disorder

Major depressive disorder affects nearly 300 million people of all ages globally and is the leading cause of disability worldwide.5 Individuals with depression, including major depressive disorder, experience continuous suffering from a serious, biologically based disease which has a significant negative impact on all aspects of life, including quality of life and function.5 Although currently available antidepressants are effective for many patients, about one third of patients do not respond to treatment and are thought to have treatment-resistant depression.6

About the Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson

At the Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson, we are working to create a world without disease. Transforming lives by finding new and better ways to prevent, intercept, treat and cure disease inspires us. We bring together the best minds and pursue the most promising science.

We are Janssen. We collaborate with the world for the health of everyone in it. Learn more at www.janssen.com. Follow us at www.twitter.com/JanssenUS and www.twitter.com/JanssenGlobal.

This press release contains "forward-looking statements" as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 regarding product development and the potential benefits of esketamine. The reader is cautioned not to rely on these forward-looking statements. These statements are based on current expectations of future events. If underlying assumptions prove inaccurate or known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, actual results could vary materially from the expectations and projections of Janssen Research & Development, LLC and/or Johnson & Johnson. Risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to: challenges and uncertainties inherent in product research and development, including the uncertainty of clinical success and of obtaining regulatory approvals; uncertainty of commercial success; competition, including technological advances, new products and patents attained by competitors; challenges to patents; manufacturing difficulties and delays; changes in behavior and spending patterns or financial distress of purchasers of health care products and services; changes to applicable laws and regulations, including global health care reforms; and trends toward health care cost containment. A further list and description of these risks, uncertainties and other factors can be found in Johnson & Johnson's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2017, including in Exhibit 99 thereto, and the company's subsequent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Copies of these filings are available online at www.sec.gov, www.jnj.com or on request from Johnson & Johnson. None of the Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies or Johnson & Johnson undertakes to update any forward-looking statement as a result of new information or future events or developments.
• National Institute of Mental Health. Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression (STAR*D) Study. Available at: http://www.nimh.nih.gov/about/director/2011/antidepressants-a-complicated-picture.shtml#_edn2. Accessed .
• The clinical relevance of changes in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale using the minimum clinically important difference approach. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18377706. Accessed .
• Khin NA, et.al. "Exploratory analyses of efficacy data from major depressive disorder trials submitted to the US Food and Drug Administration in support of new drug applications," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. April, 2011. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21527123. Accessed .
• Johnson & Johnson Press Release. Esketamine Receives Breakthrough Therapy Designation from U.S. Food and Drug Administration for Major Depressive Disorder with Imminent Risk for Suicide. Available at: https://www.jnj.com/media-center/press-releases/esketamine-recieves-breakthrough-therapy-designation-from-us-food-and-drug-administration-for-major-depressive-disorder-with-imminent-risk-of-suicide. Accessed .
• Thase ME. Update on partial response in depression. J Clin Psychiatry. 2009;70[suppl 6]:4-9.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It’s clear that the work was funded by Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies, and the affiliation of the experts quoted in the piece is similarly clear.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - More research is suggesting that heavy smokers may benefit from screening for lung cancer, to detect tumors in their earliest stages.

A new study finds that regular smokers who received three-dimensional X-rays to look for the presence of early tumors had a significantly lower risk of dying over a 10-year period.

The results are in keeping with those of a much larger study published last month, which showed that these 3-D X-rays, or CT scans, reduced the death rate among 53,000 current and former heavy smokers by 20 percent compared with screening using regular chest X-rays. That previous finding was “very good news in the field,” said Dr. Bruce Johnson of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute, who treats lung cancer patients and reviewed the results for Reuters Health.

This latest study, published in the journal Lung Cancer, looked at death rates in a different, smaller population of heavy smokers, and estimated that those who received up to two CT scans would have between a 36 and 64 percent lower risk of dying, compared to those who went unscreened.

The data are “consistent” with earlier studies but there are still many issues to resolve regarding lung cancer screening, Johnson said.

For one, scientists haven’t yet worked out how often to screen people, and when to start. It is not clear when or how guidelines for lung cancer screening could be drawn up, and until they are, insurers including government programs such as Medicare are unlikely to pay the average $300 cost of a scan.

Furthermore, an April study showed that 21 percent of a patient’s initial lung CT scans show suspicious lesions that turn out not to be cancer, but lead to needless invasive follow-up procedures and radiation exposure, as well as stress and anxiety for patients and their families.

The high so-called “false positive” rate is an issue, said Dr. James Hanley of McGill University, who also reviewed the findings for Reuters Health, but many mammograms also find lesions that turn out to be benign. And for lung cancer, doctors know there is a high false-positive rate and have a set protocol to follow in order to determine which lesions are dangerous, added Johnson.

Lung cancer kills 1.2 million people a year globally and it will kill 157,000 people in the United States alone this year, according to the American Cancer Society.

Tobacco use accounts for some 85 percent of lung cancer cases in the U.S., and one estimate puts a smoker’s lifetime absolute risk of developing lung cancer between 12 percent and 17 percent. Five-year survival rates for lung cancer are low.

In recent years, CT scans, in particular, have been promoted by some hospitals and advocacy groups for lung cancer screening, even though studies had not yet shown definitively whether such screening saves lives.

In 2006, Dr. Claudia Henschke, currently based at Mount Sinai School of Medicine and Arizona State University, caused a stir when she published a study concluding that 80 percent of lung-cancer deaths could be prevented through widespread use of spiral CT.

Her ideas were controversial to start with, especially when other researchers found her work had been paid for by a tobacco company.

In the current study, funded in part by manufacturers of CT scanners (along with government and other sources), Henschke and her colleagues compared outcomes for nearly 8,000 smokers and former smokers who volunteered to undergo CT scans to outcomes in two sets of people with smoking histories who were not scanned.

The three groups of people had some important differences, such as in average age and how long and heavily they had smoked, so the researchers had to use mathematical tools to try to eliminate the influence of those differences, said Hanley. For instance, to compare death rates, the researchers tracked how many people died among those who were screened, then pulled out all the people with similar underlying characteristics in the other two groups and looked at their death rates, Hanley explained.

A total of 64 people died in the screened population, the authors report — but applying the death rate among people with the same underlying characteristics in one of the unscreened populations, they estimated that the number of deaths would have been 100. This translates into a 36 percent lower risk of dying among the screened population.

Applying the same methods to the other unscreened population, the authors estimated that screening was associated with a 64 percent lower risk of dying.

Overall, research is suggesting that CT scans of people at risk of lung cancer might make a dent in cancer mortality, and it’s possible that more frequent screening might make an even bigger dent, Hanley noted. “If screening is going to work, you’ve got to keep at it.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 



The story quotes two independent experts who provide valuable perspectives on this study. We wish more stories provided similar attention to independent experts. It also notes that Dr. Henschke has been criticized in the past for accepting funding from tobacco companies and that this study was supported in part by manufacturers of CT scanners.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lynden, WA - August 24, 2017 - Initial findings from several studies - including both human subjects and animals - on the potential health benefits of red raspberries were presented earlier this year at the 2017 Experimental Biology conference in Chicago. Participants in short-term human trials experienced an improvement in glucose control and increased satiety, while longer-term animal trials revealed promising effects on the gut microbiota after red raspberry intake. The observations from animal and in vitro studies provided insights that support future hypotheses for red raspberry research exploring potential beneficial effects on pathways related to reducing inflammation, obesity, and type 2 diabetes risk.

"We are excited about this new flurry of studies, which builds on previously published research aimed to better understand the potential health benefits of red raspberries," said Tom Krugman, Executive Director of the National Processed Raspberry Council (NPRC). "Our Council is committed to delivering the highest quality nutrition and health science that consumers can use to make informed choices when aiming for a healthy diet."

While additional research, particularly in humans, is warranted, preliminary evidence from these studies suggests that the actions of essential nutrients, fiber, and polyphenolic phytochemicals found in red raspberries may play a role in supporting key metabolic functions, including anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative and metabolic stabilizing activity. While this emerging research is promising, and contributes to the overall understanding of the health benefits of red raspberries, conclusions cannot be drawn at this time.

In this human trial, investigators from the Center for Nutrition Research at the Illinois Institute of Technology looked at two study groups: obese individuals with impaired fasting glucose and hyperinsulinemia (PreDM) and healthy weight individuals with normo-glycemia and insulinemia. Participants experienced a significant reduction in postprandial glucose when 2 cups (250g) of red raspberries were consumed with meals compared to no raspberries. The glucose lowering was accompanied with less insulin suggesting improved insulin sensitivity in individuals with pre-diabetes and insulin resistance.

* Xiao, D. Huang, Y. Park, E. Edirisinghe, I. and Burton-Freeman, B. Red Raspberries and Insulin Action: Understanding the Role of Red Raspberry Consumption on Postprandial Metabolic Indices. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 973.9. http://bit.

In a secondary objective of the blood sugar control study, researchers found that subjects in the PreDM group who reported the highest level of hunger at baseline experienced greater satiety after the control meal compared to raspberry containing meals (p<0.05). In contrast, the healthy weight participants experienced significantly greater hunger suppression and wanted to eat less after a breakfast containing 2 cups (250g) of red raspberries compared to a calorie-matched control meal without raspberries. Because this study was limited to three meals, further research is needed to determine the factors that influenced outcomes.

* Huang, L. Xiao, D. Park, E. Edirisinghe, I. and Burton-Freeman, B. The Effect of Red Raspberry on Satiety. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 794.8. http://bit.

In an eight-week pilot study, researchers from the Institute for Food Safety and Health from the Illinois Institute of Technology examined the impact of consumption of red raspberry purée or fructo-oligosaccharide on the gut microbiota and the subsequent bioavailability of red raspberry polyphenols in healthy volunteers. Consumption of the red raspberry puree and the fructo-oligiosaccharide for 4 weeks resulted in decreased Firmicutes and increased Bacteroidetes, which was more pronounced after red raspberry intake. Additionally, a type of bacteria called Akkermansia that has been associated with metabolic health was increased during red raspberry intake only. These preliminary results are promising. Further research is needed to support the hypothesis that the consumption of raspberry puree may change the composition of the gut microbiota.

* Zhang, X. Sandhu, A. Schill, K. Edirisinghe, I. and Burton-Freeman, B. The Reciprocal Interactions between Red Raspberry Polyphenols and Gut Microbiome Composition: Preliminary Findings. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 965.29. http://bit.

Dr. Giuliana Noratto and colleagues of the Department of Food and Nutrition Science at Texas A&M University studied if dietary supplementation with red raspberries could modulate the fecal microbiota of obese mice with diabetes and dyslipidemia. In this animal study, raspberry supplementation was associated with higher levels of Lachnospiraceae - a family of bacteria that can be depleted during diseases of the intestinal tract, such as inflammatory bowel disease. These findings provide a basis for formulating hypotheses for conducting additional studies, particularly in human trials.

* Noratto, G. Garcia-Mazcorro, J. Chew, B. and Mertens-Talcott, S. Dietary Supplementation with Raspberry Whole Fruit Modifies the Relative Abundance of Fecal Microbial Communities in Obese Diabetic (db/db) Mice. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 965.19. http://bit.

In an animal study, mice fed 5% freeze dried raspberry for 12 weeks, showed signs of improved insulin resistance and reduced inflammation in skeletal muscle while consuming a high-fat diet. These data corroborate a short-term study in humans reported by Xiao and colleagues at the same meeting supporting further work in humans to provide additional insight into these findings.

* Min Du, Tiande Zou, Bo Wang, Xingwei Liang, and Mei-Jun Zhu. Raspberry intake reduces skeletal muscle lipid accumulation and improves insulin sensitivity in mice fed high fat diet. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 972.19. http://bit.

A research team from the University of Michigan studied the potential biologically active properties of red raspberries with in vitro assays including antioxidant and anti-inflammatory capacities. Follow-up research explored the potential relationship between feeding freeze-dried whole raspberry powder and cardiometabolic risk in obesity prone rats. Red raspberries were found to upregulate the expression of specific cardiac-protective molecular proteins (myocardial adiponectin, its receptor 2, and apolipoprotein E). Rats fed the red raspberries also experienced altered nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase mRNA, a protein associated with multiple functions in conditions related to obesity and type 2 diabetes. More research is needed to determine if compounds in red raspberries play a role in human cardiometabolic pathways.

* Kirakosyan, A. Seymour, EM. Gutierrez, E. and Bolling, S. Associations of Dietary Intakes of Red Raspberry Fruits with Risk of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 973.4. http://bit.

In a mouse model, red raspberry supplementation of 5% dry feed weight was found to suppress inflammation and facilitate epithelium repair compared to mice with induced colitis (inflammation of the colon) and fed a standard chow diet. These observations are not conclusive, and further research is needed to determine if red raspberry supplementation supports epithelial function in humans.

* Bibi, S. Du, M. Kang, Y. Sun, X. Xue, Y. Soussa Moraes, LF. and Zhu, M. Dietary Red Raspberry Enhances Intestinal Epithelium Repair in Chronic Colitis. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 972.19. http://bit.

Anthocyanin profiles among common processed forms of raspberries (frozen, juice concentrate, seeded puree, and seedless puree) on the U.S. market were investigated. Thirty-four samples - both domestic and imported - were reviewed. Seven individual anthocyanins were identified in the samples. While anthocyanin profiles varied slightly, contents varied considerably. This may reflect differences in varieties, origins, processing methods among other influential factors.

* Wu, X. Sun, J. Ahuja, J. Haytowitz, DB. Burton-Freeman, B. Chen, P. Pehrsson, PR. Anthocyanin profiles and contents in processed raspberries on the U.S. market. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 454.6. http://bit.

Created in 2013, the National Processed Raspberry Council (NPRC) represents the processed raspberry industry and is supported by assessments from both domestic producers and importers. NPRC's mission is to conduct nutrition research and promote the health benefits of processed raspberries. The NPRC is responsible for marketing processed raspberries in the U.S. and is committed to promoting the growth of the entire industry. Processed raspberries are frozen at the peak of ripeness to lock in flavor and nutrition. Visit redrazz.org for more information, and follow us on our social media channels:
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release was transparent about the conflict of interest—it was released by the National Processed Raspberry Council (NPRC). On its website, the NPRC says its mission is to “promote the consumption of processed raspberries based on research results.”
The studies were all funded by the trade group, and that’s noted on the EurekAlert! sidebar, where the release is hosted. 
The news release also included a blurb at the bottom acknowledging that the NPRC “represents the processed raspberry industry.” 
Many news releases have conflicts of interest—at least the NPRC was honest about it. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Panel Says Aspirin Lowers Heart Attack Risk For Some

Millions of Americans take baby aspirin every day to prevent a heart attack or stroke. If they are at high risk of heart disease, they're doing the right thing, according to draft recommendations issued Monday by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

The independent panel also said that taking low-dose aspirin daily for at least 10 years may protect against colorectal cancer, at least in people who are already taking it to prevent heart attacks and stroke.

Adults between the ages of 50 and 59 who have a 10 percent or greater risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 10 years benefit the most from taking about 81 milligrams of aspirin every day, the panel says.

But the potential benefit is smaller for adults between the ages of 60 and 69. And it's unknown for adults under 50 or over 70. People should talk with their health care provider to find out if they have health problems that would justify taking aspirin, according to Dr. Douglas Owens, a professor of medicine at Stanford University and a member of the task force.

For example, uncontrolled high blood pressure, or high cholesterol, obesity, age and diabetes can all increase heart disease risk. "Because heart attacks are caused by clots in the arteries of the heart, aspirin can help prevent heart attack and it can also help prevent strokes that are caused by blood clots," Owens says.

Several groups including the American Heart Association offer online calculators to help people figure out their risk, which, along with discussion with a health care provider, can help determine whether daily aspirin might be useful.

However, there is a caveat. Daily aspirin can cause bleeding in the stomach and brain. And Owens says that people with medical conditions like ulcers, kidney problems, liver problems or bleeding disorders are more vulnerable, as are people who take blood-thinning drugs and NSAIDs.

These new recommendations aren't final, and are open to public comment.

Concerns have been raised about whether aspirin is really effective enough, when so many other medicines are available to help control heart disease risk.

One physician with major concerns is Steven Nissen, chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic, in Cleveland, Ohio. "I think that millions of Americans are taking aspirin — some of them are really the 'worried well,' " he says.

If people don't have a significantly increased risk of having a heart attack or stroke over the next decade, Nissen says, they may be "causing more harm than benefit."

And while many medical groups recommend daily aspirin to lower heart disease risk, not all federal agencies agree. The Food and Drug Administration actually issued a warning against routinely taking aspirin to prevent heart disease in people without significantly high risk.

Nissen worries that many people are mistaking their actual heart disease risk. "With all the good therapies, better blood pressure control, better cholesterol control, all the things we do in modern medicine," he says, "over the last couple of decades, we've had nearly a 50 percent reduction in the rate of cardiovascular disease."

People who don't really need to should not be taking aspirin every day, says Nissen. "It's just not prudent or safe," he says, noting that bleeding in the abdomen or brain is extremely dangerous and can be fatal. Nissen does agree with the general consensus that taking low dose aspirin is beneficial for people who have had a heart attack or stroke.

But for pretty much everyone else, assessing actual heart disease risk in consultation with your doctor is crucial to deciding whether to take aspirin every day.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story doesn’t delve into potential conflicts of interest, but it does point out that the task force is an independent panel, and interviewed Dr. Nissen who is not part of the panel.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 26, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Electroencephalogram (EEG), a test that shows the electrical activity of the brain, might be used to spot autism in children, a new study suggests.

The study, conducted by researchers at Harvard University Medical School, looked at the synchronization of brain activity across different brain regions, as measured by EEG.

"These scientists used sensors to record electrical brain activity across many different regions on the scalp," explained Geraldine Dawson, chief science officer at the advocacy group Autism Speaks. "They then looked at the extent to which brain activity from one region was synchronized with brain activity from another region," a phenomenon known as "EEG coherence," said Dawson, who was not involved in the research.

"Synchronization between different brain regions indicates that those regions are functioning in a coordinated, rather than independent, fashion -- in other words, they are functionally connected and communicating with each other," she said.

In the new study, Dr. Frank Duffy and Dr. Heidelise Als compared EEG measurements of nearly 1,000 children with and without autism. They found that the two groups had widespread differences in terms of brain connectivity.

EEG revealed that the children with autism had a reduced short range connectivity, indicating poor function of local brain networks. This was especially true in the left hemisphere regions of the brain responsible for language.

The children with autism also had increased connectivity between brain regions that were farther apart, which might be a mechanism developed to compensate for reduced short range connectivity, the researchers said.

The research was conducted at Boston Children's Hospital and was published online June 25 in the journal BMC Medicine.

The use of EEG-based testing may help diagnose autism in children and may improve early detection in infants, leading to more effective treatments and coping strategies, the researchers said.

"What was unique about this study is the very large number of children studied," Dawson noted. "Consistent with many previous studies using EEG and functional MRI with both children and adults with autism, these investigators found that, overall, children with autism show reduced coordination (coherence) across brain regions."

She said the findings are important because, "they help us understand why individuals with autism have difficulty with complex behaviors, such as social interaction and language. As children's brains develop, the different brain regions become increasingly connected, allowing for the acquisition of complex behaviors that require coordination across different brain regions."

Language, for example, requires coordination across the auditory, visual, and motor brain regions, as well as the participation of the prefrontal cortex, she said.

"This reduced functional connectivity in the brain helps us understand impairments associated with autism," she added. "The hope is that early behavioral intervention can help mitigate these functional impairments, helping to form the connections that natural develop in typical children."

"Although autism is still principally a clinical diagnosis, this study ... may allow for a new approach to classifying children with autism and may even assist in the early identification of affected children at a younger age," said Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at the Steven & Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York in New Hyde Park, NY.

The number of children diagnosed with autism in the United States has recently increased to one in 88.

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more about autism.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We’re giving this one a pass here, but we thought that more time could have been spent with the only other independent expert quoted in the story, who was given one sentence to offer perspective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In 1992, Harvard neuroscientist Richard Davidson embarked on an unusual research project to study the brains of Buddhist monks who spent thousands of hours meditating. He found that not only did the practice activate different parts of the brain, it also seemed to impact the body in ways that matter for health.

That pivotal study has led to a number of research projects in recent years that look at what calming the brain does for specific medical conditions and diseases.

The results of one of those studies are out Tuesday in JAMA. The study looks at adults with chronic low back pain, one of the leading cause of disabilities in the United States and one reason why more and more people are addicted to painkillers.

Led by Daniel C. Cherkin of Group Health Research Institute in Seattle, the experiment involved randomly assigning 342 adults with the condition to meditate, talk with a psychologist or continue with their normal techniques for addressing the pain, such as medication. The first group engaged in yoga and mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), which focuses on being aware of and accepting physical discomfort. The second group participated in cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) to change pain-related thoughts and behaviors during eight weekly two-hour group sessions.

The participants in the small study ranged in age from 20 to 70 and had suffered from back pain for an average of 7.3 years.

The results for both techniques were very positive. At 26 weeks, 61 percent of those in the meditation group reported improvement in the activities they could do, compared with 58 percent in the CBT group and 44 percent of those who stuck to their usual routines. The results for pain improvement were similar, with 55 percent in the meditation group reporting improvement compared with 45 percent in the CBT group and 27 percent in the usual-care group. The numbers were similar when rechecked at 52 weeks.

"These findings suggest that MBSR may be an effective treatment option for patients with chronic low back pain," the authors wrote.

The study did caution that 30 of the 103, or about one-third, of the participants in the meditation group reported an "adverse event," most often an increase in pain due to yoga.

In an editorial, Madhav Goyal and Jennifer A. Haythornthwaite of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine said that the mechanisms for why meditation might work on back pain is still a mystery but that this question is merely "academic" for many clinicians and their patients who need immediate relief.

The two wrote that despite this and other unknowns, the study provides "a compelling argument for ensuring that an evidence-based health care system should provide access to affordable mind-body therapies."

MIT scientists find evidence that Alzheimer’s ‘lost memories’ may one day be recoverable

’Siri, I want to commit suicide’ and other statements likely to yield unhelpful responses from your phone

Roots of Napoleon complex may be justified: Study finds short men get short of end stick in life.



Kids with August birthdays are more likely to get an ADHD diagnosis. Here’s why.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Conflicts of interest don’t appear to be an issue here, and the story includes statements from an accompanying editorial in JAMA, which was written by experts unaffiliated with the research. This squeaks by as Satisfactory, though it should be noted that most of this material was available via news releases (see below).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 23, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Vitamin D supplements may slow or prevent low-grade prostate cancer from progressing, a small new study suggests.

"Vitamin D decreases inflammation in tissues, and inflammation is a driver of cancer," explained Bruce Hollis, the study's lead researcher and a professor of pediatrics, biochemistry and molecular biology at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston.

For the study, researchers randomly assigned 37 men who elected to have their prostate removed to receive either 4,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D or an inactive placebo daily for 60 days before their operation.

When the prostate gland was examined after their surgery, researchers found that many who received vitamin D had improvements in their prostate tumors, while the tumors in the placebo group remained the same or got worse.

"In greater than 60 percent of those taking it, vitamin D actually made the cancer better," said Hollis.

Hollis reported that in some cases the tumor shrank and in others the cancer went away. However, the study was small, and results from a larger trial aren't expected for several years, he added.

Doctors often recommend a "watch and wait" period for men with low-grade, or less aggressive, prostate tumors. But many patients and their families aren't comfortable waiting and opt to have surgery before it's deemed medically necessary. These findings suggest that taking vitamin D might help reduce the need for such radical treatment.

But Dr. Anthony D'Amico, chief of radiation oncology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, said that this study was too small to reach any definitive conclusion about the value of vitamin D in fighting prostate cancer.

"It's premature to make any conclusions," he said. The findings also need to be replicated in a much larger number of patients, D'Amico said.

D'Amico stressed that men should not start taking vitamin D supplements in hopes of slowing or curing prostate cancer.

Vitamin D, known as the "sunshine vitamin," is produced by the body when it's exposed to sun. It's also found in fortified dairy products and fatty fish.

The study results were scheduled for presentation Monday at the annual meeting of the American Chemical Society in Denver. Data and conclusions presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more about prostate cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article quotes the chief of radiation oncology at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston in the strongest possible way concluding that the study was too small to establish any value of vitamin D supplements and prostate cancer prevention or therapy. There is no indication that the vitamin supplement industry had any role in the research. However, the article might have pointed out that the researcher, Bruce Hollis, has been conducting studies about the benefits of vitamin D for decades and is a widely quoted expert on the potential benefits of the vitamin in disease prevention. Hollis was quoted elsewhere on this study saying that “doctors should be recommending vitamin D₃ for men with low-grade prostate cancer,” and we’re glad to see that HealthDay did not pass along those overly enthusiastic comments.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A music legend fights Alzheimer's disease on his unforgettable farewell tour. CNN Films Presents:" Glen Campbell ... I'll Be Me ," Saturday, November 7, at 8 p.m. ET.

(CNN) Over the years, resveratrol, an antioxidant found in grapes, chocolate and red wine, has been touted as a possible antidote to Alzheimer's disease, cancer, diabetes and many other conditions. Now, the first study in people with Alzheimer's suggests that the compound, when taken in concentrated doses, may actually have benefit in slowing progression of this disease.

Researchers at 21 medical centers across the United States looked at the safety and effectiveness of taking high doses of resveratrol in an experimental pill -- equal to the amount found in 1,000 bottles of red wine -- in people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's.

The researchers looked at several biomarkers of Alzheimer's, and found that people who took up to four pills a day for a year had higher levels of amyloid-beta proteins in their spinal fluid than those who took a placebo (control) pill.

Although accumulation of amyloid-beta in the brain is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease, patients actually have lower levels of this protein outside of the brain. The study finding suggests that resveratrol could help change the balance from amyloid-beta buildup in the brain to circulating protein in the body.

Even if concentrated forms of resveratrol pills like the kind used in this study were available, it's too soon to recommend going out and getting some just yet.

"The study is encouraging enough that we should certainly go ahead and do a [larger] clinical trial because we showed that it is safe and does have significant effects on Alzheimer's biomarkers," said Dr. R. Scott Turner, professor of neurology at Georgetown University Medical Center and lead investigator of the study, which was published on Friday in the journal Neurology.

The main goal of the current study, which included 119 patients, was to find out whether high doses of resveratrol could be safe. The only small concern they found was that patients taking resveratrol lost about two pounds during the one-year study, and weight loss is already a problem with Alzheimer's, Turner said. In comparison, the control group gained about 1 pound.

Much more research is needed

The study was not big enough to answer some important questions, such as whether patients taking resveratrol actually had lower levels of amyloid-beta plaques in their brain, and most importantly, whether they experienced less decline in their mental faculties.

A large, phase 3 clinical trial getting at these issues could start in as soon as a year, Turner said. (The current study was a phase 2 trial, typically meant to evaluate safety and get an early look at efficacy of a new drug.)

Even for the relatively small number of participants in the study, the researchers did see indication that resveratrol could improve cognition. Patients in this group had slight improvements in their ability to carry out daily tasks, such as remembering to brush their teeth. And anecdotally, patients who took resveratrol told the researchers that they felt like they were maintaining their mental ability. (Neither the participants nor the researchers knew who was taking resveratrol and who was taking placebo.)

"To really get a better feel of how effective this could be you really need to do larger studies for longer periods of time (such as several years)," said James A. Hendrix, director of global science initiatives at the Alzheimer's Association, a research and advocacy organization. "Other potential therapies we've had had some early exciting results and then they didn't pan out in later trials," he added.

If resveratrol does pan out in further research, it may add to the medications that are currently available, such as Aricept and Exelon, which slow, but do not halt, progression of the disease, Hendrix said.

Ultimately, it will probably be a combination of several drugs, as well as diet, exercise and social and mental stimulation that help stave off the rapid mental decline that is often associated with Alzheimer's, he added.

Antioxidant may be most effective in combination

This is one of the first studies to look not only at these biomarkers, but also the metabolites of resveratrol in spinal fluid, to show that resveratrol is probably getting into the brain, said Dr. Giulio M. Pasinetti, who is the Saunders Family Chair and professor in neurology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. However, he added that changes in biomarkers may not necessarily lead to mental and behavioral improvements, which larger studies will address.

In addition, resveratrol on its own might not end up working as well as a combination of resveratrol and other polyphenol compounds found in red wine, grape juice and grape seed extract, which could help people at risk of Alzheimer's and those who already have mild symptoms, Pasinetti said.

The current study used high doses of resveratrol to increase the chances that enough of the compound got into the brain to have an effect. But for now, the best way to get resveratrol is probably through diet. One glass of red wine a day could help those with mild Alzheimer's, "but no more than that," Turner said.

There is probably little benefit in taking currently available resveratrol supplements, even if they claim to contain levels similar to the ones used in this study. "The things that are on the market are not regulated, and you don't know how much is in them," Turner said. "There could be 500 milligrams, which is what they advertise [researchers gave participants in the study four 500 milligram pills a day] or there could be zero," he said.

Previous research has suggested that people who consume diets rich in resveratrol do not have lower rates of cancer, heart disease and other conditions.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes input from two outside sources who provided important insight into the work. The story is much stronger thanks to the input of these two sources, who addressed the novelty of the work, the need for additional research, and how resveratrol could potentially become part of a multifaceted treatment regimen. The story doesn’t mention who funded the research (NIH), which would have been good. And while the story doesn’t mention that several study authors had ties to pharmaceutical companies, it’s not clear that those companies have any ties to the research.
So the overall rating here is Satisfactory, although we did notice the spokesperson from the Alzheimer’s Association mentioned that the currently available cholinseterase inhibitors slow progression of disease, which they do not — they treat symptoms in a minority of patients for a short period of time. He also opined that eventually the likelihood is that treatment will take a combination of several drugs (and lifestyle measures). Both lines are consistent with the huge amount of pharma money pumped in to the Alzheimer’s Association.
Similarly, the other source apparently holds a patent on the use of a grape seed extract to treat Alzheimer’s and Parkinsons — an interest that could impact his views on this similar approach.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, April 19, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- More evidence is emerging that women who take calcium supplements to prevent bone deterioration may, in fact, be risking their heart health.

But even when added to previous studies with similar findings, the new conclusions don't necessarily mark a death knell for calcium supplements, say the authors of a study released online April 19 in the BMJ.

"There is a lack of consensus at the present time as to what recommendations should be regarding the use of calcium supplements," said study senior author Dr. Ian Reid, who fully expected that the new results will have a "significant impact on recommendations."

"Our own recommendation is to critically review the use of calcium supplements, since the data in this paper suggests that they do more harm than good," added Reid, who is professor of medicine and endocrinology at the University of Auckland in New Zealand.

"The cautious way forward seems to be to encourage people to obtain their calcium from the diet, rather than from supplements, since food calcium has not been shown to carry this increased risk of heart disease," Reid added.

A recent meta-analysis done by the same group of researchers found a 27 to 31 percent increased risk of heart attacks in women taking calcium without vitamin D.

Many older women take calcium supplements with or without vitamin D to keep their bones strong, especially since that has long been standard medical advice. In addition, the mammoth, U.S.-government funded Women's Health Initiative (WHI) earlier found no negative link between calcium and heart health.

But, as the current authors point out, more than half of the women in that study were already taking their own calcium supplements on top of what they had been prescribed for the trial, which may have clouded the results.

For this analysis, the authors looked only at the 16,718 women in the WHI who had not been taking personal calcium supplements before entering the trial.

In this case, women who were randomized to take calcium and vitamin D as part of the study protocol had a modest 13 to 22 percent increased risk of cardiovascular problems, particularly heart attacks. Women in the control arm had no change in risk.

The case against calcium became stronger when researchers added in data from 13 other, unpublished trials involving almost 30,000 women. Now the increased risk for heart attack was 25 to 30 percent and, for a stroke, 15 to 20 percent.

While the authors speculate that an increased risk could be biologically plausible given that calcium is connected with hardening of the arteries, another expert thinks not.

While calcium does tend to be a marker of inflammation, explained Dr. Philip Houck, assistant professor of internal medicine at Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine, "lesions with calcium are actually more stable so there's less of a chance of having a heart attack than in vessels that are less calcified."

Moreover, the results may have been statistically significant but that doesn't mean they're clinically significant, he added. "If women have good reason to take calcium because their bones are thin, then they should not be afraid of taking the calcium," said Houck, who is also a cardiologist with Scott & White in Temple, Texas.

Dr. Susan V. Bukata, associate professor of orthopaedic surgery at the University of Rochester Medical Center, said that the study really doesn't provide enough information to make a definitive conclusion.

Nevertheless, accumulating evidence has her urging patients to get their calcium from their diet, rather than reflexively telling them to take 1,200 milligrams of calcium a day. "With diet plus a supplement combined, women should be getting 1,000- to 1,500-milligrams a day," she said.

And in an accompanying journal editorial, medical professors Dr. Bo Abrahamsen and Dr. Opinder Sahota wrote that due to study limitations, "it is not possible to provide reassurance that calcium supplements given with vitamin D do not cause adverse cardiovascular events or to link them with certainty to increased cardiovascular risk. Clearly further studies are needed and the debate remains ongoing."

The National Osteoporosis Foundation has more on osteoporosis.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes some good independent sources, including Dr. Philip Houck, assistant professor of internal medicine at Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine, and Dr. Susan V. Bukata, associate professor of orthopaedic surgery at the University of Rochester Medical Center.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — The breast surgery and reconstructive team at The Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, NJ, is taking the lead in providing new and progressive advances in breast cancer surgery. Valley was the first hospital in northern New Jersey where an innovative technique – called pre-pectoral placement of a tissue expander -- was utilized during breast reconstruction surgery following a mastectomy. The procedure results in diminished post-operative pain, quicker recovery time, improved mobility, and an excellent aesthetic outcome for patients.

The technique has the potential to be a “game-changer,” says Tzvi Small, M.D., Director of the Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery at The Valley Hospital, who performed the breast reconstruction procedure on Hasbrouck Heights resident Vanessa Burt, 43.

“This variation of a standard technique used during breast reconstruction will revolutionize the post-operative recovery in patients who meet certain criteria for the procedure,” notes Dr. Small. “Here at Valley, we are proud to offer this option for our patients and are excited about its potential for vastly improving patient care for women with breast cancer.” The technique involves placing tissue expanders (interim implants) under the skin on top of a woman’s pectoralis muscles after her breast tissue has been removed. After a recovery period of approximately two months — during which the woman’s chest skin heals, blood supply replenishes, and the expanders are gradually inflated to stretch the skin — the patient returns for an outpatient surgical procedure to replace the tissue expanders with permanent breast implants. In addition to exceptional cosmetic results, the technique is likely to improve clinical outcomes as evidenced by ongoing research that shows women who undergo this procedure experience less pain and a shorter recovery period.

“Over the past decade there have been dramatic improvements in breast reconstruction that utilize various types of surgical innovations, implants, and biologic tissue,” notes Dr. Small. “It is very rewarding as a reconstructive surgeon to continuously refine these procedures for our patients.”

Ms. Burt chose the Valley breast surgery team after carefully researching her treatment options for DCIS (ductal carcinoma in situ), a diagnosis that is often debated among clinicians as to whether it should be classified as breast cancer at all. In DCIS, abnormal cells have not spread beyond the milk ducts into adjacent breast tissue or lymph nodes. After consulting with several breast surgeons and reconstructive surgeons, Ms. Burt opted for a nipple-sparing mastectomy performed by breast surgeon Tihesha Wilson, M.D., Assistant Medical Director of Valley’s Breast Center. Immediately following in the operating room, Dr. Small performed the breast reconstruction. “This was a long journey,” says Ms. Burt, a publicist for the San Francisco-based Fat Wreck Chords music company. “Dr. Wilson was more than patient with me as I first chose active surveillance for one year and then decided to undergo a double mastectomy when another area of DCIS was identified in November 2015. I am also grateful for Dr. Small’s willingness to ‘look outside the box’ and for his determination to perform my reconstruction in a way that would give me the best results with the least amount of recovery time. I want to also commend the pathologists at Valley, who were exceptional in their diagnostic results.” Dr. Wilson and Laura Klein, M.D., Medical Director of the Breast Center, have extensive experience in performing nipple-sparing mastectomy, a technically demanding surgery that is performed within aesthetically appealing minimally invasive incisions. With expertise in minimally invasive oncoplastic breast surgery, Dr. Wilson has also studied complementary medicine and provides her patients with a holistic, integrative approach to breast care. “It’s important to listen to each woman’s needs and then to decide together what is the best approach to treatment, so that in the end the cancer will be gone and the woman can move on with her life,” says Dr. Wilson.

The Valley Breast Center provides comprehensive diagnostic, surgical, and support services using a multidisciplinary approach. The Breast Center is designated by the National Accreditation Program of Breast Centers, a program of the American Cancer Society. Valley’s Breast Imaging Center has been named a Breast Imaging Center of Excellence by the American College of Radiology.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The Valley Breast Center is listed at the end of the release. But due to the overwhelmingly positive comments from the patient who received the procedure, it would have helped to make clear whether or not she was compensated in any form by the hospital system.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) — Could one hour be all you need to quit smoking, without cravings or side effects?

That’s what Innovative Laser Therapy, a New Haven, Connecticut-based company, advertises on its website. The clinic uses low-level lasers - similar to those sometimes used to treat arthritis-related pain - to target specific acupuncture points on the body related to addiction, metabolism and stress, and claims that most patients can quit smoking after one session.

In that session, the laser is pointed at spots on the face, hands and wrist, with the aim of relieving withdrawal symptoms and preventing cravings.

“When you smoke a cigarette, you artificially tell your brain to release endorphins,” Frank Pinto, the owner of Innovative Laser Therapy, told Reuters Health. Therefore, quitting leads to a quick drop in endorphin levels, he said.

“The laser basically stimulates the nerve endings to tell the brain to release a flood of endorphins” to boost a patient over that initial 3-5 day hump of withdrawal symptoms, he said.

The treatment also targets other points that are thought to suppress appetite — to prevent the weight gain that often comes with quitting smoking — and promote relaxation, according to Innovative Laser Therapy.

But does it work?

There's limited research showing that laser therapy might help some smokers quit. Innovative Laser Therapy cites one study, a 2008 paper published in the Journal of Chinese Medicine, available on their site at link.reuters.com/pus95p. A UK-based team found that smokers that had four laser treatments over two weeks were more likely to quit than smokers that had three treatments. Those in the three treatment group, in turn, had better success rates than a control group that was given fake laser treatments.

After 6 months, 55 percent of the four-treatment group was smoke-free, compared to 19 percent of the three-treatment group and 6 percent of those who were treated with fake lasers.

The authors weren’t able to follow most of the 340 participants for more than 6 months after treatment, so they don’t know if those who stopped smoking started up again, or if they really quit for good. And the journal’s site - which offers lasers and other treatments for sale — does not say whether it is peer-reviewed.

In contrast, a 2000 Singapore study of 330 adolescents found no difference in 3-month quitting rates for participants treated with real or fake laser therapy.

“In scientific terms, this one (UK) study is not enough evidence to recommend (the) laser for smoking cessation,” Dr. Adrian White told Reuters Health by email. Dr. White is a research fellow at Peninsula Medical School in the UK who co-authored a review of laser therapy and similar smoking cessation methods for the Cochrane Collaboration, an international organization that evaluates medical research. “The results conflict with the other study, and they seem ‘too good to be true.’”

According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 1 in 5 Americans is a current cigarette smoker, and the majority of them smoke every day. The American Heart Association reports that more than 80 percent of smokers say they want to quit. But many smokers try more than one smoking cessation method or take years of trying before they do quit for good.

Pinto launched Innovative Laser Therapy after he successfully quit smoking with a round of laser therapy from a clinic in Florida. His company charges $350 for a one-time treatment that takes less than an hour, and offers free extra treatments to patients who are still struggling with quitting in the following 6 months. Other companies do a few shorter therapy sessions as part of their regular treatment plan.

Using acupuncture methods to treat addictions such as smoking is not new, White said, but there is still no clear evidence that treatment with needles has any therapeutic effects either.

And while the laser device used by clinics including Innovative Laser Therapy has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for temporary pain relief, the agency has not cleared it to be marketed for smoking cessation.

The UK study found that the side effects of the treatment were similar to some withdrawal symptoms, and the FDA has classified the laser as a “nonsignificant risk” device. Pinto says that the biggest side effect he sees is that “people feel relaxed during the treatment.”

Neil Camera, the president of Laser Therapeutics, Inc., says that FDA approval could be on the horizon. His company, which produces the lasers and supplies them to centers that are running clinical trials on the treatment’s effectiveness, has had an application for approval in to the FDA for three and half years, he said.

But the government organization had only dealt with drugs - not new technology - for smoking cessation, which has slowed down the process, Camera said. “The FDA didn’t know how to handle it, quite frankly,” he told Reuters Health. “That was the biggest drawback.”

Dr. Neil Spielholz, of Nova Southeastern University in Fort Lauderdale, was involved with the initial study submitted to the FDA - the same one that showed the success of laser treatment in UK smokers. The FDA had a couple of problems with that study, he said, including that successful quitting was measured by a smoker’s own reports, and not by more modern methods that calculate the amount of carbon monoxide in someone’s breath. In response, Laser Therapeutics is designing another study to address those comments, he said.

A spokesperson from the FDA confirmed that the agency is aware of the concept of using low level lasers for smoking cessation and had been in discussions with those seeking to get it approved on how they should proceed.

Usually three convincing studies involving large groups of human patients are needed before the FDA decides to approve a treatment.

Pinto says that Innovative Laser Therapy follows up on the success of all of its clients a month after the treatment for clinical evidence that will be part of the package of data presented to the FDA.

“The company (Laser Therapeutics) is going crazy,” Spielholz told Reuters Health. “They want to get this thing approved, obviously.”

But, he said of the initial evidence in favor of the treatment, “this one is only a single study, which of course the people who believe in lasers will jump on ... (but) things have got to be confirmed. One study, no matter how many patients are in it, really needs one or two confirmation studies.”

If future studies do show its effectiveness, laser treatment would have a leg up over conventional methods of smoking cessation, such as medications including Chantix and Zyban, said Spielholz, who continues to work with Laser Therapeutics on getting FDA approval.

The lack of any drugs involved in laser therapy “would be the beauty of this,” he said. “You do not have those side effects of suicidal thoughts and feelings of paranoia that are reported for the drugs,” he said.

Still, Laser Therapeutics’ Camera said, the treatment won’t work on everybody. “The person has to be wanting to quit smoking,” he said. “They can’t be dragged in by a spouse or whatever, because nothing’s going to work then.”

Dr. Martha Daviglus, who studies preventative medicine at Northwestern University, agreed that the most important part of any smoking cessation program was that smokers were ready to quit. After seeing the initial research, she’s hopeful, but cautious, about low-level laser therapy as a way to help people do that.

“There are hundreds of methods to quit smoking,” she said. “We can hope that this is going to be a method that is going to help people.” But, Daviglus said, “We need more research and more evidence.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story makes extensive use of independent sources and the scientific literature. This story could be a lesson plan for someone wanting to teach a course in how to cover "breakthrough" treatments. 1. Find the studies being used to make these claims. 2. Read them. 3. Talk to the authors. 4. Talk to others who have done research in a similar vein.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings add to confusion over whether taking aspirin, ibuprofen or related painkillers reduces the risk of developing melanoma.

Animal experiments have suggested that the class of painkillers known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) could play a role in preventing melanoma, but a large 2008 study failed to find any evidence to support this possibility.

Now, a smaller study that asked people with melanoma and those without the disease to recall their use of NSAIDs has found that taking these drugs - particularly aspirin - at least once a week for more than 5 years may have offered some protection against the deadly disease.

The findings are interesting, but should not lead people to conclude that popping a few painkillers will reduce their risk of skin cancer, cautioned Dr. Maryam Asgari of Kaiser Permanente Northern California and the University of California San Francisco, who co-authored the 2008 study.

NSAIDs - which include aspirin, naproxen (marketed as Aleve), and ibuprofen (Advil) — have side effects, she noted, such as stomach bleeding. People with a family history of melanoma are better off wearing sunscreen and getting regular skin checks from a dermatologist, Asgari recommended.

“I think it’s just too early” to say NSAIDs offer any protection, she said. “I think the jury is still out.”

There’s reason to hope NSAIDs might offer some protection against this type of cancer, however - earlier this year, a review found that people who use painkillers such as ibuprofen on a regular basis may be less likely to get bladder cancer. Other research has consistently supported the benefits of NSAIDs in preventing colorectal cancer, and provided some evidence they may work for breast, esophagus, and stomach cancers, as well.

Melanoma is the most lethal form of skin cancer, killing almost 9,000 people in the U.S. last year, according to the National Cancer Institute.

To investigate whether NSAIDs offer any protection, Dr. Clara Curiel-Lewandrowski of Harvard Medical School and the University of Arizona asked 400 people diagnosed with melanoma and 600 similar people without the disease to recall their use of the painkillers.

The researchers found that people without cancer had a longer history of taking NSAIDs than people who eventually developed melanoma. Specifically, more than 40 percent of people who were cancer-free said they’d been taking NSAIDs at least once per week for more than 5 years, versus only 28 percent of those who developed melanoma. Overall, regular use of NSAIDs for more than 5 years appeared to reduce the risk of developing cancer by more than 40 percent, the authors report in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology.

Unfortunately, the technique — comparing people with melanoma to those without - is fraught with potential problems, said Asgari. For one, you have to get the comparison right, she noted; there’s always a concern that people without cancer who agree to participate in the study may be more health conscious to begin with, and it’s this that protects them from cancer, not their use of NSAIDs. “Did you somehow get a biased sample of people, and is that why you’re seeing this difference?”

Her 2008 study analyzed data from nearly 64,000 people who were melanoma-free at the beginning of the investigation, then followed them for a few years to see who developed the disease. She and her colleagues found no evidence that taking NSAIDs had any effect on risk of developing the deadly skin cancer.

As a result, “I wouldn’t recommend (taking NSAIDs to reduce melanoma) just based on this” new study, Asgari noted.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story turned to Dr. Maryam Asgari of Kaiser Permanente Northern California and the University of California San Francisco, who co-authored a 2008 study.  Oddly, no author/researcher on the new study was quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS - March 29, 2018 - A first-of-its-kind drug targeting a fused gene found in many types of cancer was effective in 93 percent of pediatric patients tested, researchers at UT Southwestern's Simmons Cancer Center announced.

Most cancer drugs are targeted to specific organs or locations in the body. Larotrectinib is the first cancer drug to receive FDA breakthrough therapy designation for patients with a specific fusion of two genes in the cancer cell, no matter what cancer type. The research appears in The Lancet Oncology.

"In some cancers, a part of the TRK gene has become attached to another gene, which is called a fusion. When this occurs, it leads to the TRK gene being turned on when it's not supposed to be and that causes the cells to grow uncontrollably. What's unique about the drug is it is very selective; it only blocks TRK receptors," said lead author Dr. Ted Laetsch, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics and with the Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center.

Larotrectinib, targets TRK fusions, which can occur in many types of cancer. While the TRK fusions occur in only a small percentage of common adult cancers, they occur frequently in some rare pediatric cancers, such as infantile fibrosarcoma, cellular congenital mesoblastic nephroma, and papillary thyroid cancer, said Dr. Laetsch, who leads the Experimental Therapeutics Program (ETP) in the Pauline Allen Gill Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders at Children's Health in Dallas.

"Every patient with a TRK fusion-positive solid tumor treated on this study had their tumor shrink. The nearly universal response rate seen with larotrectinib is unprecedented," Dr. Laetsch said.

Among them was 13-year-old Briana Ayala of El Paso, who aspires to a career in fashion design. In 2016, Briana was found to have a rare tumor in her abdomen wrapped around her aorta, the largest artery in the body.

Surgeons in her hometown said it would be too dangerous to operate, so her family brought Briana to Children's Health in Dallas, where UT Southwestern Professor of Surgery Dr. Stephen Megison had to remove portions of her aorta while removing most of the tumor.

But the cancer started to grow again and no further treatments were available.

Dr. Laetsch sent her tumor for genetic testing and found that Briana's cancer had the TRK fusion, meaning the new drug might help.

Briana enrolled in the phase 1 clinical trial of larotrectinib and began taking the drug twice a day. Within weeks her pain and the swelling in her abdomen diminished, and scans showed her tumors had shrunk significantly.

Nearly two years later, Briana is back in school and playing with her dog, Goofy, and the family's seven parakeets. She's also been able to pick up her sketch pad and her dreams of a New York City fashion career.

"These are the kind of amazing responses we've seen with larotrectinib," said Dr. Laetsch, "and this is why I'm so excited about it."

The results of the larotrectinib trial in adult patients - a 75 percent response rate - were published last month in the New England Journal of Medicine.

The TRK-fusion mutation can be present in many types of cancers, including lung, colon, thyroid, and breast cancer, as well as certain pediatric tumors. TRK, short for tropomyosin receptor kinase, is a gene that plays a key role in brain and nervous system development and has a limited role in nervous system functions such as regulating pain in later life.

Larotrectinib belongs to a class of molecules known as kinase inhibitors, which work by cutting back on the enzymatic activity of a key cellular reaction. The selectivity of the drug means it does not cause the severe side effects associated with many traditional cancer treatments, and none of the patients with TRK fusions had to quit the study because of a drug-induced side effect.

Equally important, the response was long-lasting for most patients. "For some of the targeted drugs in the past, many patients responded initially, but then resistance developed quickly. To date, the response to this drug seems to be durable in most patients," said Dr. Laetsch, who investigates the use of tumor molecular profiling to guide therapy in UT Southwestern's Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Division.

A next step in the research is a clinical trial involving a similar drug for those patients who developed resistance. Dr. Laetsch will be the national leader for that clinical trial in children.

The larotrectinib research was supported by Loxo Oncology Inc., the National Institutes of Health, the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas, the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, and Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation. Dr. Laetsch is a paid consultant for Loxo Oncology Inc.

The Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center is the only NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Center in North Texas and among just 30 U.S. cancer research centers to be designated by the NCI as a National Clinical Trials Network Lead Academic Participating Site. UT Southwestern Medical Center is recognizing its 75th year this year.

UT Southwestern, one of the premier academic medical centers in the nation, integrates pioneering biomedical research with exceptional clinical care and education. The institution's faculty has received six Nobel Prizes, and includes 22 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 17 members of the National Academy of Medicine, and 14 Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigators. The faculty of more than 2,700 is responsible for groundbreaking medical advances and is committed to translating science-driven research quickly to new clinical treatments. UT Southwestern physicians provide care in about 80 specialties to more than 100,000 hospitalized patients, 600,000 emergency room cases, and oversee approximately 2.2 million outpatient visits a year.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release lists the funders of the trial and notes that the lead investigator is a paid consultant for Loxo Oncology.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alex Pierce, 25, took up distance running with great enthusiasm a couple of years ago. Then she developed knee pain so severe that she could not climb stairs.

So Pierce, a doctoral student in food science, went to see physical therapist Matt Briggs at The Ohio State Wexner Medical Center in Columbus. He performed deep massages, suggested changes in her running form and taught her how to exercise her thigh and gluteal muscles to better protect her knees. She believes all of that helped.

But Pierce, like a growing number of patients, had another treatment she is convinced helped even more. It’s called "dry needling," and it involves the insertion of thin, non-medicated solid needles into muscles or connective tissues. Proponents say it can reduce pain and improve movement. Pierce has had the procedure more than half a dozen times and believes it is one reason she will be able to run her fourth marathon in November.

“This has kind of changed my life,” she says.

Testimonials like that are a big reason dry needling has caught on with some physical therapists, athletes and other patients, Briggs says. But testimonials are not scientific proof.

And there, Briggs says, is where dry needling is lacking. While some studies have shown promise, he says, “the quality of the evidence is not strong.” That’s why Briggs and his colleagues are starting a study looking at dry needling in “runner’s knee,” the condition that has plagued Pierce. Their goal, and the goal of other researchers now looking at dry needling, is to produce results rigorous enough to show whether it really works.

For now, here’s what consumers should know:

Physical therapists say it is not, “though superficially, it may look the same,” says Justin Elliott, vice president of government affairs for the American Physical Therapy Association. For one thing, he says, dry needling as performed by a physical therapist is not rooted in ancient Chinese medicine — there’s no talk about redirecting the body’s energy flow by placing needles at certain points in the body. Instead, needles are placed directly in problem areas.

Elliott says dry needling also is practiced by some chiropractors, naturopathic physicians and nurses, which puts it outside the realm of any one specialty.

Acupuncturists beg to differ. “What is being called dry needling is clearly a form of acupuncture” and should be done only by professionals extensively trained in that discipline, says Thomas Burgoon, a West Chester, Pa., physician who is president of the American Academy of Medical Acupuncture. He says many acupuncturists do exactly what the physical therapists describe, with the same kind of needles.

Burgoon’s group has persuaded some states to bar physical therapists from the practice. 



How might it work?

One theory is that the needles cause tight muscles to twitch, then relax. The needles may also increase blood flow or set off nerve responses that alter pain perception, Briggs says.

Another possibility: It’s a placebo effect, an improvement triggered by the expectation that a treatment will work rather than by the treatment itself. To look for that possibility, the Ohio State study will compare patients who get the real needle treatment to those poked with sham needles that don’t pierce the skin.

Mark Crislip, an infectious-disease doctor in Portland, Ore., who recently wrote about dry needling for Science-Based Medicine — a website critical of alternative medicine — says the version practiced by physical therapists doesn’t “come with the mystical baggage that accompanies acupuncture.” But he says it may well be a “theatrical placebo.”

What do published studies say?

“It’s a mixed bag,” Elliott says. In a 2011 review, the physical therapy association rated the evidence for dry needling a 3 out of 5, based on the best studies. A formal analysis of 35 trails on acupuncture and dry needling for chronic lower back pain was published by the Cochrane research group in 2005. It found they “may be useful” additions to standard treatment. But it said higher quality studies were needed.

What are the risks?

Needling can produce minor bleeding and some soreness, but in trained hands, and with the use of sterile needles and gloves, “it’s a very safe procedure,” Briggs says.

In rare cases, deep needling can lead to a punctured lung or injuries to nerves and blood vessels, and acupuncturists fear non-specialists will be more likely to make such mistakes, Burgoon says.

Will insurers pay for this?

Many will not. Charges for patients can range from $10 to $75 per session, says Edo Zylstra, CEO of KinetaCore, a company that offers intensive three-day weekend courses in dry needling to physical therapists.

Do all physical therapists offer this?

No. The physical therapy association tells members in seven states to steer clear because of recent court or regulatory decisions or language in existing licensing laws. They are: California, Florida, Hawaii, Idaho, New York, South Dakota and Washington.

And most of the nation’s 200,000 licensed physical therapists are not trained in the technique. About 6,000 have taken courses in dry needling in the past few years, Zylstra says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story should be commended for its extensive sourcing. There are many sources packed into this piece and likely more sources who were interviewed and not quoted given the amount of reporting that clearly went into it.
At the same time, most of the sources have a potential conflict of interest in some way:
All of these potential conflicts are called out in the piece, which is commendable.
The one person who brings a fairly down-the-middle view is Matt Briggs, a physical therapist who is studying the technique to see whether it works. But our question about him is whether he also is a practitioner of the technique.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Parents of children with autism take note. It may be possible to predict autism in infants as young as 6 months who have older siblings with the disorder, according to a new study by a national network of researchers.

Infants in such families are at increased risk of developing autism, which is typically diagnosed when a child is 2- to 3-years-old and develops symptoms such as challenges with social skills, repetitive behaviors, delayed speech or nonverbal communication.

Researchers used magnetic resonance imaging — or MRI — to scan the brains of 343 infants when they were 6 months, 12 months and 24 months old. Two-thirds of the infants were high risk, having an older sibling with autism. The scans showed that 70 percent of high-risk toddlers diagnosed with autism at age 2 had an elevated amount of cerebrospinal fluid around their brains at 6 and 12 months, compared to toddlers who were not diagnosed with autism. Cerebrospinal fluid is a clear, colorless liquid that bathes the brain and spine.

This excess fluid “could possibly be an early biological marker for autism,” said Mark Shen, the lead author of the article, published in Biological Psychiatry, and a post-doctoral fellow at the University of North Carolina’s Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities. Additional studies are needed to confirm the finding, he said.

Such a marker would allow doctors to identify infants at high risk of developing autism before symptoms are present.

“The earlier we can get biological markers for autism, the earlier intervention can be initiated, and the greater the chance of better outcomes, ” said David Kennedy, Ph.D., co-director of the Child and Adolescent NeuroDevelopment Initiative at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. Typically, therapists work with children and parents to improve eye contact, social interactions and communication skills.

Related: See the special bond between a boy with autism and a deaf shelter dog

The study results are “very exciting,” said Dr. Adriania Di Martino, a professor of child and adolescent psychiatry at NYU Medical School. Excess brain fluid may be more than an early marker for autism, Di Martino said. It may also be a mechanism in the development of autism, and it opens up new possibilities for research, she said. “You can start thinking about conditions that might lead to increased cerebrospinal fluid.”

Shen and his colleagues are already looking for genes associated with excess brain fluid. Normally, the liquid, refreshed four times a day, washes away byproducts that build up in the brain. But if the fluid is not flowing properly, these byproducts hang around and cause inflammation, which could “hamper brain development” and lead to autism, said Shen.

Completely different mechanisms may be at work for kids without an older sibling with autism, said Shen and Dimartino. More studies are needed, they said.

Related: De Niro says 'find the truth on vaccines'. But scientists already did

Parents with children with autism should not rush to their pediatrician demanding brain MRIs for younger siblings, Shen said.

“We wouldn’t recommend that every high-risk infant get an MRI until we know that the accuracy can be improved closer to the 90 percent range” from the current 70 percent, Shen told TODAY.

He and his colleagues are working on improving accuracy by combining their brain fluid findings with other recent research. In addition to flushing out the brain’s garbage, brain fluid also delivers signals to the brain that tell it how and when to grow. In a study published last month in Nature, 80 percent of infants diagnosed with autism as toddlers had an increased rate of growth in the surface area of their brains in their first year, compared to toddlers who were not diagnosed with autism.

“We’re going to combine those two markers to see if we can improve the prediction closer to the 90 percent range, where it could be really clinically useful,” said Shen.

About 1 in 68 children develop autism in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, But as many as 20 out of 100 infants with an older sibling with autism will develop the disorder, said Di Martino.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes quotes from independent researchers, and we did not detect any potential conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - Iranian scientists say they have developed a way of using a simple blood test to predict accurately when women will reach the menopause, offering the chance for women to plan for family and career far in advance.

The test, which measures levels of a hormone produced by cells in the ovaries, was able to predict the age at which women reached menopause to within an average of 4 months, according to data to be presented at the conference of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology in Rome on Monday.

“The results ... could enable us to make a more realistic assessment of women’s reproductive status many years before they reach menopause,” said Ramezani Tehrani of the Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences in Tehran, who led the study.

Experts commenting on the work agreed it was promising, but said its findings would need to be confirmed in larger trials.

“The possibility of an accurate predictor for menopause is very exciting. People have been looking for something like this for years,” said Dagan Wells of the Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at Oxford University.

The average age for menopause is 51, with ovulation in most women ending sometime between age 40 and 60. But it can happen later or earlier, making it difficult for women who want to develop a career before having babies to know how long to wait.

Tehrani’s team took blood samples from 266 women aged between 20 and 49 who were also taking part in another study called the Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study, which started in 1998.

They then measured concentrations of a hormone called the anti-Mullerian Hormone (AMH) that is produced by cells in women’s ovaries. AMH controls the development of follicles in the ovaries from which eggs develop, and the scientists suspected it might be useful for judging ovarian function.

The researchers took two more blood samples at three yearly intervals and also collected information on the women’s socioeconomic background and reproductive history.

“We developed a statistical model for estimating the age at menopause from a single measurement of AMH concentration,” Tehrani explained in a report on the study. “Using this model, we estimated mean average ages at menopause for women at different time points in their reproductive life span.”

Tehrani said the results showed “a good level of agreement” between predicted and actual age at menopause for the 63 women in the group who reached menopause during the study.

The average difference between the predicted age and the women’s actual age at menopause was a third of a year, and the maximum margin of error was three to four years.

Wells said Tehrani’s team appeared to have hit upon a “fairly accurate algorithm” for predicting menopause.

But said it would be important to see if the method could also help predict the time when fertility effectively ends.

“A woman may cease monthly ovulation and experience menopause at 50, but she will probably have been effectively infertile for several years prior to this,” he said. “It will be important to let patients know that fertility will have declined greatly in the years preceding the final ovulation.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story briefly quotes one source other than the study’s lead author.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Up to half of women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer might be cured, compared to the current 20 per cent survival rate, argues Dr. Steven Narod, senior scientist at Women's College Research Institute, who calls for a new standard of treatment for women with late-stage ovarian cancer.

Based on an analysis of existing evidence, published in an opinion article in the Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology journal on January 20, Dr. Narod argues that to achieve a cure, rather than simply delay progression or reoccurrence of the disease, women should be first treated with aggressive surgery to remove all clinically-detectable cancer cells, followed by targeted chemotherapy to the abdomen (intraperitoneal chemotherapy).

The possibility of a 50 per cent cure rate would be a significant improvement over the current 20 per cent survival rate resulting from more conventional treatment options offered to patients, which consist of a combination of different methods including: chemotherapy before surgery; post-operative chemotherapy delivered intravenously to the whole body (as opposed to localized into the abdomen); and surgery that leaves minimal residual disease in the abdomen, rather than removing all visible cancer cells.

Dr. Narod, who is also a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Breast Cancer, recommends that doctors should consider adopting a standard model of care for all women diagnosed with advanced-stage ovarian cancer:
• Chemotherapy should be offered after the surgery, rather than before. Chemotherapy before surgery might provide a false assurance that there's no more residual cancer, whereas microscopic tumour may remain after the surgery, leading to cancer recurrence and possibly, death.
• The surgery should be aggressive in an attempt to remove all visible signs of the tumour, and to avoid leaving any residual disease. The goal is to have no cancer visible to the naked eye of the surgeon after the surgery.
• Surgery should be followed by intraperitoneal, or localized, chemotherapy delivered to the abdomen. Localized chemotherapy works best if there's no residual cancer after the initial surgery. It is the combined effect of surgery and chemotherapy that works best.

"For decades, women have been treated with a combination of treatment options, resulting in poor prognosis for most women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer, but there are many survivors as well," said Dr. Narod, senior scientist at Women's College Research Institute.

"Women need support to endure surgery and the rigours of intraperitoneal chemotherapy, but should be encouraged to do so whenever possible, considering the potential survival benefits," said Narod. "We should offer all women the possibility of a cure."
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release doesn’t mention funding sources and conflicts of interest, but there do not appear to be any conflicts of interest since the release is highlighting an opinion piece that analyzes previous research studies. Because the research isn’t advocating use of a specific drug or technology and because the published review states the author has no competing interests, we’ll give them the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 25, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental breath test, designed to quickly identify patients suffering from heart failure simply by analyzing the contents of a single exhaled breath, has demonstrated promise in early trials, a team of researchers says.

The investigators stressed that their evaluation is based on a small group of participating patients, and that more extensive research will have to be done to confirm their initial success.

But by subjecting a patient's breath to a rigorous but fast analysis of the hundreds of so-called volatile organic compounds contained therein, the study team said it has so far been able to correctly diagnose heart failure among newly hospitalized patients with a 100 percent accuracy.

"Every individual has a breath print that differentiates them from other people, depending on what's going on in their body," explained study lead author Dr. Raed Dweik, a staff physician in the department of pulmonary, allergy and critical care medicine with the Respiratory Institute at Cleveland Clinic. "And that print can tell us a lot about a person, what they've been exposed to and what disease they have," he added.

"That's what makes the new field of breath testing so promising, because it is non-intrusive, so there is no risk involved," Dweik said. "And you can do it anywhere, in a clinic, in a hospital, anywhere."

The findings were published March 25 in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology.

The study authors pointed out that the most common reason American patients are admitted to a hospital is when there is a suspicion of heart failure -- a tough-to-treat condition in which the heart's pumping action grows gradually weaker over time.

Currently, a diagnosis of heart failure comes from a variety of factors, according to the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. These include medical history and symptoms, and a physical exam in which a doctor will listen to a patient's heart and lung sounds, and check ankles, feet, legs and abdomen for signs of fluid buildup. Blood tests and an electrocardiogram can help confirm that heart failure exists.

In the new study, to gauge how well the noninvasive breath test could identify heart failure, the team collected exhaled breath samples from 41 patients who had been admitted as in-patients to the Cleveland Clinic.

Of those, 25 had been admitted with a primary diagnosis of "acute decompensated heart failure" while another 16 patients had shown no signs of heart failure but did have other cardiovascular issues. A single breath sample was obtained from each of the patients within 24 hours of admission, as well as from an additional 36 patients with acute decompensated heart failure as an independent point of comparison.

Within two hours of collection, all the samples were subject to the breath test analysis, which relied upon "mass spectrometry" technology to scan the samples for their molecular and chemical compound content. Some of those compounds had been pegged as potential telltale signs of heart failure.

The result: The breath test correctly identified all the patients with heart failure, clearly distinguishing them from those cardiac cases where heart failure was not an issue.

Dr. Gregg Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said that if further research were able to establish its effectiveness, a breath-driven tool for identifying heart failure would be a helpful diagnostic innovation -- but more so in a doctor's office or clinic than in the hospital.

"If it is clear that it is highly reliable and specific and sensitive, then yes, it would be a welcome advance," he said. "But I would say it would be perhaps more helpful for primary care physicians in an outpatient setting, because that is where it's most challenging to identify heart failure. Today a diagnosis in that environment is based on a patient's history and exam, but symptoms for heart failure can easily overlap with a lot of other diagnoses. And the blood work that would be taken in a doctor's office might not come back until the next day, delaying identification," he noted.

"So a breath test would be most useful in that kind of challenging situation," Fonarow said. "But in an emergency room, while there are challenges as well, bedside blood tests are much more readily drawn and quickly analyzed so you can often get the results in minutes. So there may be potentially less of a role for a breath test in that kind of setting."

Study author Dweik added that the test is "theoretically cheap. But of course we're still early in the process of exploring its potential. This study is really a proof of concept. There is much more work that needs to be done to get it to the point where it would become widely available."

For more on heart failure, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There are quotes from an independent expert. The journal that published the research reported that it was funded by state and federal grants, and that the researchers did not report any disclosures relevant to this study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Standard guidelines for stroke treatment currently recommend clot removal only within six hours of stroke onset. But a milestone study with results published today in the New England Journal of Medicine shows that clot removal up to 24 hours after stroke led to significantly reduced disability for properly selected patients.

The international multi-center clinical study, known as the DAWN trial, randomly assigned 206 stroke victims who arrived at the hospital within six to 24 hours to either endovascular clot removal therapy, known as thrombectomy, or to standard medical therapy.

Thrombectomy involves a catheter placed in the femoral artery and snaked up the aorta and into the cerebral arteries where the clot that is blocking the artery, and causing the neurological symptoms, is retrieved.

Almost half of the patients (48.6 percent) who had clot removal showed a considerable decrease in disability, meaning they were independent in activities of daily living 90 days after treatment. Only 13.1 percent of the medication group had a similar decrease. There was no difference in mortality or other safety end-points between the two groups.

"These findings could impact countless stroke patients all over the world who often arrive at the hospital after the current six-hour treatment window has closed," says co-principal investigator Raul Nogueira, MD, professor of neurology, neurosurgery and radiology at Emory University School of Medicine and director of neuroendovascular service at the Marcus Stroke & Neuroscience Center at Grady Memorial Hospital.

"When the irreversibly damaged brain area affected by the stroke is small, we see that clot removal can make a significant positive difference, even if performed outside the six-hour window," says co-principal investigator Tudor Jovin, MD, director of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Stroke Institute. "However, this does not diminish urgency with which patients must be rushed to the ER in the event of a stroke. The mantra 'time is brain' still holds true."

To select patients for the trial, the researchers used a new approach which used brain imaging and clinical criteria as opposed to just time alone.

"Looking at the physiological state of the brain and evaluating the extent of tissue damage and other clinical factors seems to be a better way to decide if thrombectomy will benefit patients as opposed to adhering to a rigid time window," says Nogueira.

The researchers planned to enroll a maximum of 500 patients over the course of the study period. However, a pre-planned interim review of the treatment effectiveness after 200 patients were enrolled in the trial led the independent Data Safety Monitoring Board overseeing the study to recommend early termination of the trial, based on pre-defined criteria demonstrating that clot removal provided significant clinical benefit in the studied patients.

"Our research and clinical teams are immensely proud of these breakthrough findings, which are so profound they will likely result in a paradigm shift that will not be seen again for many years in the field of stroke therapeutics," says Michael Frankel, MD, professor of neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, chief of neurology and director of the Marcus Stroke and Neuroscience Center for the Grady Health System.

According to Frankel, the Emory neuroscience team was a major contributor to the DAWN trial, working at Grady Memorial Hospital, the second leading site of the trial's enrollment.

The DAWN trial included trial locations in the United States, Spain, France, Australia and Canada. The trial was sponsored by Stryker Corporation, a medical technology company that manufactures the clot removal devices used in the study.

The DAWN trial results were presented at the European Stroke Organization Conference in May.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding source — a device manufacturer — was disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The new drugs are not without disadvantages. They cost much more than generic warfarin, roughly $8 a day instead of $1 or less. And Eliquis and Pradaxa require two pills a day, one in the morning and one in the evening, instead of the once-daily warfarin. The study included 18,201 people in 1,034 clinical sites in 39 countries and was consistent worldwide, the sponsors said. Although the study was financed by the drug makers, which raises the issue of bias, it met the gold standard for medical research as a randomized, double-blinded trial in which doctors and patients did not know who took which pill until the end. The drug acts on an enzyme that leads to blood clots.

Dr. Christopher B. Granger, the study’s lead author and a professor of medicine at Duke University, said, “I think this is a profound trial result that will have a major impact on the practice and management of patients with atrial fibrillation. It combines both greater efficacy in terms of prevention of stroke with a substantial reduction to bleeding risk, and that package is one that will be particularly compelling.”

Wall Street has high expectations, too. The companies’ stock soared after they released a brief statement about the stroke and bleeding benefits in June. Barclays Capital said the final results on Sunday were “perhaps the most anticipated R.&D. event of the year.”

“If everything checks out,” Jami Rubin of Goldman Sachs said in an interview, “that will confirm in our minds that Eliquis has potential to take a majority share of the $10 billion anticoagulation market.”

More than 2.6 million people have atrial fibrillation in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. As many as 12 million people will have it by 2020 because of an aging population with longer life expectancy. The arrhythmia in the left upper chamber of the heart can cause slow blood flow and clots, raising the risk of stroke by four to six times on average, the government says.

As many as half of people with the condition, however, are untreated, by varying estimates. Warfarin, a cheap 60-year-old drug sold generically under the brand name Coumadin, requires frequent blood tests to monitor its active level and interacts with some other drugs and foods, including leafy greens. There is great appeal and demand for new drugs that do not vary so much and deliver the same stroke-preventing benefits.

The first new drug, Pradaxa, from the German drug maker Boehringer Ingelheim, was introduced in the United States last fall. In the first seven months on market, about four in five cardiologists and two in five primary care doctors had prescribed it to more than 250,000 people, Wa’el Hashad, Boehringer’s vice president for cardiovascular marketing, said in an interview last week.

Pradaxa inhibits thrombin, an enzyme in clot formation. Other emerging drugs block a related enzyme known as Factor Xa.

Xarelto, from Bayer and Johnson & Johnson, approved by the F.D.A. in July to prevent clots in hip and knee replacement surgeries, goes to an F.D.A. review panel for atrial fibrillation on Sept. 8.

Eliquis is scheduled to be submitted for F.D.A. review later this year. Its New York-based makers are marketing powerhouses with the top two best-selling drugs in the world, Lipitor from Pfizer and Plavix from Bristol-Myers Squibb. Patents on those drugs expire in the next year, making Eliquis even more important to their businesses.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned that the study reported on had been funded by the drug maker.  It included comments from a clinician who had no ties to the study reported on.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“These people are worried about lung cancer, and now there is an opportunity to offer them something,” said Dr. Mary Reid, an associate professor of oncology at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo.

But health officials involved in the study refused to endorse widespread screening of current or former smokers, saying more analysis of the study’s results is needed to further identify who benefited most. Such an analysis is months away. And they pointed out that the study offers no reassurance about the safety of smoking or the advisability of CT scans for younger smokers or nonsmokers.

“No one should come away from this thinking that it’s now safe to continue to smoke,” said Dr. Harold E. Varmus, director of the National Cancer Institute.

Patients wishing to get a CT lung screen will most likely have to pay the roughly $300 charge themselves, since few insurers pay for such scans unless an illness is suspected. The federal Medicare program will soon reconsider paying for such screens, a Medicare official said.

The study, called the National Lung Screening Trial, was conducted by the American College of Radiology Imaging Network and the cancer institute. It involved more than 53,000 people ages 55 to 74 who had smoked at least 30 pack-years — one pack a day for 30 years or two packs a day for 15 years. Ex-smokers who had quit within the previous 15 years were included in the group.

Each was given either a standard chest X-ray or a low-dose CT scan at the start of the trial and then twice more over the next two years. Participants were followed for up to five years. There were 354 lung cancer deaths among those who received CT scans and 442 among those who got X-rays. The $250 million study, which began in 2002, was paid for by the cancer institute and carried out at 33 sites.

Its preliminary results were announced days after an independent monitoring board determined that the benefits of CT scans were strong enough to stop the trial. The study will be published in the coming months.

The study found that for every 300 people who were screened, one person lived who would otherwise have died during the study. But one-quarter of those given CT scans were found to have anomalies, nearly all of which were benign. These false signals generally led to more worry, more CT scans and sometimes to lung biopsies and thoracic surgery.

“There are economic, medical and psychological consequences of finding these abnormalities,” Dr. Varmus said.

Deaths due to all causes declined by 7 percent among study participants who received CT scans, suggesting the tests helped to detect other life-threatening diseases besides lung cancer.

Dr. Claudia Henschke, a clinical professor of radiology at Mount Sinai Medical Center and a longtime advocate for use of CT to screen for lung cancer, said the study was likely to have underestimated the benefits of CT scans because participants were screened only three times. Had the screening continued for 10 years, as many as 80 percent of lung cancer deaths could have been averted, she said. Dr. Henschke’s research has been controversial because of its statistical methods and its financing, which included money from a tobacco company. She earns royalties from makers of CT machines.

“What we also have found is that low-dose CT scan gives information on cardiovascular disease, emphysema” and other pulmonary diseases, Dr. Henschke said. “Those are the three big killers of older people. There is just tremendous potential.”

But Dr. Edward F. Patz Jr., professor of radiology at Duke who helped devise the study, said he was far from convinced that a thorough analysis would show that widespread CT screening would prove beneficial in preventing most lung cancer deaths. Dr. Patz said that the biology of lung cancer has long suggested that the size of cancerous lung tumors tells little about the stage of the disease.

“If we look at this study carefully, we may suggest that there is some benefit in high-risk individuals, but I’m not there yet,” Dr. Patz said.

Since 46 million people in the United States smoke and tens of millions more once smoked, a widespread screening program could cost billions annually. Any further refinement of those most at risk could reduce those costs. Low-dose CT scans expose patients to about the same radiation levels as mammograms. Little is known about how the cumulative risks of years of such scans would balance the benefits.

The study’s results could have both legal and political consequences. Suits against tobacco companies have sought to force cigarette makers to pay for annual CT screens of former smokers. But with the science uncertain, those claims have so far been rebuffed. Congress has diverted some research money to create pilot CT lung screening programs, diversions that may gain momentum now.

Some Obama administration officials argued during the debate on the health care law that patients’ health was often harmed by getting too many tests and procedures that, if reduced, would improve health while reducing costs. This study suggests that, at least in lung cancer, spending more on tests saves lives.

Laurie Fenton, president of the Lung Cancer Alliance, which has lobbied for widespread CT lung screening, said the debate about the advisability of such scans is now over.

“The challenge now shifts from proving the efficacy of the method to developing the proper quality standards, infrastructure and guidelines to bring this needed benefit to those at high risk for the disease — now,” Ms. Fenton said.

But Dr. Peter B. Bach, a pulmonologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, said no one should rush out and get a CT scan yet because further analysis will better define whom the screening helped.

“Very soon we’ll have an answer about who should be screened and how frequently,” Dr. Bach said, “but we don’t have that answer today.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 



There is an independent source and the story reports that the trial was government-financed. 
However, the story does not tell readers that the independent source, Dr. Claudia Henschke, has been a loud critic of this trial. Dr. Henschke has been criticized both for making claims about benefits of CT screening that went beyond the available evidence, for having ties to a leading manufacturer of CT scanners, and for taking funding from a tobacco company. She should have been identified as someone who has frequently clashed with those who have supported this trial.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When doctors who treat pregnant women recently met to debate the best time to induce labor, they came up with a surprising answer: 39 weeks — three weeks earlier than currently recommended.

Their organization, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), has not changed its guidelines on late-term pregnancies. The guidelines say that doctors may consider elective induction at 41 weeks and should proceed with it at 42 weeks. But the question has some doctors reconsidering their assumptions about induction and has sparked criticism by women who contend there is already too much interference with uncomplicated pregnancies.

The question was presented in May at the yearly ACOG meeting in Washington: “Why not induce everyone at 39 weeks?” Two doctors had been asked to debate: Errol Norwitz, chairman of obstetrics and gynecology at Tufts University School of Medicine, and Charles Lockwood, dean of the Morsani College of Medicine at the University of South Florida.

[Here’s what’s being done to lower the maternal death rate]

“My original assumption when asked to participate in this debate,” Lockwood said, “was that Dr. Norwitz would take the ‘pro’ side since he has written about the risk of stillbirth after 38 weeks, and I would take the ‘con’ side since older literature suggested that C-section rates would likely be higher in the elective induction of labor at 39 weeks.”

Norwitz was a vigorous proponent. “There is no benefit to the fetus waiting beyond 39 weeks in well-dated pregnancies,” he told the doctors. And as Lockwood reviewed research, he found that he was more and more in agreement with that point of view.

“But Errol and I decided we would not tell each other which side we were taking in order to conduct independent assessments of the literature and report on our conclusions,” Lockwood said. “Beyond adding an element of suspense, this strategy allowed us to come to unbiased conclusions.”

After Lockwood found that recent studies suggest that elective inductions at 39 weeks decrease Caesarean delivery rates and might reduce the rate of infant and maternal complications, what was supposed to be a debate proceeded as a discussion in support of induction.

Before either doctor spoke, the audience in a crowded ballroom was polled: 63 percent opposed having most women deliver at 39 weeks, 20 percent supported it and 17 percent were unsure.

Norwitz argued against simply letting nature take its course.

“Nature is a terrible obstetrician,” he said, referring to the “continuum” of pregnancy and birth: the large number of zygotes that never implant, the 75 percent lost before 20 weeks, and stillbirth.

And, he said, the risk of stillbirth and neurological injuries rises after 39 weeks. “Stillbirth is a hugely underappreciated problem,” he said. “There are anywhere between 25,000 to 30,000 stillbirths a year in the United States.”

Lockwood and Norwitz’s support for induction at 39 weeks not only surprised many of the doctors at the session, it also upset those who believe less intervention is the safest route for mother and baby.

Labor may be induced by breaking the amniotic sac or by using hormones called prostaglandins or medication such as oxytocin, which can set off contractions. Labor can begin immediately or take a day or two; if it becomes too lengthy, Caesareans are performed.

Cristen Pascucci, an advocate for giving women more control over childbirth decisions, thinks the doctors’ remarks suggest that all babies need to be “rescued by birth,” creating an anti-woman mentality. “It’s as if women and their babies are fundamentally in opposition to each other and the female body is dangerous by design,” said Pascucci, a vice president of the advocacy group Improving Birth.

Pascucci, who is based in Lexington, Ky., travels the country speaking and consultingon issues related to birth rights. She said the induction recommendation “reinforces a century-old, pre-feminist American obstetric view that birth is pathological and the doctor’s job is to extract the fetus from the incubator — like in the ’50s, when every baby was pulled out of its shackled, unconscious mother by episiotomy.”

Consumer groups such as hers, she said, have been calling on ACOG to evolve toward care that is more centered on women. “It’s disheartening to see how hard that’s going to be for some physicians to do.”

Lockwood and Norwitz are aware that there is strong opposition to induction at 39 weeks. “I think a lot of this gets very emotional,” Norwitz said.

Although both doctors support induction at 39 weeks for all healthy pregnancies, Lockwood said that obstetricians shouldn’t routinely adopt the practice just yet. As with any change in standard medical care, extensive research is needed before it can be safely and widely adopted. Even so, Norwitz thinks that “it’s a very healthy discussion to have.”

Due dates are calculated 40 weeks from the first day of a woman’s normal menstrual period and, according to ACOG, full term is defined as a pregnancy that lasts between 39 weeks and 40 weeks and six days.

As he prepared for the debate, Lockwood created a micro-simulation model to predict the outcome of various care decisions, and results suggested lower rates of stillbirth, Caesarean delivery and maternal and neonatal complications for elective induction at 39 weeks. That prompted him to take the debate stage as a proponent of early induction.

Still, he was surprised by an audience poll at the end of the discussion: 70 percent now supported the idea that women deliver at 39 weeks, 21 percent remained unsure and only 9 percent were against the idea.

[I didn’t understand the pressure to have a C-section until I was about to deliver]

Traditional medical thinking assumes that early induction could lead to higher infection rates and the need for a Caesarean. But Norwitz said the evidence doesn’t support that. Rather, he said, the latest literature suggests that the drugs available to soften the cervix in preparation for contractions help to decrease the Caesarean risk, adding a small caveat: For a small number of first-time mothers with “unfavorable, long and hard cervixes” — as opposed to cervixes that are soft and receptive to induction — the risk of Caesarean is increased.

Rebecca Dekker, who has a doctorate in nursing and founded the website Evidence Based Birth, which aims to make research on childbirth more accessible to families and professionals, watched a live stream of the session and described the presentations as misleading and the research as flawed. She called it “concerning and rash” for doctors at the meeting to make “broad conclusions” that “could potentially affect at least 3 million women a year in the United States alone.”

Norwitz said that the presentations were evidence-based. “This is my interpretation of the published literature,” he said. “This is not a personal opinion based on belief or ideology.”

Lockwood said he finds push-back inevitable and part of the broader scientific process.

Dekker said there were flaws in the research showing that women who received elective induction had lower rates of Caesarean delivery. For the women who waited for labor to start on its own, about half ended up being induced for medical complications. “They still analyzed the data as if the women had spontaneous labor, so it sways the results of the studies,” she said.

Dekker isn’t disputing that there are about 25,000 stillbirths per year or that this is a concern. However, she said a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report shows about half of stillbirths occur between 20 and 27 weeks of pregnancy, and the other half at later points.

“It’s obvious that a blanket policy of 39-week inductions would not affect all of the stillbirths that happen before 39 weeks,” Dekker said, adding that the CDC report concludes, “Despite intensive investigations, for a substantial number of fetal deaths a specific cause of death cannot be determined.”

And, Dekker said, the public has the misconception that inductions are simple, noninvasive procedures. Pitocin, the most commonly used drug for induction, is classified as a high-alert medication that can increase the risk of patient harm if an error occurs. The drug can cause contractions that are too frequent, increasing the risk of decreased blood flow and oxygen to the baby, she said. Also, the drug can cause the placenta to detach from the uterine wall too early, and it can cause the uterine wall to tear.

For Dekker, the major benefit of spontaneous labor is avoiding the risks of a medical induction.

There are clear philosophical differences. One early morning in his hospital’s labor and delivery unit, Norwitz said, he spoke with a midwife colleague who compared labor to walking through a forest. “We midwives stand behind the patient, and if she gets off the path, we coax her back onto it,” she told him. “Obstetricians are in front of her, hacking through the forest.”

Esther Hausman, a certified nurse midwife in Concord, Mass., argues for restraint. “Since we don’t know exactly what triggers labor, why mess with it?”

Hausman suggested learning from countries such as Denmark or Sweden, where midwifery is the first line of care and where fetal and maternal mortality rates are lower than in the United States. In a 2014 CDC report, the U.S. infant mortality rate (6.1 per 1,000 births) put it in 26th place among a selection of developed countries. Finland and Japan had the lowest rates (2.3 per 1,000 births.)

Dekker said that the ACOG debate should have instead compared the medical model of care to midwife-led care. Midwives are less likely than doctors to induce a woman electively, she said, and studies have found they intervene less than doctors and have more-satisfied patients.

Beverly Siegal, a retired obstetrician-gynecologist in Newton, Mass., attended the debate and was among those who changed their thinking on induction.

“What changed [my opinion] at the end of the presentation was the really convincing argument that there is nothing gained for the baby to stay in beyond 39 weeks,” Siegal said. “I would personally recommend that any woman with a favorable cervix at 39 weeks be encouraged to get induced.”

Of course, Lockwood said, women should be heard.

“Finally, needless to say, it is expectant mothers that should have the final say as to whether to let nature take its course or undertake this potentially salutary but clearly artificial intervention,” he said.

“But obviously our messages — how you talk — does make a difference,” Norwitz said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: As noted above, the story includes several sources who criticize the proposition that labor should be induced earlier routinely. The story also quotes an opponent who charges that obstetricians have a philosophical bias in favor of medical intervention, which in a way flags a potential conflict of interest for readers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MINNEAPOLIS - People who eat vegetables, fruit and whole grains may have lower rates of depression over time, according to a preliminary study released today that will be presented at the American Academy of Neurology's 70th Annual Meeting in Los Angeles, April 21 to 27, 2018.

The study found that people whose diets adhered more closely to the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet were less likely to develop depression than people who did not closely follow the diet. In addition to fruit and vegetables, the DASH diet recommends fat-free or low-fat dairy products and limits foods that are high in saturated fats and sugar. Studies have shown health benefits such as lowering high blood pressure and bad cholesterol (LDL), along with lowering body weight.

"Depression is common in older adults and more frequent in people with memory problems, vascular risk factors such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol, or people who have had a stroke," said study author Laurel Cherian, MD, of Rush University Medical Center in Chicago and a member of the American Academy of Neurology. "Making a lifestyle change such as changing your diet is often preferred over taking medications, so we wanted to see if diet could be an effective way to reduce the risk of depression."

For the study, 964 participants with an average age of 81 were evaluated yearly for an average of six-and-a-half years. They were monitored for symptoms of depression such as being bothered by things that usually didn't affect them and feeling hopeless about the future. They also filled out questionnaires about how often they ate various foods, and the researchers looked at how closely the participants' diets followed diets such as the DASH diet, Mediterranean diet and the traditional Western diet.

Participants were divided into three groups based on how closely they adhered to the diets. People in the two groups that followed the DASH diet most closely were less likely to develop depression than people in the group that did not follow the diet closely. The odds of becoming depressed over time was 11 percent lower among the top group of DASH adherers versus the lowest group. On the other hand, the more closely people followed a Western diet--a diet that is high in saturated fats and red meats and low in fruits and vegetables--the more likely they were to develop depression.

Cherian noted that the study does not prove that the DASH diet leads to a reduced risk of depression; it only shows an association.

"Future studies are now needed to confirm these results and to determine the best nutritional components of the DASH diet to prevent depression later in life and to best help people keep their brains healthy," said Cherian.

Register now for the 2018 AAN Annual Meeting Press Room in Los Angeles, April 21-27, 2018

The study was supported by the National Institute on Aging.

Learn more about brain health at http://www. .

The American Academy of Neurology is the world's largest association of neurologists and neuroscience professionals, with over 34,000 members. The AAN is dedicated to promoting the highest quality patient-centered neurologic care. A neurologist is a doctor with specialized training in diagnosing, treating and managing disorders of the brain and nervous system such as Alzheimer's disease, stroke, migraine, multiple sclerosis, concussion, Parkinson's disease and epilepsy.

For more information about the American Academy of Neurology, visit http://www. or find us on Facebook, Twitter, Google+, LinkedIn and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the study was supported by the National Institute on Aging, which is good. However, conflicts of interest are not explicitly addressed. Given that only one of the researchers involved with the study was named, it is impossible for readers to determine if there are any conflicts of interest. For example, one can buy any number of DASH diet cookbooks online — are any study co-authors associated with those? Given the paucity of information in the release, it’s impossible to tell. (As noted above, we obtained a copy of the study abstract and didn’t see any obvious conflicts of interest — but the information isn’t readily available in the release.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON--A new dietary review of 49 observational and controlled studies finds plant-based vegetarian diets, especially vegan diets, are associated with lower levels of total cholesterol, including lower levels of HDL and LDL cholesterol, compared to omnivorous diets. The meta-analysis appears as an online advance in Nutrition Reviews.

The study authors--Yoko Yokoyama, Ph.D., M.P.H., Susan Levin, M.S., R.D., C.S.S.D., and Neal Barnard, M.D., F.A.C.C.--reviewed 30 observational studies and 19 clinical trials, which met their inclusion criteria. They find:

A plant-based vegetarian diet is associated with total cholesterol that's 29.2 mg/dL lower in observational studies. In clinical trials, a plant-based diet lowers total cholesterol by 12.5 mg/dL.
• In observational studies, a plant-based vegetarian diet is associated with a 22.9 mg/dL reduction in LDL cholesterol and a 3.6 mg/dL reduction in HDL cholesterol, compared to control groups following an omnivorous diet.
• In clinical trials, a plant-based vegetarian diet lowers LDL cholesterol by 12.2 mg/dL and reduces HDL cholesterol by 3.4 mg/dL, compared to control groups following an omnivorous, low-fat, calorie-restricted, or a conventional diabetes diet.
• A plant-based vegetarian diet is not associated with statistically significant changes in triglyceride levels in observational studies or in clinical trials.

The authors predict the strong correlation between vegetarian diets and lower cholesterol levels may be due to the association a plant-based diet has with a lower body weight, a reduced intake of saturated fat, and an increased intake of plant foods, like vegetables, fruits, legumes, nuts, and whole grains, which are naturally rich in components such as soluble fiber, soy protein, and plant sterols.

The study authors hypothesize that the greater risk reduction for total, HDL, and LDL cholesterol levels observed in the longitudinal studies is likely due to long-term adherence to plant-based eating patterns and changes in body composition.

"The immediate health benefits of a plant-based diet, like weight loss, lower blood pressure, and improved cholesterol, are well documented in controlled studies," says study author Susan Levin, M.S., R.D., C.S.S.D. "Our goal with studying plasma lipids throughout the lifespan is to capture the net risk reduction of using a vegetarian diet to control lipid levels. We hope to empower patients with new research about the long-term cardiovascular health benefits of a vegetarian diet, which include a reduced risk of a heart attack, stroke, and premature death."

Charles Ross, D.O., a member of the nonprofit Physicians Committee and a former emergency department physician, has firsthand experience with putting a plant-based diet into practice.

Dr. Ross is in his late 60s, takes no medications, and lowered his previously high total cholesterol from 230 mg/dL to a healthy 135 mg/dL after adopting a whole-food, plant-based diet in 2012. Within the first month of making the dietary change, he effortlessly lost 10 pounds. Within a year, Dr. Ross traded a 34-year career of practicing emergency medicine for a new career path: lifestyle medicine. After 5.5 years of making the career switch, he continues to host free biweekly nutrition classes for his primary care patients and the community. More than 700 people have enrolled to learn how to lose weight, eliminate the need for medications to treat type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and elevated cholesterol, and to simply feel better. His former hometown of Roseburg, Ore., is now a Blue Zones community. He is a part-time instructor at the College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific Northwest and hopes to set an example for future physicians.

"I no longer work for a living," notes Dr. Ross, who now resides in Westfir, Ore. "I wake up every day eager to hear about how a plant-based diet and a healthful lifestyle is changing and saving lives in our community. What I've found is that if you want your patients to make significant health changes, you have to make them yourself. The prescription started to spread soon after my family, co-workers, neighbors, and friends heard about my experience."

For clinicians concerned about spending extra time in and outside of the exam room, the study authors encourage time-strapped health care providers to refer patients to registered dietitians who can help with the transition to a plant-based vegetarian diet. The 2015 Dietary Guidelines for Americans highlights a healthy vegetarian diet as one of three healthful eating plans to follow.

The study authors also note hyperlipidemia, or elevated cholesterol and triglycerides, is often underdiagnosed and undertreated. A 10 percent increase in the prevalence of treatment for hyperlipidemia can prevent 8,000 deaths each year. Taking small steps, like those proposed by the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel 3, which include assessing heart disease risk, making lifestyle and dietary recommendations, and assessing the need for future follow-up appointments and pharmaceutical interventions, could prevent approximately 20,000 heart attacks, 10,000 cases of coronary heart disease, and save almost $3 billion in medical costs each year.

"To make any form of health care work and to truly power economic mobility, we have to get healthy," says Levin. "The first place to start is by building meals around nutrient-packed, plant-based foods, which fit into nearly every cultural template, taste preference, and budget."

To request a copy of the study or to request an interview with a study author, please contact Jessica Frost at 202-527-7342.

Founded in 1985, the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine is a nonprofit organization that promotes preventive medicine, conducts clinical research, and encourages higher standards for ethics and effectiveness in research.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the research is funded by the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine. Reporters will have to dig a little deeper to learn that group supports an activist agenda on behalf of animal rights, which may have a bearing on its health and diet recommendations. But the release meets our minimum standard for a satisfactory grade.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers from the Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine are nearing development of a blood test that can accurately detect the presence of Alzheimer's disease, which would give physicians an opportunity to intervene at the earliest, most treatable stage.

Robert Nagele, PhD, presented his team's most recent findings October 18 at OMED 15 in Orlando. Dr. Nagele's work focuses on utilizing autoantibodies as blood-based biomarkers to accurately detect the presence of myriad diseases and pinpoint the stage to which a disease has progressed. By detecting Alzheimer's disease long before symptoms emerge, Dr. Nagele hopes those with disease-related autoantibody biomarkers will be encouraged to make beneficial lifestyle changes that may help to slow development of the disease.

"There are significant benefits to early disease detection because we now know that many of the same conditions that lead to vascular disease are also significant risk factors for Alzheimer's. People found to have preclinical disease can take steps to improve their vascular health, including watching their diet, exercising and managing any weight and blood pressure issues to help stave off or slow disease progression," Nagele said.

While the cause of Alzheimer's remains elusive, it is clear that maintaining a healthy blood-brain barrier is a critical preventative measure. Diabetes, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, stroke and being overweight jeopardize vascular health. As blood vessels in the brain weaken or become brittle with age, they begin to leak, which allows plasma components including brain-reactive autoantibodies into the brain. There, the autoantibodies can bind to neurons and accelerate the accumulation of beta amyloid deposits, a hallmark of Alzheimer's pathology.

The blood test developed by Dr. Nagele has also shown promise in detecting other diseases, including Parkinsons's, multiple sclerosis and breast cancer. His team's research on the role of autoantibodies explains that:
• All humans possess thousands of autoantibodies in their blood;
• These autoantibodies specifically bind to blood-borne cellular debris generated by organs and tissues all over the body;
• An individual's autoantibody profile is strongly influenced by age, gender and the presence of specific diseases or injuries; and
• Diseases cause characteristic changes in autoantibody profiles that, when detected, can serve as biomarkers that reveal the presence of the disease.

In Alzheimer's, the brain begins to change years before symptoms emerge. Detecting Alzheimer's antibodies at the preclinical stage would give patients an opportunity to work with their physician to make lifestyle changes or receive available treatments before they become symptomatic. Potentially, this early intervention could help those with preclinical Alzheimer's avoid or delay the most devastating symptoms.

"As osteopathic physicians, we constantly tell patients that a healthy lifestyle is the best medicine for preventing disease. We also know that many people tune out messages about nutrition and exercise until a health crisis gets their attention," said Jennifer Caudle, DO, assistant professor of family medicine at Rowan University. "I can't think of a single patient who wouldn't take steps to prevent the progression of Alzheimer's if they could directly affect their prognosis."

Today, there is no definitive FDA-approved blood test for Alzheimer's, which affects an estimated 5.3 million Americans. It is among the top 10 causes of death in America.

Dr. Nagele's research has been supported by grants from the Michael J. Fox Foundation and the Osteopathic Heritage Foundation.

OMED 15 is a five-day event offering clinical and research updates in 15 specialties, with an emphasis on osteopathic principles and practices.

The osteopathic philosophy of medicine takes a whole person approach to prevention, diagnosis and treatment, giving its practitioners a distinct model for clinical problem solving and patient education. OMED welcomes all health care professionals-- including MDs, nurse practitioners and physician assistants--interested in osteopathic medicine's collaborative approach to increasingly complex medical issues. To learn more about DOs and the osteopathic approach to medicine, visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two funding sources for the research are disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — For three years, Andrew Harder wondered if he had prostate cancer. In 2009, he had routine blood work that revealed an elevated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level. When PSA is above 4 nanograms per milliliter of blood, it can be one of the first signs of a prostate tumor. Harder’s PSA was 9.

By the time Harder saw a urologist, it had skyrocketed to 20. His doctor recommended the traditional next step: a transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) biopsy, which involves taking random tissue samples from 12 cross sections of the prostate.

Over the course of two years, Harder, 60, an MRI technologist, would have three TRUS biopsies. They were all inconclusive.

“It is frustrating to have a bunch of biopsies with a rising PSA and no proof of cancer,” Harder said.

After Harder’s third biopsy, his urologist was ready to throw in the towel, and that’s when Harder was referred to Jinxing Yu, M.D., at VCU Health. By then, Harder’s PSA was around 30.

Yu is the director of oncologic and prostate imaging in the Department of Radiology at VCU. Over the past five years, he has developed diagnostic techniques using MRI technology to investigate difficult cases like Harder’s.

After one MRI, Yu found Harder’s tumor. After that, Yu performed a targeted biopsy guided by the MRI scanner, allowing him to take tissue samples directly from the tumor.

In 2012, he started on a treatment plan: hormone therapy for six months to shrink the tumor and prostate, and then external beam radiation to finish the job. Today, his PSA is normal.

Other patients who continue to hit a brick wall with negative results from TRUS biopsies yet persistently high PSA levels may not be as fortunate.

“A patient had 10 TRUS biopsies and his doctors still couldn’t find a tumor,” Yu said. “If you do not have this kind of advanced imaging, sometimes a patient runs into a situation when a tumor can’t be found and treated because it’s too late — it has already metastasized. He ends up diagnosed with cancer only after the tumor has spread to his bone or lymph nodes years later.”

Magnetic resonance imaging and targeted biopsy for the prostate have provided relief for patients like Harder who have not been able to get an accurate diagnosis. When caught early, prostate cancer is highly treatable.

Much like someone would have an MRI to investigate the cause of back pain, the technology gives doctors eyes on what is happening in prostate tissue. VCU Medical Center is one of the major teaching hospitals in the country doing advanced multiparametric MRI, which involves taking three different types of imaging sequences of the prostate.

Each of the sequences — T2 weighted imaging, diffusion-weighted imaging and dynamic contrast enhanced imaging — tells a story, and together they can be used to make a diagnosis with more than 90 percent accuracy.

Interpreting a prostate MRI to be able to correctly diagnose cancer is a skill that can take years to develop. Yu and his team look for certain patterns that are typical of cancer on each of the different sequences.

“If we put those characteristic features together from each sequence then we can say with a high degree of confidence that this area is concerning for cancer and potentially target it for biopsy,” said Sarah Winks, M.D., an attending physician in the Department of Radiology.

An MRI can also help determine how aggressive a tumor is, Yu said, and indicates if the tumor extends outside of the prostate and involves other areas — all information that helps urologists and radiation oncologists determine the best course of treatment.

In addition to enhancing detection of prostate cancer, magnetic resonance technology also enhances the biopsy process with a procedure called magnetic resonance/ultrasound fusion biopsy. MRI scans are overlaid with real-time ultrasound images to guide the biopsy needle to the tumor.

In 2014, VCU Health’s Department of Radiology, supported by the Division of Urology in the Department of Surgery, purchased ultrasound/MRI fusion biopsy equipment. Prior to this, Yu’s team had performed targeted MRI biopsies with the patient being moved in and out of the MRI scanner as the needle was guided to the target area — a sort of stop-motion procedure that could take up to an hour. The new equipment has simplified and shortened the process to about 20 minutes.

A study published in 2015 by the Center for Cancer Research found that fusion biopsy is 30 percent more accurate in diagnosing high-risk, aggressive cancers than a TRUS biopsy. It is also much better at finding tumors in the anterior part of the prostate, near where Harder’s tumor was located.

Yu credits the technology and also having a dedicated team that can perform multiparametric-MRI, read the MRI scans and conduct biopsies with a very high success rate.

“At most places, there will be a radiologist reading the MR image and a clinician performing the biopsy. The person reading the image and person putting in the needle is different,” Yu said. “Sometimes you don’t get the same result. We do both. That’s one of our strengths.”

Yu has seen how MRI technology has changed prostate patients’ care. “Five years ago, 95 percent of patients with prostate cancer or a high PSA would never get any imaging,” Yu said. “Right now, I think probably 50 or 60 percent get imaging.” Sometimes, these are patients pushing their doctors for a referral as one of Yu’s patients did last year.

Last August, Jim Grandon of Colville, Washington, discovered he had a PSA of 5.3. It was elevated from the 4.1 measurement that he had registered for a few years. The rising PSA was cause for concern. Instead of going through with an immediate TRUS biopsy recommended by his urologist, he decided to research next steps.

“With just going in and doing a blind biopsy like most urologists will do, you have anywhere from 35 to 45 percent success rate,” Grandon said. “I found three or four places around the country with a biopsy success rate of over 85 percent. When I went back to my urologist, he said, ‘Why spend money flying around the country when we can take care of you here?’ I said, ‘Because 85 percent is better than 40 percent.’”

VCU Medical Center was one of the places Grandon had researched to get his diagnostic testing done, and a few phone calls later, he was on a plane flying across the country to see Yu.

On his second day in Richmond, Grandon had an MRI that showed a lesion. The next day, Yu biopsied it. On the fourth day, Grandon flew home and began researching treatment options. He opted for brachytherapy followed by external radiation at a clinic closer to home, and recently completed his treatment.

More and more, physicians are hearing about and understanding the benefits of MRI technology for prostate care, which has also been helpful in preventing overdiagnosis and overtreatment. According to the Center for Cancer Research study, MRI targeted biopsies detect 17 percent fewer low-risk tumors. These are tumors that would have never developed into a life-threatening cancer, but might lead a doctor and patient to treat it unnecessarily.

When Yu started prostate MRI screening in 2011, his team performed about 50 scans per year. Now, with the support of Massey Cancer Center, Urology and Radiation Oncology, they are doing about 1,200 multiparametric-MRI and 200 imaging guided biopsies per year. He estimates the volume will continue to increase because VCU will attract patients not only from the Greater Richmond area but also patients such as Grandon from other parts of the country.

Yu hopes the advanced technology means positive changes in the standard of care. He speculates that in the same way women have a baseline mammogram, men would have a baseline prostate MRI and periodic magnetic resonance scans if warranted by bloodwork and family history.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release doesn’t name a funding source, but it’s not based on one study. It focuses heavily on selected outcomes and patient anecdotes from a single treatment center, the VCU Massey Cancer Center.
There are no apparent undisclosed conflicts of interest or funding sources related to VCU. However, two authors of the NCI’s Center for Cancer Research study (briefly referenced in the release) had reported holding a patent related to the MRI biopsy platform, and a third reported holding multiple patents in the field. That research was supported by the National Institutes of Health, the National Cancer Institute, the Center for Cancer Research, and Center for Interventional Oncology. The NIH, Philips Healthcare, and devicemaker Invivo Corp. have a cooperative research and development agreement.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 25, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- By probing deeper into the biological mechanisms that go awry in melanoma, scientists have come up with an experimental drug that has had an effect in a surprising number of patients with advanced melanoma.

The drug, PLX4032, just completed a phase 1 clinical trial in which 81 percent of participants with a particular gene mutation had a partial response, meaning at least some shrinkage of the tumor.

The current standard treatments for metastatic melanoma -- chemotherapy and interleukin-2 (IL2) -- only have response rates in about 15 percent of these patients, said Dr. Paul Chapman, senior author of a study in which the findings are described.

The average survival time for someone diagnosed with melanoma is nine to 11 months, added Chapman, who is an attending physician in the Melanoma Sarcoma Service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.

One expert cautioned that it's too early to say whether the drug will actually prolong patient's lives, or if it might be helpful to patients in earlier stages of the disease.

"I don't want to say this is going to change survival rates but they're working with the most ill people, so you can't really generalize [to other patient populations]," said Dr. Alice Pentland, chair of dermatology at the University of Rochester Medical Center. "I think the most important part of this breakthrough is the bigger percentage of people who responded."

The study, which is published in the Aug. 26 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, was funded by drug makers Plexxikon and Roche Pharmaceuticals.

About nine years ago, scientists discovered that the tumors of about half of patients with melanoma have a mutation in a gene called BRAF.

The gene appears to help drive the runaway cell division that is a hallmark of cancer. "It's always on. It's always signaling to the nucleus [of the tumor cells] that it's time to divide," Chapman explained.

That finding opened the door to potential targeted, molecular therapies for melanoma, which has been sorely lacking in effective treatments.

PLX4032 is the first potent inhibitor of BRAF that has made it to the clinical trial stage, Chapman said.

In the trial, 55 patients received escalating doses of the drug. Ten of 16 patients who had the BRAF gene mutation had a partial response to the drug, meaning the tumor shrank by at least 30 percent, while one had a complete response, with the tumor disappearing altogether.

Among 32 patients with BRAF-mutated melanoma in the second phase of the study, 24 had a partial response and two had a complete response.

"It worked: 81 percent had a partial response -- which has never been seen. I don't know of any solid tumors that have a response rate that high," said Chapman. "What's different here is that we've discovered a molecule that is responsible for driving the melanoma cell. It turns out that the melanoma really cares if we block the gene BRAF. It matters. It's addicted to this pathway."

There are some important caveats, however. It's not known at this time if the drug can improve overall survival, and a sizable proportion of participants developed resistance to the drug, the researchers say.

The findings join other recent reports of potential treatments for melanoma in what appears to be an exciting time for the field. Progress in this field has essentially been stalled for decades, experts say.

Recently, scientists reported that another experimental drug, ipilimumab, prolonged median survival in patients with metastatic melanoma from 6.4 months to 10 months.

"[Existing therapy] is not good for melanoma, so this is really a new opportunity that I think may have some importance to people," Pentland said.

However, she stressed that the best defense against melanoma is to get your skin examined regularly by a professional who knows what to look for.

"Our most successful treatment is to get [the lesion] early, get it before it's thick, get it before it spreads," she said.

There's more on metastatic melanoma at the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes a dermatologist with no links to the research. Not coincidentally, she is the only person in any of the three stories we reviewed about this study to point out the lack of conclusive data on survival. The story also notes that the trial was funded by drug maker Roche.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 19, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- New research suggests that a single blood test could confirm type 2 diabetes, saving patients time and health care costs.

Currently, it's recommended that a blood test focused on elevated fasting levels of blood sugar (glucose) or a blood component called glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) be confirmed with a second blood test at a follow-up visit.

But taking the test twice takes up time and money and could still result in missed diagnoses, said a team from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore.

In the new study, researchers led by Hopkins epidemiologist Elizabeth Selvin looked at data on more than 13,000 people in a long-running U.S. heart disease study. The study began in the 1980s, and along the way has recorded valuable data from participants, including diabetes test data.

Selvin's group analyzed that data, and reported that a positive result for glucose and HbA1c from just a single blood sample can confirm type 2 diabetes.

This could change care, "potentially allowing a major simplification of current clinical practice guidelines," Selvin said in a university news release. "Doctors are already doing these [glucose and HbA1c] tests together -- if a patient is obese, for example, and has other risk factors for diabetes, the physician is likely to order tests for both glucose and HbA1c from a single blood sample.

"It's just that the guidelines don't clearly let you use the tests from that one blood sample to make the initial diabetes diagnosis," she explained.

Diabetes is treatable, but about 3 million Americans with the disease don't know they have it.

"I'm hoping that these results will lead to a change in the clinical guidelines when they are revised in early 2019, which could make identifying diabetes a lot more efficient in many cases," Selvin said.

"Diabetes moves fast, and the cost of diabetes has increased more than 20 percent since 2012," noted Dr. Robert Courgi. The new study "helps us move quicker to treat diabetes," he said.

"By diagnosing diabetes quicker, we can improve outcomes," said Courgi, an endocrinologist at Northwell Health's Southside Hospital in Bay Shore, N.Y. "The current standard is to delay diagnosis with repeat office visits and blood work. Now we can educate the patient sooner and start treatment earlier to prevent complications of diabetes such as heart attack, dialysis and amputations."

Dr. Gerald Bernstein coordinates the Friedman Diabetes Program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. He agreed that quicker diagnosis could mean better treatment and outcomes for patients.

"The CDC reports that greater than 52 percent of the U.S. population has either clinical diabetes or prediabetes," Bernstein noted. "Given these numbers, any abnormality of glucose should be regarded as sufficient reason to start preventative treatment with an education program, lifestyle change and first-line medication such as metformin."

According to Bernstein, if only one diagnostic test were needed, "this would mean that a follow-up visit would be a look at the treatment benefits -- rather than a confirmation of an abnormal glucose."

The study was published June 19 in the journal Annals of Internal Medicine.

The American Diabetes Association has more on type 2 diabetes.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story tapped independent diabetes experts.
While the study was funded by government grants, one of the authors disclosed grants and personal fees from industry, unrelated to the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the 1950s through the early ’70s, research began to show that psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin, the active ingredient in magic mushrooms, could be quite effective at treating mental health disorders like addiction.

“In the ’50s and ’60s psychedelics were the cutting edge of psychiatric research,” says Charles Grob, a physician and researcher at UCLA.

But at the same time, many of these substances were taken in uncontrolled settings by large numbers of people, and certain proselytizers (like Timothy Leary) advocated their widespread use. Then President Richard Nixon declared drugs “public enemy No. 1” and the so-called “war on drugs” began. All this combined to give psychedelics a bad name at the time and led to most of them being outlawed. For nearly a generation, science on these substances shut down.

But that’s changing. In the past 20 years or so, a small amount of research has once again begun to focus on these chemicals, showing that they have promise for treating a range of conditions, from addiction to depression and anxiety, says Evan Wood, a psychiatric researcher at the University of British Columbia.

In 2006, researchers at the University of Arizona published a study showing obsessive-compulsive patients who ingested psilocybin had immediate and lasting reductions in problematic symptoms. The same year, Johns Hopkins University physician and researcher Roland Griffiths showed that in healthy volunteers, psilocybin produced lasting benefits like improved mood and peacefulness six months after ingestion. Study participants “made claims to be more sensitive, compassionate, tolerant, to have increased positive relationships, an increased need to serve others,” according to Griffiths. “Those kinds of changes are not delusional, because blinded interviews with family members, friends and work colleagues [confirm these reports].”

Similar work has shown psilocybin can help treat anxiety associated with cancer, at UCLA and New York University. Grob says work by his group and others has shown that psilocybin can help treat “terminal cancer patients with overwhelming existential anxiety, an area that traditional medicine struggles with.” And a study in late 2014 found that LSD permanently reduced anxiety in a small number of patients.

Wood says he’s most excited about research into using psychedelics to treat addiction, and he published a review on September 8 in the Canadian Medical Association Journal covering recent work in this field. One study from earlier this year in the Journal of Psychopharmacology found, for example, that 10 alcoholic patients given psilocybin in a controlled setting had greatly reduced cravings for and intake of alcohol in the months after the treatment. Another study, authored in 2014 by Griffiths and Matthew Johnson at Johns Hopkins and published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology, found the substance helped people give up cigarettes. Twelve out of 15 patients in this small study had given up smoking six months after a psilocybin-assisted therapy session.

Ayahuasca, an Amazonian brew containing dimethyltryptamine that causes hallucinations and often intense spiritual experiences, has also shown promise in treating addictions, besides anxiety and depression, Wood says. Another chemical, called MDMA, the active ingredient in the drug Ecstasy, can help treat post-traumatic stress disorder.

Psychedelics generally are thought to work by allowing individuals to have a spiritual or “mystical” experience, during which time people can have profound realizations that permanently change their behaviors, Wood says. The idea that you can take a medicine one or a few times and become “cured,” or at least significantly helped, conflicts with current standard practices, which often involve taking medications every day for years, or life.

“With even minor mental health conditions like minor depression or anxiety...or more serious problems like addiction, the existing paradigm is to frame these as chronic, lifelong diseases” that require continuous medication with drugs like serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitors, Wood says. But not so with psychedelics, which represent “a total paradigm shift in the way that mental illness is treated,” he adds.

He points out that psychedelics should never be used carelessly, and that the “set and setting” (meaning the dose, mood, environment, company and surroundings) where a person takes them are of paramount importance. That said, when studied under controlled and supervised conditions, these chemicals have not been found to cause lasting negative health consequences, the Canadian Medical Association Journal review noted. All of which adds up to a compelling argument that psychedelics “should be the focus of intensive study for treating mental illness,” Wood says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The only expert quoted is the author of the Canadian Medical Association Journal review article that seems to be the news hook for the story. It would have been interesting to hear a second opinion.
Editor’s note: This review originally stated that that there was no independent source quoted, which is incorrect. The story quotes Dr. Charles Grob who was not involved with the review article that’s the launching point for the story. The rating has been changed to Satisfactory. 
There is also no information about the potential conflicts around such research, and even though such conflicts may be unlikely given the source of drugs studied, a sentence to confirm the independence of the research would have raised the credibility of the article.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“We had outstanding results, and our study, we think, is representative of these treatments in the and ,” said Dr. Thomas G. Brott, director for research at the campus in , Fla., and lead author of the North American study, called Crest (for Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy versus Stenting Trial). “Prior to the Crest trial, we really did not have the best evidence, but these results indicate that we have two very safe and effective methods to prevent stroke.”

Though there are differences in risk between the two procedures and individual variations, he said, “the results from stenting are very comparable to those for carotid surgery.”

But Dr. Martin M. Brown, chief investigator for the European trial, the International Carotid Stenting Study, said that although differences in the groups studied might explain the disparate results, “nobody has really shown stenting is better than surgery, so why choose a stent?”

Dr. Brown added, “Even if Crest shows little difference between the two, there are three other trials that suggest surgery is safer.”

Strokes are the third leading cause of death in the United States and a major cause of disability among adults. Each year, almost 800,000 Americans suffer a stroke, and more than 140,000 die.

Although many patients take drugs like statins and medicine to reduce their risk of stroke, surgical treatment of severe blockages in the carotid artery has been shown to be more effective than medical therapy alone in preventing ischemic strokes caused by a buildup of plaque in the arteries.

The Crest trial, sponsored by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke with additional financing from the stent maker Abbott Vascular, is one of the largest randomized clinical trials to study the two major procedures used to open blocked neck arteries and restore blood flow to the brain.

It included 2,502 patients at more than 100 in the United States and Canada, who were randomly assigned to receive either surgery or stenting over a period of nine years. Most of the patients had an artery blockage greater than 70 percent. The trial included patients who had suffered a stroke or a ministroke and those who were asymptomatic.

The death rate in the trial was very low, but risks varied depending on the procedure. Within the first month after the procedure, 4.1 percent of stent patients had suffered a stroke, compared with 2.3 percent of the surgery patients. But surgery patients were at higher risk for , with 2.3 percent suffering a heart attack in the first 30 days compared with 1.1 percent of stent patients. Strokes had a higher impact on the patient’s quality of life, the study reported.

Younger patients — those under 70 — had better results with stenting, while older patients had better results with surgery, the study found.

Long-term follow-up of patients, which was two and a half years on average but is continuing, found both groups at equal risk of suffering a stroke that should have been prevented by the procedure: 2 percent of those in the stent group compared with 2.4 percent of the surgical patients.

The European trial, which included 1,713 patients randomly assigned to either stent or endarterectomy, found that stent patients were at much higher risk of stroke, death or heart attack in the first 30 days after surgery, with 7.4 percent suffering one of these adverse events, compared with 4 percent of the surgery group.

Among the possible explanations offered for the disparities are that the European study included only symptomatic patients, who may have had more advanced disease, and that the North American trial carefully screened the doctors doing the stenting procedure, including only highly skilled physicians with a lot of experience.

Dr. Walter J. Koroshetz, deputy director of the institute that sponsored the North American trial, said the Crest trial was the first in which the results of stenting and surgery had been found to be equivalent — suggesting that the stent procedure had improved with time.

The most important message is that the overall death rate was extremely low, 0.6 percent, said one of the study’s principal investigators, Dr. Gary S. Roubin, the chairman of cardiovascular medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.

“What this trial has done overwhelmingly,” he said, “is shown that in , with the very skilled surgeons and physicians performing stenting, the outcomes were extremely safe.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It would have been nice to see some perspective from someone who was in no way affiliated with either of these studies–something which the LA Times, in its defense, did provide in its coverage. Nevertheless, in the hierarchy of sourcing priorities, we felt it was most important that the coverage include some kind of European perspective to counterbalance the American voices advocating for stents. The New York Times managed to get a hold of the lead investigator for the European ICSS trial. He made a pretty good case for why one might think twice before opting for a stent instead of open surgery.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Autism spectrum disorders , marked by impaired language, repetitive behaviors, and social difficulties, now affect up to one in 110 children, according to the CDC.

The research needs to be duplicated, Hertz-Picciotto tells WebMD. Still, she says, the finding points to a gene-environment interaction that may possibly help explain some cases of autism.

Taking prenatal vitamins was found even more protective for mothers and children who had a high-risk genetic makeup .

"It appears that women who reported taking prenatal vitamins starting three months prior to conception and through the first month after conception seem to have a reduced chance their child will develop autism ," says study researcher Irva Hertz-Picciotto, PhD, professor of epidemiology and environmental health at the MIND Institute and Department of Public Health, University of California, Davis.

June 1, 2011 -- Taking prenatal vitamins may reduce the risk of having a child with autism , new research shows.

The researchers looked at three groups of children, all aged 2 to 5. All were enrolled in the CHARGE study (CHildhood Autism Risks from Genetics and Environment) from 2003 to 2009. The groups included:

Mothers reported their use of prenatal vitamins or other supplements before, during, and after pregnancy.

The researchers collected blood from all family members to evaluate their genetic makeup.

They focused on genes known to play a role in folate metabolism. These genes include MTHFR and COMT as well as others. Folate and other B vitamins are crucial to brain development.

Overall, Hertz-Picciotto says, "For the women who didn't take prenatal vitamins, there was about a 60% higher risk of having a child with autism."

The risk rose if the mothers or the children had a high-risk gene form.

The mothers with the high-risk form of MTHFR had a 4.5 times higher chance of a child developing autism, she says, than mothers without this high-risk form who did take the prenatal vitamins.

Children who had the high-risk COMT gene form were seven times as likely to have autism as children without it whose mothers did take the vitamins.

"Overall, it does look like there are at least a couple of genes here, either the mother's genotype or the child's genotype, that show this interaction ... magnifying the size of the effect from not taking the vitamins," Hertz-Picciotto says.

Exactly why the prenatal vitamins may protect against autism is not clear, she says. It may be that the vitamins contribute to high levels of folate.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes an independent expert who was not involved with the research and who is identified as working for an advocacy group. There don’t seem to be any other potential conflicts to disclose.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“I’m very favorably impressed they were able to pull this study off so successfully, and it clearly shows the importance of early intervention,” said Dr. William T. Carpenter, a professor of psychiatry at the University of Maryland School of Medicine, who was not involved in the study.

Dr. Mary E. Olson, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, who has worked to promote approaches to psychosis that are less reliant on drugs, said the combined treatment had a lot in common with Open Dialogue, a Finnish program developed in the 1980s. “These are zeitgeist ideas, and I think it’s thrilling that this trial got such good results,” Dr. Olson said.

In the new study, doctors used the medications as part of a package of treatments and worked to keep the doses as low as possible minimizing their bad effects. The sprawling research team, led by Dr. John M. Kane, chairman of the psychiatry department at Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, randomly assigned 34 community care clinics in 21 states to provide either treatment as usual, or the combined package.

The team trained staff members at the selected clinics to deliver that package, and it included three elements in addition to the medication. First, help with work or school such as assistance in deciding which classes or opportunities are most appropriate, given a person’s symptoms. Second, education for family members to increase their understanding of the disorder. And finally, one-on-one talk therapy in which the person with the diagnosis learns tools to build social relationships, reduce substance use and help manage the symptoms, which include mood problems as well as hallucinations and delusions.

For example, some patients can learn to defuse the voices in their head — depending on the severity of the episode — by ignoring them or talking back. The team recruited 404 people with first-episode psychosis, mostly diagnosed in their late teens or 20s. About half got the combined approach and half received treatment as usual. Clinicians monitored both groups using standardized checklists that rate symptom severity and quality of life, like whether a person is working, and how well he or she is getting along with family members.

The group that started on the combined treatment scored, on average, more poorly on both measures at the beginning of the trial. Over two years, both groups showed steady improvement. But by the end, those who had been in the combined program had more symptom relief, and were functioning better as well.The researchers expect to have lowered average doses in the combined program but had not yet finished analyzing that data.

“One way to think about it is, if you look at the people who did the best — those we caught earliest after their first episode — their improvement by the end was easily noticeable by friends and family,” Dr. Kane said. The gains for those in typical treatment were apparent to doctors, but much less obvious.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes experts who were not authors on the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Columbus, OH. Good news for the millions of people who suffer from skin wounds that won’t heal. A team of researchers at The Ohio State University has brought a potentially transformative solution to the problem by creating a portable adhesive patch that drives a continuous, small electrical current to stimulate healing and reduce the risk of infection.

Nearly 7 million Americans have chronic wounds – typically a result of diabetes, obesity or other conditions that impact circulation – costing the healthcare system nearly $25 billion each year. The non-healing wounds are painful, can permanently damage nerves, prevent mobility and in extreme cases, cause infection that can lead to death.

The patch’s design significantly advances existing FDA-approved wireless electroceutical dressing (WED) that harnesses the body’s innate response to injury to help wounds heal.

“A wound naturally produces its own electrical fields that help reduce bacteria and promote cell regeneration; however, this function is likely impaired in chronic wounds,” said Sashwati Roy, PhD, an Associate Professor in the Department of Surgery at Ohio State’s College of Medicine. “The prototype dressing mimics this physiological process, and while it has proven to create an optimal environment where chronic wounds can heal, we are always looking for new ways to keep pathogens under better control.”

Roy notes that chronic wounds are particularly susceptible to infection because bacteria, which at times are free floating within a wound – can sometimes mobilize, creating colonies covered by a thick sticky coating called a biofilm. The immune system cannot penetrate the biofilm, and antibiotics can’t get in either – causing constant inflammation and low-level infection that can further dampen the healing process.

Now, with support from Ohio State’s Center for Clinical and Translational Science (CCTS), researchers from both the College of Engineering and the College of Medicine are taking the technology to the next level. Working with a mechanical and aerospace engineering team led by Shaurya Prakash, PhD and Vish Subramaniam, PhD, the scientists have optimized the bandage’s design and the amount of electrical current delivered. Like present WEDs, the new prototype is flexible, portable and self-contained. Made of silk and silver, the experimental dressing includes a self-contained battery that delivers a continuous, safe, low-level electrical current to the injury. “We’re hoping this new design may allow electric fields and currents to penetrate more deeply into wounds, and really get to where these biofilms may be hiding,” said Subramaniam, chair of the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Ohio State. “The destruction of the biofilm would enable antibiotics to start killing off bacteria, reduce chronic inflammation and allow the body’s natural immune response to work more effectively. Bacteria are known to quickly acquire resistance against antibiotics, but to our knowledge, bacteria do not develop resistance against electroceuticals.” To test the experimental design, Roy and a team of scientists developed an animal model to mimic the skin function of a person suffering from metabolic syndrome – obesity, high blood pressure, high blood sugar - which mirrors the type of patient that typically develops chronic wounds. Animal models had skin injuries infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus or Acinetobacter baumannii, three different types of bacteria that commonly infect wounds and develop biofilms that are treatment resistant.

Early results, which were presented at the Wound Healing Society’s Annual Meeting in April 2016 indicate that infected wounds covered by the experimental bioelectric dressing healed better and more quickly than those covered with a plain dressing that is commonly used in the care of wounds today. Scientists hypothesize that the electrical currents may disrupt bacteria in two ways: by interrupting the production of chemical messages that instruct bacteria to develop biofilms and by weakening the molecular structure of existing biofilms, potentially making them more susceptible to antibiotics or the body’s natural immune response. The team’s next move is to focus on the bioelectric bandage as a treatment for chronic wounds in a patient population; however, the technology could also be used to treat acute injuries. Roy also notes that the U. S. Department of Defense is very interested in the dressing as a temporary measure to help prevent infection in soldiers wounded on the battle front.

“This technology has a long shelf life and is compact enough to be put into any field medical kit. It could be applied immediately to wounds help keep bacteria from mobilizing and start promoting healing until the soldier could be transported to a facility for more intensive medical care.”

The team already has interest from several industry partners, and is hoping to begin testing the new technology in patients before the end of the year to determine optimal treatment duration and more about the healing effects of electrical fields on skin cells on a molecular level.

The Ohio State University Center for Clinical and Translational Science (CCTS) is funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) program (UL1TR001070, KL2TR001068, TL1TR001069) The CTSA program is led by the NIH’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS). The content of this release is solely the responsibility of the CCTS and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release identifies the funder of this work as the National Institute of Health, and notes that “the team already has interest from several industry partners.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Surgery For Sinus Misery: Better, But Still No Cure

Surgeon Ralph Metson stares at a big video screen that shows, with amazing clarity, the inside of Nancy Butler's nasal passages.

A weird glow lights up her nose and cheek from within. It comes from the fiber-optic tip of Metson's endoscope, which also holds a high-res camera lens.

On the monitor, you can see the miniature instruments he's using to cut away inflamed tissue and snip away pieces of eggshell-thin bone that block Butler's sinuses and give her nonstop headaches. To avoid poking through to the brain or into the orbit of an eye, there's a device around the patient's head with a guidance system that tells Metson, in three dimensions, exactly where his sharp instruments are on a CT scan of Butler's head.

After an hour or so of this delicate work, Metson has opened up the 72-year-old woman's sinuses so they can drain. "The next time she gets a cold," he says, "her membranes are not going to swell and block the sinuses the way they have in the past. They're going to stay open."

This is modern sinus surgery. It's a lot less brutal than the old days -- back in the early 1980s. Then, surgeons cut through the face and mouth, scraped out the sinuses and left patients bruised and scarred. Often they were no better off, sometimes worse.

Advances since then have persuaded more doctors to do sinus surgery. So a lot more people are getting it -- around 300,000 a year, making it one of the most common operations.

But how good is it, in terms of giving patients relief from the pain, breathing difficulty and fatigue of chronic sinusitis?

"Surgery is usually not curative," Metson says. "But probably in over 90 percent of the cases, it does significantly improve a patient's quality of life. He or she will still have infections after surgery. But hopefully they'll be less frequent, less severe and shorter in duration. A brief course of antibiotics will work better after surgery."

Judy Foreman, another of Metson's patients, offers an example of both how surgery can help -- and why patients' expectations shouldn't be too high.

Foreman had sinus surgery two years ago, when she was 64, after trying everything else. (See sidebar.) She rinsed out her sinuses faithfully with saltwater. She tried decongestants, antihistamines and steroid nasal sprays. Over and over, Metson prescribed antibiotics.

For about 80 percent of patients, these nonsurgical alternatives manage the problem adequately, Metson says. But Foreman was in the other 20 percent.

Foreman writes a health column for The Boston Globe and other newspapers, so she's an unusually well-informed patient. "I read an article about people feeling less tired all the time after having had surgery, and I thought, boy, I would really like that," she says.

When she asked Metson about surgery, he said most people with her degree of sinus problems would have had it long before.

"I thought, 'OK, so I'm just being scared,' " Foreman says. She didn't like to think of someone sticking sharp instruments up her nose and cutting away delicate tissue. But when she overcame her squeamishness and finally had the operation, she found it wasn't nearly as bad as she thought it would be.

"It's uncomfortable," she reports. "Afterwards you have these cotton wads up your nose and, of course, you can't breathe with all this stuff in your nose." But she didn't hurt very much. "I was so glad to get it over with that I would say the pain was not bad at all."

And the outcome? Now she has three or four sinus infections a year instead of five or more. They're not as bad as before. Still, she's disappointed.

"I'm not like a person without this problem," she says. "I get a cold and I freak out because I know it's going to be there for three weeks. Other people get it and they're done in five days."

Foreman wrote a column about her surgery. Two years later, she's still getting e-mail from people asking whether they should have it.

"I say, 'Go for it!' Because I think it's made enough of a difference that I'm glad I did it," Foreman says. She'd consider a second operation, but Metson says usually that's advised only for patients with nasal polyps that regrow -- not a problem she has.

Metson says most of his patients do better than Foreman. But surgery rarely cures them. That's because surgery doesn't touch the root cause of chronic sinusitis.

Surgeons can cut away bone and membranes that block sinuses. But they can't stop the inflammation some people are prone to, and that inflammation can cause new obstructions.

To tackle that problem, researchers have discovered five genes involved in that inflammatory process. Metson hopes drugs will be developed to regulate those genes.

"And if we can use those as novel targets for, let's say, nasal sprays or medications, we may be able to treat people like Judy without surgery," Metson says. "Or we'll do surgery and follow it up after surgery with these sprays."

That, he says, will be the next big advance in sinus treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story relies heavily on the perspective of Judy Foreman, the health columnist and patient, and her surgeon, Ralph Metson, neither of whom have any conflicts of interest that we could identify. While it would have been nice to hear from an expert who wasn’t involved in this particular case, the story does enough to satisfy the criterion. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 22, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- In women who have had breast cancer, annual mammograms help detect second breast cancers, but they're not as effective in women who have never had the disease, new research suggests.

"Screening mammography does work well in women with a history of breast cancer, so they should continue to get their annual screening mammogram," said Diana Miglioretti, senior investigator at Group Health Research Institute in Seattle and a co-author of the new research. "But they also need to remain vigilant because they are at increased risk of cancers not detected on mammography that show up between mammograms."

In their study, published in the Feb. 23 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, Miglioretti and her colleagues found that false positives and interval cancers were both higher in women with a history of breast cancer than in those without such history. False positives are an initial finding of cancer that turns out to be benign based on additional testing. Interval cancers are those found between mammograms, either through additional tests or symptoms.

The researchers evaluated 12 years of data from 58,870 screening mammograms in 19,078 women with early-stage breast cancer and an equal number of mammograms in another 55,315 women who had never had breast cancer. The women were matched on such factors as age and breast density, a risk factor for cancer, with higher density increasing risk.

Within a year of the screening, 655 cancers were found in women with a breast cancer history and 342 in those without.

Mammograms had detected 76.5 percent of the cancers in women who had never had breast cancer and 65.4 percent in those who had previously had the disease. As for false positives, 1 percent of the women without a history of breast cancer were referred for biopsy but ended up being cancer-free, compared with 1.7 percent of those with a breast cancer history.

The interval cancer rate was 3.6 per 1,000 screenings in those with a history and 1.4 per 1,000 in those without, the investigators found.

Women with a history of breast cancer were also more likely to be called back for additional imaging or biopsies: 18 percent called back, compared with 8.3 percent of the others.

"I think it's mostly positive news," Miglioretti said. "Of the ones that are missed, most of them are early stage." It points to the need, she said, for women to remain vigilant about screening after their breast cancer treatment -- and to report any symptoms to their doctor immediately.

Dr. William Audeh, medical director of the Samuel Oschin Cancer Center and the Wasserman Breast Cancer Risk Reduction Program at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, described the findings as "not at all surprising." He reviewed the study but was not involved in it.

After surgery and radiation, he said, a woman's breasts have changed, and there is a greater chance that a radiologist will think that something is abnormal simply because of the changes. "That helps explain the false positives," Audeh said.

And though mammography did not catch all cancers in the women with a breast cancer history, the study still points out the value of the test, he said.

Robert Smith, director of cancer screening for the American Cancer Society, agreed.

"Despite poorer performance compared with women without a prior history of breast cancer, overall screening mammography was effective at detecting the majority of breast cancer in women with a [history] at an early favorable stage, with the majority of tumors being diagnosed as ductal carcinoma in situ or stage 1," Smith said.

A trend among cancer specialists, Audeh said, is to tailor follow-up for a woman who has had breast cancer. For those who have dense breasts and are younger than 50, for example, "we can alternate mammograms with breast MRIs," with one of the tests every six months, he said.

WomensHealth.gov has more on mammograms.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Quotes from two independent sources are included in the article.  Dr. William Audeh, director of the Wasserman Breast Cancer Risk Reduction Program at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, presents possible explanations for some of the higher false positives among women with a personal history of breast cancer.  Quotes from both Dr. Audeh and Dr. Robert Smith, director of cancer screening for the American Cancer Society, point out that screening mammography may not have been as effective among women with a personal history of breast cancer as it was in those without a breast cancer diagnosis but that most of the cancers detected were stage I or ductal carcinoma in situ, a non-invasive breast cancer. The article could have noted that study authors declared no conflicts of interest and  that the study was funded by a grant from the National Cancer Institute.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The pocket-watch-sized device is billed as "a pacemaker for the brain," the newest cutting-edge treatment for as many as 4 million adults whose severe depression is not relieved by psychotherapy, drugs or even shock treatments.

Since its approval under unusual circumstances eight months ago by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), more than 550 Americans have undergone surgery to have a vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) implanted in their chests to activate parts of their brains. Another 7,000 people -- aided by a network of nurses hired by Cyberonics, the Houston-based manufacturer of the device -- are seeking approval from their insurance companies for the $25,000 operation.

More than 3,700 psychiatrists, including doctors affiliated with Suburban, Georgetown, Sheppard Pratt and Howard University hospitals, have been trained in the use of VNS, the first device ever approved to treat depression. It consists of a battery-operated generator attached to an electrode implanted in the vagus nerve in the neck. The generator emits regular pulses of electricity that are supposed to stimulate serotonin and other brain chemicals believed to regulate mood, according to Cyberonics.

Yet despite the imprimatur of the FDA and an aggressive marketing campaign mounted by the company, the most basic question about the treatment remains unanswered: Does it work? Is VNS a lifesaving treatment for chronic depression, as some patients and doctors maintain, or an unproven and potentially harmful treatment based on flimsy science, as critics contend?

At the heart of the debate is this: The only rigorous clinical trial of the device -- which is approved to treat severe epilepsy -- failed to demonstrate effectiveness in alleviating depression. That study involved 235 patients, all of whom received the device, which was turned on in only half the group. At the end of three months, there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups.

A second study of 174 VNS recipients found that 30 percent showed significant improvement after one year. Because that study lacked a control group and because patients received other depression treatments after the device was implanted, there is no way to know whether the device was responsible. For years experts have known that depression -- unlike, say, type 1 diabetes -- can get better without treatment.

Last July, a top FDA official, citing the lack of alternatives for severely depressed patients, overruled unanimous opposition by 20 members of his staff and approved the device as a depression treatment for adults who had failed four other treatments.

FDA spokesman Stephen King said that VNS met federal standards for medical devices, which are less stringent than those governing drugs, and might help adults who had exhausted other options and were at a high risk of suicide. Cyberonics officials testified that 30,000 people commit suicide annually, most of whom were diagnosed with severe depression. The same rationale had led an FDA advisory panel in 2004 to approve the device by a 5-2 vote.

To Philadelphia psychiatrist Richard P. Malone, a member of the panel who voted against approval, such arguments are specious.

"Pancreatic cancer is a hopeless condition" with a much higher death rate than chronic depression, said Malone, a professor of psychiatry at Drexel University. "And we have as much evidence that this works for pancreatic cancer as it does for depression. Why not use it for that?"

Some patients with chronic depression say they were willing to try anything that promised relief. Graphic artist Colleen Kelly decided in 2000 that she had nothing to lose by enrolling in an experimental study of VNS. Now 42, Kelly, who lives in Prince George's County, said dozens of medications had not helped her for long or had caused severe reactions. Nearly three dozen electroshock treatments failed to work and wiped out years of memories, she said.

VNS gave Kelly three "very good years," she said, and then her depression returned. "The past year has been abysmal," said Kelly, who urged the FDA advisory panel to approve the device. "I still keep hoping it's going to help me in some way."

But critics say they are not persuaded by Cyberonics's theory of how VNS works. The company's Web site says that "preliminary imaging studies suggest that VNS Therapy affects many areas of the brain implicated in mood regulation."

But Malone called the theory "all speculative."

"This almost has a feel of 18th-century psychiatry -- having a device and not being able to show how it works," he said.

Washington psychiatrist Wayne Blackmon agreed. "Psychiatry has been burned again and again by overextravagant claims" about devices and psychosurgery, said Blackmon, a lawyer and a past president of the D.C. Medical Society. "The history of psychiatry is plagued by psychiatrists jumping the gun because these poor people are suffering and the argument is we have to do something."

The device has also attracted attention on Capitol Hill, where the Senate Finance Committee has spent two years looking into decision-making at the FDA.

Last month committee chairman Charles E. Grassley (R-Iowa), whose panel issued a report highly critical of the agency's approval of VNS, said he was concerned that patients and their doctors were not being adequately informed about the risks of VNS, which include cardiovascular problems that can be life-threatening.

Grassley questioned whether Medicare and Medicaid should pay for the device, which costs $15,000 and must be replaced every five years or so when the battery runs low. So far neither the federal government nor private insurers have agreed to cover VNS for depression on a routine basis, although many have approved individual cases.

Last week, BlueCross BlueShield of Alabama announced it would pay for VNS treatment in chronically depressed patients who had failed four previous treatments.

Two recent technology assessments by major insurance companies have concluded there is insufficient evidence to find that VNS works for depression. A report by Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, an influential mental health insurer in Boston, called it "experimental, investigational and unproven."

Robert "Skip" Cummins, Cyberonics's CEO, dismissed such criticism and said his company, whose sole product is VNS, faced similar skepticism after the device was approved for epilepsy in 1997.

He noted that VNS is now accepted by insurers as a treatment for intractable seizures, which can be fatal if they are not controlled. About 35,000 epilepsy patients have received the implant.

Many FDA "regulators, politicians and third-party payers" know little about resistant depression, Cummins said. "Hundreds of psychiatric thought leaders and patients are rallying around the device" for "the worst of the worst" cases of depression, he said.

"There is nothing out there as safe and effective," Cummins said, adding that a company-financed study showed that the effectiveness of VNS improved over time. He added that he has a personal interest in intractable depression because his mother and grandfather committed suicide.

New York psychiatrist T. Byram Karasu, chairman of the task force that writes the section on depression for psychiatry's diagnostic and statistical manual, said that even though the effectiveness of VNS is uncertain, it appeals to patients and their psychiatrists.

In its marketing campaign, Cyberonics notes that VNS treatment does not cause the weight gain associated with antidepressants and the confusion and memory loss common after electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), psychiatry's term for shock treatments.

"VNS has a quality of cardiac surgery to it, a certain cachet," and it lacks the stigma of shock treatments, said Karasu, adding that six of his patients adamantly refused ECT and opted instead for VNS. "No one would know you didn't get a defibrillator."

For Paulo Negro's patients, the issue is not stigma, but options. Negro, chief of behavioral health services at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, said his VNS patients have tried everything, but their depression always recurred.

"What would you do if you've not been getting better for years?" asked Negro. "It's a chance to get better. I'd take it."

That's what Charles E. Donovan III did. The St. Louis resident credits the implant he received five years ago with saving his life. At the time, the Georgetown University graduate said he was so depressed he told his doctor he hoped to die on the operating table.

But in the weeks after surgery, Donovan said, he started to feel better. Although he takes antidepressants, Donovan said, he is sure drugs are not responsible, because they hadn't helped him previously.

Donovan, who is featured on the Cyberonics Web site, said he has no financial relationship with the company. He recently self-published a book about his experiences, entitled "Out of the Black Hole," and runs a pro-VNS Web site for patients. "I am so humbled by this treatment and grateful," he said.

Others have had far less positive experiences. Among them is Katherine V. Coram, 58, of Silver Spring who got the implant in the same study as Donovan. Coram said she knew she was in the group with the activated device because she could feel it going off, she said. She frequently lost her voice while she was talking and felt a persistent constriction in the back of her throat. Both are common side effects of VNS treatment.

Coram said the device seemed to help a bit at first, but when the doctor turned up the settings, she felt suicidal for the first time in years. Worsening depression and suicide attempts were reported by one-third of patients in one study funded by Cyberonics, according to data presented to the FDA.

Last year Coram said she had the generator removed from her chest because it wasn't helping. The electrodes in her neck must remain forever; doctors tell VNS patients that removing them is too risky because tissue grows around them As a result, VNS recipients cannot undergo a full body MRI or therapeutic ultrasound.

"I'm still angry about the whole thing," said Coram, who said she regrets getting the implant and currently relies on the standby treatments: psychotherapy and antidepressants.

"You get desperate when you've been depressed for years," she said. "This sounds benign, like a pacemaker. My crusade is for people to know a lot more about it before they sign up." ·
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Patients, providers, FDA spokesperson, device manufacturer, skeptics and supporters are interviewed or cited.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study authored by scientists from the American Cancer Society, the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, the U.S. National Cancer Institute, and more than 20 other medical centers and organizations finds that higher circulating vitamin D concentrations are significantly associated with lower colorectal cancer risk. This study strengthens the evidence, previously considered inconclusive, for a protective relationship. Optimal vitamin D concentrations for colorectal cancer prevention may be higher than the current National Academy of Medicine recommendations, which are based only on bone health. The study appears online in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

Vitamin D, known for its role in maintaining bone health, is hypothesized to lower colorectal cancer risk via several pathways related to cell growth and regulation. Previous prospective studies have reported inconsistent results for whether higher concentrations of circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D, the accepted measure of vitamin D status, are linked to lower risk of colorectal cancer. The few randomized clinical trials of vitamin D supplementation and colorectal cancer completed thus far have not shown an effect; but study size, supplementation duration, and compliance may have contributed to their null findings.

"To address inconsistencies in prior studies on vitamin D and to investigate associations in population subgroups, we analyzed participant-level data, collected before colorectal cancer diagnosis, from 17 prospective cohorts and used standardized criteria across the studies," said Stephanie Smith-Warner, PhD, an epidemiologist at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and co-senior author on the article. The analysis included over 5,700 colorectal cancer cases and 7,100 controls from the United States, Europe, and Asia. A single, widely accepted assay and laboratory was used for new vitamin D measurements and calibration of existing vitamin D measurements. "In the past, substantial differences between assays made it difficult to integrate vitamin D data from different studies," explained Regina G. Ziegler, PhD, a National Cancer Institute epidemiologist and co-senior author on the article. "This calibration approach enabled us to systematically explore risk over the broad range of vitamin D levels seen internationally."

Compared to participants with circulating vitamin D concentrations considered sufficient for bone health, those with deficient concentrations of vitamin D had a 31% higher risk of colorectal cancer during follow-up, which averaged 5.5 years (range: 1 - 25 years). Similarly, concentrations above bone health sufficiency were associated with a 22% lower risk. However, risk did not continue to decline at the highest concentrations. These associations persisted even after adjusting for known colorectal cancer risk factors. Protective associations were seen in all subgroups examined. However, the association was noticeably stronger in women than men at concentrations above bone health sufficiency. The lifetime risk of colorectal cancer is 4.2% (1 in 24) in women and 4.5% (1 in 22) in men. Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer and third leading cause of cancer-related deaths in both men and women in the United States, with about 140,250 new cases and 50,630 deaths expected during 2018.

"Currently, health agencies do not recommend vitamin D for the prevention of colorectal cancer," said Marji L. McCullough, ScD, American Cancer Society epidemiologist and co-first author of the study. "This study adds new information that agencies can use when reviewing evidence for vitamin D guidance and suggests that the concentrations recommended for bone health may be lower than would be optimal for colorectal cancer prevention."

Vitamin D can be obtained in the diet, particularly from fortified foods, from supplements, and from sun exposure. Experts recommend vitamin D be obtained through diet whenever possible because excessive ultraviolet radiation is a major risk factor for skin cancer.

Article: Circulating Vitamin D and Colorectal Cancer Risk: An International Pooling Project of 17 Cohorts. JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst doi: 10.1093/jnci/djy087
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Vitamin D supplement manufacturers appeared to play no role in the analysis, and the funders are from the American Cancer Society, the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, and the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- For Carlton Davis, "the" always seemed to come out as "hte." Frequently having problems in school, he once threw a typewriter out of his fourth-floor window at college after making the "hte" mistake yet again.

Abby Schwartz can relate. She would often mix up the letters d and b, sounding out certain words to make make sense of them. Things have gotten better, but she'll still make the occasional "b-d" or "5-2" flip. Davis, now 66, also still mixes up the digits of phone numbers.

"(Reading) would be slow. It wouldn't be enjoyable. I would lose my place," said Abby, 13, of Lexington, Massachusetts. "There were times when I would yell at myself: 'I can't do this. I can't do this. I can't do this.' "

Abby and Davis, like an estimated 5 percent to 20 percent of the population, have struggled with dyslexia, a condition that, broadly speaking, hinders a person's ability to interpret language.

Scientists have recently made headway in understanding what's going on in the brain of a person with dyslexia, which has not been well understood. New research suggests it may be possible to tell from a brain scan whether a dyslexic child's reading ability will improve over a few years. It goes along with the general trend of personalized medicine, in which genetic tests, brain scans and other tests can increasingly help predict the conditions for which a particular individual is at risk.

And a separate recent study found that some dyslexics may have a heightened understanding of space, despite an impairment in language.

In dyslexia, also called developmental reading disorder, the brain doesn't properly recognize or process symbols. Children with this condition may find reading comprehension difficult because they don't connect sounds with letters and can't recognize words well. Celebrities including Whoopi Goldberg, Cher and Henry Winkler (the "Fonz") have made their dyslexia publicly known, and great artists such as Pablo Picasso are said to have had it.

Some children with the disorder can "compensate," or read fairly normally, but perhaps more slowly than their peers, by adulthood. It is hard to know who will be able to improve reading skills over time, and how much extra help is necessary.

A study led by Fumiko Hoeft, psychiatry researcher at Stanford University School of Medicine, used brain imaging to answer this question. Her study followed 25 children with dyslexia and 20 children without dyslexia over a 2½-year period.

The researchers found greater activation and connectivity in the brain's right hemisphere among dyslexic children who showed greater improvement in reading after the 2½ years. They used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study this phenomenon.

In general, much of the language comprehension and processing that goes on in the brain happens in the left hemisphere, but there is some right hemisphere involvement also. Hoeft's study suggests that people with dyslexia who go on to read fairly normally are using a part of the right hemisphere in reading tasks more than the average person would.

If made widely available, this kind of brain scan could be an important complement to the assessments -- based on reading and behavior -- already available for diagnosing dyslexia, Hoeft said. As this usage of fMRI becomes more useful and commonplace, the high cost per scan would go down, she said.

Rebecca Branstetter, psychologist who blogs at Notes from the School Psychologist, says this dyslexia brain scan could provide useful information, but it doesn't highlight environmental factors -- such as the quality of instruction in the child's classroom -- that could contribute to reading problems.

Abby's father, Edward Schwartz, fears that this tool would just add to a child's anxiety about the testing process. The potential to alarm a child isn't worth it, and he doesn't trust that this method would offer definitive information.

"The kids (are) much more likely to feel like they're broken in some way," Schwartz said. Abby, he recalls, "didn't like it to be referred to as a 'learning disability.' She was happy when people offered her alternative ways to think about it."

Guillermo Tilley, the father of 7-year-old Nate, who has dyslexia, similarly would not want his son to have the fMRI.

"It would taint my interpretation of who Nate is and his struggle with dyslexia," Tilley said.

Of course, the results of the study are only preliminary. Participants included 25 children with dyslexia and 20 children without dyslexia, which is too small a sample size to prove anything, although still respectable when it comes to neuroimaging studies. Another important limitation in the study is that some children in the study did receive tutoring or reading interventions, to which they were not randomly assigned. A larger trial that controlled for remediations would offer more conclusive results. But this one found that receiving a remediation did not appear to affect improvement in reading abilities.

Here's another insight about dyslexia: men with the condition may have enhanced visual-spatial abilities, according to a study in the journal Learning and Individual Differences. This was another small study -- 20 dyslexic volunteers and 21 participants without the condition -- testing how people identify shapes, navigate a virtual environment, and do other tasks involving spatial reasoning.

Davis, a noted architect and writer in the Los Angeles area, believes he fits that category. He gets thrown off by pure mathematics, but he's good at anything involving spatial relationships and design.

And those kinds of skills should be taken advantage of in school, said Wendy Weiner, principal of the arts-focused Conservatory Prep in Davie, Florida, and mother of a dyslexic child.

"If they can create projects -- instead of drawing a picture of a room, if they can make a model of a room -- they will generally do it pretty much to scale because they can visualize things very clearly," she said.

Because of this, Weiner said, three-dimensional letters and numbers, perhaps made out of plastic or clay, help a dyslexic child grasp the shapes better. Holding a "7" upright in your hand, you're less likely to view it sideways as a "V," she said.

The most important intervention is a direct, explicit teaching of phonics, or how symbols correspond with sounds, Branstetter said. The sooner it can be detected, the better. A child's personality can also factor in: Some persist despite frustration better than others. Parents should speak to their school psychologists about the best plan of action, she said.

For Abby, a breakthrough moment came at age 9: She started reading voraciously, and today reads well above the seventh-grade level. She'd had good tutors and plenty of support from her parents, but it also took self-confidence for her to make herself read on her own, she said.

As for Davis, he'd never heard of dyslexia until a friend brought it up when he was 34, and then went through training at a learning development center. Using computers for writing has helped him tremendously -- especially spell-check.

"I know a lot of people who have trouble reading, as I did when I was a kid, are dyslexic," he said. "It is an issue that certainly holds back a lot of kids, because of their inability to do certain things."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 



The story does include independent experts. Although it does not discuss conflicts of interest, the authors of the main study declared no conflicts and reported that their study was supported by a number of grants from public agencies and foundations, though the baseline assessment of the participants was supported by a company that markets treatment interventions for people with dyslexia. One troubling point: the story describes one person who claims to have been helped by “training at a learning development center.” If this individual was associated with the company that helped sponsor this research, the story should have disclosed that connection.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study could change the way doctors treat patients at high risk for skin cancer. It doesn't involve any high-priced new pharmaceuticals -- the key may be an over-the-counter vitamin supplement that costs less than $10 a month.

Researchers found that a form of vitamin B3 called nicotinamide could help reduce the chance of skin cancer recurring in patients who've had it before. (Another popular form of Vitamin B3 called niacin was not used in this study.)

For the study, researchers in Australia looked at nearly 400 people who had had at least two non-melanoma skin cancers. They found patients who took vitamin B3 twice a day cut their chances of developing new skin cancers by 23 percent.

"That's a dramatic number," Dr. David Agus, director of USC's Norris Westside Cancer Center, told "CBS This Morning." "It could make a major impact."

Dr. Jae Jung, a dermatologist at City of Hope cancer center in Duarte, California, agreed. "If you can reduce the new skin cancer rates for these patients, it would be an enormous benefit," she told CBS News.

How does it work? Sunlight's ultraviolet (UV) rays can damage the DNA in skin cells, increasing the risk for skin cancer. Researchers say vitamin B3 gives skin cells an energy boost -- "turns back on the immune system," in Agus's words -- helping them repair the damage.

Nearly 5 million people are treated for skin cancer in the U.S. each year, and the Skin Cancer Foundation says 1 out of 5 Americans will develop skin cancer in their lifetime.

The two most common forms of the disease, basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, can usually be treated successfully. The most dangerous type, melanoma, occurs in about 73,000 people in the U.S. each year and kills more than 9,900.

One patient who could benefit from the vitamin treatment is Charity Wiese, who has been diagnosed with skin cancer more than two dozen times in the last five years. She said she's had "quite a few on the top of my head, a few on the back of my head, one behind each ear," even though she tries to stay out of the sun. Wiese had leukemia as a teenager and underwent radiation therapy, which put her at high risk for skin cancer later in life.

Wiese thinks the vitamin study sounds promising. "I am absolutely willing to try it and hope for the best," she said.

Doctors involved in the study are excited by their findings on vitamin B3 nicotinamide. "It's safe, it's almost obscenely inexpensive, and it's already widely commercially available," Dr. Diona Damian, the senior author of the study and a professor of dermatology at the University of Sydney, told HealthDay.

But she said more reserach is needed to see if everyone benefits from it. "It's not something we'd recommend at this stage for the general population," Damian said. She also noted that the benefits appear to wear off when patients stop taking the supplements.

Results of the study are being presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology later this month.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two independent sources are quoted in this story about the study. But as with AP’s coverage, the quotes offered here provide little in the way of substantive analysis.
But that’s one of the pitfalls of reporting on abstracts that haven’t even been presented to a scientific conference yet, much less published. It’s almost impossible to get truly substantive analysis because the data haven’t been adequately scrutinized.
We’ll award a borderline Satisfactory, however, since their comments do relate specifically to the expected impact of the benefit reported in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Exposing sleeping people to a series of short flashing lights at night might help them adjust more quickly to time zone changes, according to a new U.S. study.

In experiments, the technique – which is based on the way non-visual parts of the brain respond to light – was much more effective than sustained bright light similar to that from devices sometimes used to combat sleep disorders or seasonal depression.

“Jet lag itself is really a nuisance syndrome as it is self-resolving,” said senior author Jamie Zeitzer, assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the Stanford University School of Medicine in California.

Zeitzer was on the committee that removed jet lag as a “disease” from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), the guide that psychiatrists use to diagnose mental illnesses.

“However, the treatments that are developed for jet lag can be used for less prevalent, though far more significant societal problems including delayed sleep in teens (in whom we have an ongoing clinical trial using the flash technique) and shift workers who try to flip between a night time schedule for work and a day time schedule for leisure,” he told Reuters Health by email.

The study included 39 people, 31 of whom were exposed to a series of two-millisecond light flashes with changing intervals while sleeping, and eight of whom were exposed to 60 minutes of continuous bright light.

A series of flashes similar to a camera flash delivered every 10 seconds over a 60-minute period delayed sleepiness by two hours, compared to a 36-minute delay for those exposed to continuous light for an hour, according to the results published in the Journal of Clinical Investigation.

“In essence, using the night before you traveled from California to N.Y. would move your circadian system two-thirds of the way there before you even left,” Zeitzer said.

Arriving in New York, you would be synced to the local time after one day, he said.

“The circadian clock is the central conductor of the many clocks that are found in nearly all tissues of your body,” Zeitzer said. “This clock remains synchronized with the external day through regular exposure to light.”

Nighttime flashes change the timing of the circadian clock, he said.

“For moving your system to a later time, such as would be necessary when traveling East-to-West, light during the first few hours of the night is ideal,” he said. “For moving your system to an earlier time, such as would be necessary when traveling West-to-East, light during the last few hours of the night is ideal.”

The night flashes require special technology and equipment, beyond just a smartphone, which are still in development, Zeitzer said.

In a previous study, the short flashes of light at night did not interrupt sleep or reduce its quality, he added.

“This is one of the real advantages of this system - you can change circadian timing while you sleep, without interfering with sleep,” he said.

Mistiming light therapy can make jet lag worse, cautioned Anna Wirz-Justice, professor emeritus at the Center for Chronobiology at the University of Basel in Switzerland, who was not part of the new study.

As for frequent flyers trying this themselves, it is “far too early – neither the methodology is available outside research, nor any guidance about safety, nor tests of simulated jet lag in an appropriate ‘realistic’ protocol,” Wirz-Justice told Reuters Health by email.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This article scores well on consulting an independent source by quoting a researcher who was not part of the study, Anna Wirz-Justice, professor emeritus at the Center for Chronobiology at the University of Basel in Switzerland.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Getting too little sleep during the week can increase some risk factors for diabetes, but sleeping late on weekends might help improve the picture, a small U.S. study suggests.

Researchers conducted a sleep experiment with 19 healthy young men and found just four nights of sleep deprivation were linked to changes in their blood suggesting their bodies weren’t handling sugar as well as usual.

But then, when they let the men get extra sleep for the next two nights, their blood tests returned to normal, countering the effect of the short-term sleep deprivation.

“It gives us some hope that if there is no way to extend sleep during the week, people should try very hard to protect their sleep when they do get an opportunity to sleep in and sleep as much as possible to pay back the sleep debt,” said lead study author Josaine Broussard of the University of Colorado Boulder.

The study doesn’t prove sleeping late every weekend can counter the ill effects of insufficient rest every other night of the week, Broussard cautioned.

And it doesn’t prove that catching up on sleep will prevent diabetes.

“We don’t know if people can recover if the behavior is repeated every week,” Broussard added by email. “It is likely though that if any group of people suffer from sleep loss, getting extra sleep will be beneficial.”

To assess the impact of sleep on diabetes risk, Broussard and colleagues focused on what’s known as insulin sensitivity, or the body’s ability to use the hormone insulin to regulate blood sugar. Impaired insulin sensitivity is one risk factor for type 2 diabetes, which is associated with age and obesity and happens when the body can’t properly convert blood sugar into energy.

The researchers did two brief sleep experiments. On one occasion, the volunteers were permitted just 4.5 hours of rest for four nights, followed by two evenings of extended sleep that amounted to 9.7 hours on average. On another occasion, the same men were allowed to sleep 8.5 hours for four nights.

After the four nights of sleep deprivation, the volunteers’ insulin sensitivity had fallen by 23 percent and their bodies had started to produce extra insulin. But when researchers checked again after two nights of extended rest, the men’s insulin sensitivity, and the amount of insulin their bodies produced, had returned to normal, mirroring what was seen during the portion of the experiment when the volunteers consistently got a good nights’ rest.

The volunteers were given a calorie-controlled diet to limit the potential for their food and drink choices to influence the outcomes. In the real world, when people don’t get enough sleep they tend to overeat, which may limit how much results from this lab experiment might happen in reality, the authors note in a report scheduled for publication in the journal Diabetes Care.

“The results from the present study are unlikely to be fully reflective of what may occur in persons who are older, overweight or obese, or have other potent risk factors for diabetes,” said James Gangwisch, a researcher at Columbia University who wasn’t involved in the study.

Chronically sleep-deprived people are more likely to develop other health problems, though, ranging from obesity to high blood pressure to cognitive deficits, the study authors point out.

“By catching up on sleep on the weekends, people are reducing average extent and severity of the effects of sleep deprivation,” Gangwisch added by email. “Ideally, we would all get sufficient sleep on a nightly basis.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article did a good job, as noted earlier, of highlighting the limitations of the study, and quotes an outside researcher saying as much. Kudos!
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At workshops and conferences across the country, students, counselors and psychologists in private practice throng lectures on mindfulness. The National Institutes of Health is financing more than 50 studies testing mindfulness techniques, up from 3 in 2000, to help relieve stress, soothe addictive cravings, improve attention, lift despair and reduce hot flashes.

Some proponents say Buddha’s arrival in psychotherapy signals a broader opening in the culture at large — a way to access deeper healing, a hidden path revealed.

Yet so far, the evidence that mindfulness meditation helps relieve psychiatric symptoms is thin, and in some cases, it may make people worse, some studies suggest. Many researchers now worry that the enthusiasm for Buddhist practice will run so far ahead of the science that this promising psychological tool could turn into another fad.

“I’m very open to the possibility that this approach could be effective, and it certainly should be studied,” said Scott Lilienfeld, a psychology professor at Emory. “What concerns me is the hype, the talk about changing the world, this allure of the guru that the field of psychotherapy has a tendency to cultivate.”

Buddhist meditation came to psychotherapy from mainstream academic medicine. In the 1970s, a graduate student in molecular biology, Jon Kabat-Zinn, intrigued by Buddhist ideas, adapted a version of its meditative practice that could be easily learned and studied. It was by design a secular version, extracted like a gemstone from the many-layered foundation of Buddhist teaching, which has sprouted a wide variety of sects and spiritual practices and attracted 350 million adherents worldwide.

In transcendental meditation and other types of meditation, practitioners seek to transcend or “lose” themselves. The goal of mindfulness meditation was different, to foster an awareness of every sensation as it unfolds in the moment.

Dr. Kabat-Zinn taught the practice to people suffering from chronic pain at the University of Massachusetts medical school. In the 1980s he published a series of studies demonstrating that two-hour courses, given once a week for eight weeks, reduced chronic pain more effectively than treatment as usual.

Word spread, discreetly at first. “I think that back then, other researchers had to be very careful when they talked about this, because they didn’t want to be seen as New Age weirdos,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn, now a professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Massachusetts, said in an interview. “So they didn’t call it mindfulness or meditation. “After a while, we put enough studies out there that people became more comfortable with it.”

One person who noticed early on was Marsha Linehan, a psychologist at the University of Washington who was trying to treat deeply troubled patients with histories of suicidal behavior. “Trying to treat these patients with some change-based behavior therapy just made them worse, not better,” Dr. Linehan said in an interview. “With the really hard stuff, you need something else, something that allows people to tolerate these very strong emotions.”

In the 1990s, Dr. Linehan published a series of studies finding that a therapy that incorporated Zen Buddhist mindfulness, “radical acceptance,” practiced by therapist and patient significantly cut the risk of hospitalization and suicide attempts in the high-risk patients.

Finally, in 2000, a group of researchers including Dr. Segal in Toronto, J. Mark G. Williams at the University of Wales and John D. Teasdale at the Medical Research Council in England published a study that found that eight weekly sessions of mindfulness halved the rate of relapse in people with three or more episodes of depression.

With Dr. Kabat-Zinn, they wrote a popular book, “The Mindful Way Through Depression.” Psychotherapists’ curiosity about mindfulness, once tentative, turned into “this feeding frenzy, of sorts, that we have going on now,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn said.

Mindfulness meditation is easy to describe. Sit in a comfortable position, eyes closed, preferably with the back upright and unsupported. Relax and take note of body sensations, sounds and moods. Notice them without judgment. Let the mind settle into the rhythm of breathing. If it wanders (and it will), gently redirect attention to the breath. Stay with it for at least 10 minutes.

After mastering control of attention, some therapists say, a person can turn, mentally, to face a threatening or troubling thought — about, say, a strained relationship with a parent — and learn simply to endure the anger or sadness and let it pass, without lapsing into rumination or trying to change the feeling, a move that often backfires.

One woman, a doctor who had been in therapy for years to manage bouts of disabling anxiety, recently began seeing Gaea Logan, a therapist in Austin, Tex., who incorporates mindfulness meditation into her practice. This patient had plenty to worry about, including a mentally ill child, a divorce and what she described as a “harsh internal voice,” Ms. Logan said.

After practicing mindfulness meditation, she continued to feel anxious at times but told Ms. Logan, “I can stop and observe my feelings and thoughts and have compassion for myself.”

Steven Hayes, a psychologist at the University of Nevada at Reno, has developed a talk therapy called Acceptance Commitment Therapy, or ACT, based on a similar, Buddha-like effort to move beyond language to change fundamental psychological processes.

“It’s a shift from having our mental health defined by the content of our thoughts,” Dr. Hayes said, “to having it defined by our relationship to that content — and changing that relationship by sitting with, noticing and becoming disentangled from our definition of ourselves.”

For all these hopeful signs, the science behind mindfulness is in its infancy. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which researches health practices, last year published a comprehensive review of meditation studies, including T.M., Zen and mindfulness practice, for a wide variety of physical and mental problems. The study found that over all, the research was too sketchy to draw conclusions.

A recent review by Canadian researchers, focusing specifically on mindfulness meditation, concluded that it did “not have a reliable effect on depression and anxiety.”

Therapists who incorporate mindfulness practices do not agree when the meditation is most useful, either. Some say Buddhist meditation is most useful for patients with moderate emotional problems. Others, like Dr. Linehan, insist that patients in severe mental distress are the best candidates for mindfulness.

A case in point is mindfulness-based therapy to prevent a relapse into depression. The treatment significantly reduced the risk of relapse in people who have had three or more episodes of depression. But it may have had the opposite effect on people who had one or two previous episodes, two studies suggest.

The mindfulness treatment “may be contraindicated for this group of patients,” S. Helen Ma and Dr. Teasdale of the Medical Research Council concluded in a 2004 study of the therapy.

Since mindfulness meditation may have different effects on different mental struggles, the challenge for its proponents will be to specify where it is most effective — and soon, given how popular the practice is becoming.

The question, said Linda Barnes, an associate professor of family medicine and pediatrics at the Boston University School of Medicine, is not whether mindfulness meditation will become a sophisticated therapeutic technique or lapse into self-help cliché.

“The answer to that question is yes to both,” Dr. Barnes said.

The real issue, most researchers agree, is whether the science will keep pace and help people distinguish the mindful variety from the mindless.

A variety of meditative practices have been studied by Western researchers for their effects on mental and physical health.

An active exercise, sometimes called moving meditation, involving extremely slow, continuous movement and extreme concentration. The movements are to balance the vital energy of the body but have no religious significance.

Studies are mixed, some finding it can reduce blood pressure in patients, and others finding no effect. There is some evidence that it can help elderly people improve balance.

Meditators sit comfortably, eyes closed, and breathe naturally. They repeat and concentrate on the mantra, a word or sound chosen by the instructor to achieve state of deep, transcendent absorption. Practitioners “lose” themselves, untouched by day-to-day concerns. Studies suggest it can reduce blood pressure in some patients.

Practitioners find a comfortable position, close the eyes and focus first on breathing, passively observing it. If a stray thought or emotion enters the mind, they allow it to pass and return attention to the breath. The aim is to achieve focused awareness on what is happening moment to moment.

Studies find that it can help manage chronic pain. The findings are mixed on substance abuse. Two trials suggest that it can cut the rate of relapse in people who have had three or more bouts of depression.

Enhanced awareness through breathing techniques and specific postures. Schools vary widely, aiming to achieve total absorption in the present and a release from ordinary thoughts. Studies are mixed, but evidence shows it can reduce stress.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does an excellent job balancing comments from several leading proponents of mindfulness therapies with summaries of the evidence of this practice in clinical trials. The story discusses caveats that the practice may be useful as part of an integrative treatment plan; however, evidence suggests it is not a panacea for depression or anxiety, and it should be used with caution (or not at all) with some patients.  The journalist should be commended for the range of mindfulness experts, clinicians and patients interviewed in the article. This is a well-balanced report providing the reader with good information on a trend in medicine, but appropriately tempering over-enthusiam for the practice with available evidence.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An ibuprofen patch that delivers the painkiller directly through the skin to the site of pain, at a consistent dose for up to 24 hours, has been developed by UK researchers.

Scientists at the University of Warwick and spin-off company Medherant say their TEPI patch could revolutionize the transdermal drug delivery market.

University of Warwick research chemist Professor David Haddleton told Reuters that the polymer matrix in the patch acts as a reservoir for the drug, capable of releasing between five and ten times the amount of drugs used in gels and patches currently on the market, for periods of six hours, 12 hours, and even 24 hours.

“What we do is dissolve the active ibuprofen, for example, into the adhesive so we can have quite a high loading - so up to 30 percent of the adhesive will be the ibuprofen,” said Haddleton. “When that’s placed on the skin just like an elastoplast then the drug will actually diffuse across the skin into the body at the site of the pain and then relieve the pain in the same way as current gels and creams. We’re controlling the dosage and we’re keeping it there for a prolonged period of time.”

The patches could help treat conditions like chronic back pain, neuralgia and arthritis without the need to take potentially damaging doses of the drug orally. The team says that popular ibuprofen gels make it difficult to control dosage and can be easily rubbed off.

Although TEPI patch remains highly tacky and adheres well to skin, it is not uncomfortable to peel off, unlike many traditional plasters.

According to Andrew Lee, co-founder of Medherant, “we’ve only been in the lab about 12 months, but in the 12 months we’ve essentially assessed about 90 percent of the drugs that are currently available as either creams or patches. We’ve tested them in our polymers with very good results, we’ve been able to get increased loadings of drugs in the polymer and we’ve shown almost across the board that we can get a steady release rate of that drug from the polymer as well.”

The team says TEPI patches could go on sale within three years, and Medherant is working with some large, unnamed, pharmaceutical companies to get them ready for market.

Haddleton says the technology has exciting potential for other medications, such as opioid painkillers. “What’s important is to be able to extend the range of drugs that are available by patches because at the moment we’re limited to about 20 different drugs, and there are thousands of drugs out there, and only about 20 are used in patches at the moment, which is limited by the technology of the adhesive, essentially,” he said.

Lee told Reuters that many commercial patches do not contain pain relief agents at all, and merely sooth the body with a warming effect. He said Medherant’s technology would eliminate most side effects created by oral medication.

“One of the interesting areas that we plan to explore in partnership with large companies is actually using our platform technology to include other drugs that previously maybe haven’t been suitable for topical or transdermal delivery - or drugs which may have not got through the regulatory filings because, for instance, they might have caused stomach irritation or other side effects when taken orally,” said Lee.

The TEPI patch incorporates new adhesive technology developed by global adhesive company Bostik. Lee believes ibuprofen strips could be useful for sports participants, helping alleviate conditions such as tendonitis, and repetitive strain injuries. Nutrition companies have also shown an interest in adapting Medherant’s technology for transmitting minerals and vitamins through the skin.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: No independent sources were interviewed. The two sources that were interviewed for this article were both disclosed to be affiliated with the company Medherant, producer of the TEPI patches. Since the use of transdermal patches has been around for decades, it should have been relatively easy to identify experts in the field.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Instead of shrinking as expected, as part of the normal aging process, the memory center in the brains of seniors maintained their size and, in men, grew modestly after two years in a program that engaged them in meaningful and social activities, new Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health-led research suggests.

At the same time, those with larger increases in the brain's volume over two years also saw the greatest improvements on memory tests, showing a direct correlation between brain volume and the reversal of a type of cognitive decline linked to increased risk for Alzheimer's disease.

The research, published online in Alzheimer's & Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer's Association, studied participants in the Baltimore Experience Corps, a program that brings retired people into public schools to serve as mentors to young children, working with teachers to help them learn to read in understaffed school libraries.

"Someone once said to me that being in this program removed the cobwebs from her brain and this study shows that is exactly what is happening," says study leader Michelle Carlson, PhD, an associate professor in the Department of Mental Health at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. "By helping others, participants are helping themselves in ways beyond just feeding their souls. They are helping their brains. The brain shrinks as part of aging, but with this program we appear to have stopped that shrinkage and are reversing part of the aging process."

For the study, Carlson and her colleagues randomized 111 men and women to either participate in the Experience Corps (58) or not (53). They took MRI scans of their brains at enrollment and then again after 12 and 24 months. They also conducted memory tests. Participants were an average of 67.2 years old, predominantly African-American, were in good health, came from neighborhoods with low socioeconomic status and had some college education.

The control arm of the study, those not involved in Experience Corps, exhibited age-related shrinkage in brain volumes. Typically, annual rates of atrophy in adults over age 65 range from .8 percent to two percent. The men who were enrolled in Experience Corps, however, showed a .7 percent to 1.6 percent increase in brain volumes over the course of two years. Though not statistically significant, women appeared to experience small gains, as compared to declines in the control group of one percent over 24 months.

Carlson notes that many cognitive intervention studies last one year or less. One strength of this study, she says, is that the participants were followed for two years, which in this case was long enough to see changes that wouldn't have been detected after just one year.

The researchers were particularly interested in the results, considering that people with less education and who live in poverty are at greater risk for cognitive decline.

Carlson says it's not entirely clear which elements of Experience Corps account for the improved memory function and increased brain volumes. She says the program increases involvement in so many different kinds of activities that retired people may not have engaged in otherwise. Participants need to get out of bed, walk to the bus, and walk up and down stairs inside the schools. They work in teams. They work with young people. They share their knowledge and know they are doing good in the world. They engage in problem solving and they socialize in ways they wouldn't have if they stayed at home.

"We're not training them on one skill, like doing crossword puzzles," she says. "We're embedding complexity and novelty into their daily lives, something that tends to disappear once people retire. The same things that benefit us at 5, 10, 25, 35 - contact with others, meaningful work - are certain to benefit us as we age."

Experience Corps is a national program, however it can be costly and isn't available everywhere. But Carlson says she believes finding purpose and civic engagement may forestall some of the damage of aging on the brain.

"Impact of the Baltimore Experience Corps Trial on cortical and hippocampal volumes" was written by Michelle C. Carlson, Julie H. Kuo, Yi-Fang Chuang, Vijay Varma, Greg Harris, Marilyn Albert, Kirk I. Erickson, Arthur F. Kramer, Jeanine M. Parisi, Qian-Li Xue, Erwin Tan, Elizabeth K. Tanner, Alden Gross, Teresa E. Seeman, Tara Gruenewald, Sylvia McGill, George W. Rebok and Linda P. Fried.

The study was supported by the Johns Hopkins Neurobehavioral Research Unit, the National Institutes of Health's National Institute on Aging (P01 AG027735-03), the Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation and the Johns Hopkins Epidemiology and Biostatistics of Aging Research Fellowship (NIA T32AG000247).
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly lists the funding sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 3, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Much of the debate over when to start having mammograms has focused on lives saved, but new research suggests that early screening might also translate into smaller tumors and less aggressive breast cancer treatments.

"There are multiple benefits of mammography in terms of early detection. Not only do we save lives, but we reduce the likelihood of needing more aggressive treatment," said study author Dr. Elisa Port. She directs the Dubin Breast Center at Mount Sinai and is chief of breast surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital, both in New York City.

Currently, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that biennial screenings start at age 50 for most women, while the American Cancer Society advises that annual screenings begin at age 45. Earlier guidelines had suggested annual screenings begin at age 40.

Port noted that screening guidelines tend to be based on the ability of mammograms to save lives and how often they give a false positive result.

"But isn't there some benefit to getting tested earlier, like needing fewer lymph nodes removed and not needing chemotherapy? I think it's safe to say that most women, if they could be assured the same survival, would choose not to get more aggressive therapies," she said.

Port's study included more than 1,100 women diagnosed with breast cancer at the Dubin Breast Center. All of the women were older than 40.

The women were separated into two groups. One group had a mammogram within the 24 months before their breast cancer diagnosis. The other group had a screening 25 months or more before their diagnosis. The second group also included women who had never had a mammogram.

Women in the second group were 50 percent more likely to need chemotherapy. They were also 32 percent more likely to need surgery to remove the whole breast (mastectomy), and 66 percent more likely to need lymph nodes removed. And the women who were screened earlier had smaller tumors.

Port also looked at the 40- to 49-year-old age group, and found those who had never had a mammogram were much more likely to need chemotherapy. They were also more likely to have larger tumors (by 10 millimeters, on average) and to need a mastectomy than those in the 24 months or less group. But only 29 women fell into the "never had a mammogram" group.

However, the study did not prove a cause-and-effect link between earlier mammograms and smaller tumors and less aggressive treatment.

And Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society, noted that this was an observational study that only looked at the experience of one institution.

Still, "the observations are consistent with what we have seen with the value of early detection. Clearly, the earlier a breast cancer is diagnosed, the less treatment that will be required. But this study doesn't tell us about long-term outcomes or what transpired over a long period of time," he said.

Also, because of the nature of the study and the small sample size in the young age group sub-analysis, Lichtenfeld said that "this cannot be interpreted as a study telling us what age to start mammograms."

The study is to be presented Thursday at the American Society of Breast Surgeons meeting, in Orlando, Fla. Findings presented at meetings are typically viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Learn more about mammography screening guidelines from the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes the study author and an outside source.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - People who eat lots of magnesium-rich foods such as leafy green vegetables, nuts and beans have fewer strokes, according to an international analysis covering some 250,000 people.

But the authors of the study, published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, stopped short of recommending people take a daily magnesium supplement because their analysis focused on magnesium in food — and it may be another aspect of the food that is responsible for their finding.

“Dietary magnesium intake is inversely associated with risk of stroke, specifically ischemic stroke,” wrote lead author Susanna Larsson, a professor at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden.

The results suggest that people eat a healthy diet with “magnesium-rich foods such as green leafy vegetables, nuts, beans and whole grains,” she added.

Larsson and her colleagues combed through research databases spanning the last 45 years to find studies that tracked how much magnesium people took and how many of them had a stroke over time.

In seven studies published in the past 14 years, about 250,000 people in the United States, Europe and Asia were followed for an average of 11.5 years. About 6,500 of them, or three percent, had a stroke in the time they were followed.

For every extra 100 milligrams of magnesium a person ate per day, their risk of an ischemic stroke — the most common kind, typically caused by a blood clot — fell by nine percent.

The median magnesium intake for U.S. citizens included in the analysis was 242 milligrams a day. The United States recommends that men and women over age 31 eat 420 and 320 milligrams of magnesium daily, respectively.

Most of the studies allowed the researchers to rule out other factors, such as family history.

But Larsson told Reuters Health in an email that she could not say whether other aspects of what the people ate partially or entirely explained the finding.

More in-depth studies are needed before researchers can say that the magnesium was what actually reduced the stroke risk, she added.

Other experts said the results were consistent with dietary recommendations.

“It’s a diet that’s rich in fruits, vegetables and grains. Those are things that have low sodium, high potassium and high magnesium,” said Larry Goldstein, director of the stroke center at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, North Carolina.

"It's again the diet per se, not any one individual component of the diet." SOURCE: bit.ly/AhalBY
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included one independent expert’s perspective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Finding ways to fight the flu just got a tad more ribbeting -- that is, if you ask some researchers who have turned their attention to frogs.

A new study suggests that mucus from the skin of certain frogs can be harnessed to obliterate flu viruses.

Some frog mucus contains antimicrobial peptides, which are immune system molecules that can neutralize bacteria, viruses, and fungi.

However, the flu-killing power of such peptides has been demonstrated only under a microscope and in lab mice. More research is needed to determine just how effective a peptide can be in helping humans beat the flu.

"We have identified a potentially new treatment for H1N1 human influenza virus, which is a peptide that comes from the skin of a frog from southern India," said Joshy Jacob , an associate professor in the Emory University School of Medicine's microbiology and immunology department, who led the study.

"This peptide works by directly killing the virus, and it is specific for all influenza viruses that have a H1 type of hemagglutinin," Jacob said.

'It makes the virus particle fall apart'

The researchers observed how the peptides interacted with influenza viruses under a microscope and in mice.

"In this paper we screened 32 peptides, and the surprise was that four out of 32 had activity against the virus," Jacob said.

"Out of the four, we found one of them (urumin) was non-toxic to human cells," he said. "So, we tested it against viruses that came from the 1930s until the current ones, and it kills all of the H1s. It doesn't touch H3. It's very, very specific."

The researchers aren't quite sure why urumin only targets H1 viruses, but Jacob said that H1 viruses might be anatomically similar to an amphibian pathogen that the frog mucus is intended to destroy. If there is a similarity, it may explain why H1 viruses are vulnerable to urumin's wrath.

"The frog makes this peptide for its own survival. It never gets influenza," Jacob said, adding that the peptide fights the flu virus by destroying an important part of the hemagglutinin.

To explain how the peptide works, Jacob likened hemagglutinin to a billboard sign.

"You have the message and then you have the little stem that holds it up. The message can change but the stem is the same, and this peptide targets the stem of the hemagglutinin, that's why it's very efficient," he said.

The urumin peptide could be a novel treatment since it targets the hemagglutinin, unlike current drugs on the market which target other parts of the virus, resulting in less impact, Jacob said.

"It just blows it up. It makes the virus particle fall apart," he said.

Gregory Chinchar, a professor in the University of Mississippi Medical Center's department of microbiology and immunology, said that he was surprised that the peptide targeted the hemagglutinin on the flu virus. He was not involved in the new study.

"I don't think people thought that they work that way before," Chinchar said about the peptide. "They thought that they would be more targeted to membranes, but the data looks like they target the H1 protein specifically and that data looks pretty firm."

"The milk stayed good, just like you refrigerated it," Jacob said about the age-old Russian practice.

"In 2012, scientists took that particular frog and wanted to know why is it, why do these frogs keep milk fresh? It turned out that when you shock a frog or when you stimulate them or stress them, they secrete these short peptides into their surroundings," he said. "A majority of the peptides were antibacterial and some of them kill the things that make milk go bad."

"Amphibians, especially certain groups of frogs, produce and store large amounts of antimicrobial peptides in specialized granular glands in the skin," said Louise Rollins-Smith, associate professor of pathology, microbiology, and immunology at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. "When the skin is injured or the frog is alarmed, they release large amounts of the peptides to protect the skin."

"The peptide described in the Immunity report is somewhat unusual because of the apparent specificity," Rollins-Smith said about how urumin specifically targets H1 viruses.

"If further studies show that it has a low level of cytotoxicity and it can protect in other animal models of influenza, it could be developed as a potential treatment for influenza," she said. Cytoxicity refers to being toxic to cells in the body.

"As an amphibian biologist concerned about the loss of amphibian species around the globe, it is important to note that they may hold important secrets useful for human medicine and they should be preserved," she said.

Ferrets are next, then possibly humans

A challenge to possibly using frog mucus as a flu-fighting treatment in humans is figuring out how to get the urumin peptide to attach to flu virus cells in the human body, Jacob said.

In the new study, the peptide was delivered to mice through their noses, where flu viruses were also delivered.

"I need to come up with a strategy to deliver it systemically as well; maybe an injectable, which goes in the bloodstream and kills influenza viruses," Jacob mused.

If those studies prove to be successful, human testing could be next.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The primary source is clearly linked to the study, and two other sources are identified as independent of the research. Although the story does not mention funding sources, a news release describing the research indicates that funding came from the university itself, not from external sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Medicine That Blunts The Buzz Of Alcohol Can Help Drinkers Cut Back

If you drink more alcohol than you want to or should, you're not alone. A nationwide survey by the National Institutes of Health found that 28 percent of adults in the U.S. are heavy drinkers or drink more than is recommended.

Yet, most heavy drinkers don't get the help they need.

"The biggest problem we have in the field is that less than 10 percent of individuals with an alcohol use disorder get any treatment whatsoever," says George Koob, director of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.

Part of the challenge, researchers say, is that many drinkers don't realize that a medicine long used to help people addicted to opioids quit their drug habit can help alcoholics and other heavy drinkers cut back, too.

"I thought my only option was AA," John tells NPR. We've agreed to use only his middle name; disclosing his trouble with alcohol publicly, he says, would jeopardize his business.

He's a 47-year-old professional who says he started out as a social drinker — a few beers with his softball team after a game. But he sank into a deep depression after several deaths in his family, and sought "solace in the bottle," he says.

"I wanted to numb my thoughts," says John.

He'd often start with hard liquor in the morning, John says, and it wasn't uncommon to have eight drinks or more before the end of the day.

He worked from home, so he was able to mask the problem for a while. But eventually his wife confronted him.

"She had come home and I was rushing to hide a glass and she was furious with me," he recalls. "Just absolutely furious."

He went to see Paula DeSanto, a therapist and director of Minnesota Alternatives, in Spring Lake Park, Minn. The center provides outpatient mental health and substance use treatment services.

"I would say John's story is not unique," DeSanto tells us. "A lot of people are reluctant."

Sometimes, traditional treatments — such as residential rehab or a 12-step program like Alcoholics Anonymous — "can [lead to] a significant disruption in their lives," she explains. "There's stigma, shame and embarrassment."

DeSanto suggested a different approach to John. To help work through the loss and grief he was feeling, counseling can help, she told him. She also recommended he try naltrexone, a prescription drug.

"Naltrexone is an effective medication for the treatment of alcohol use disorders," says Koob. He points to a recent meta-analysis published in the journal Addiction that concluded that naltrexone helped reduce heavy drinking and cravings for alcohol.

The analysis included data from 64 clinical trials in which people were given either the medication or a placebo pill to test the effectiveness of the treatment. The analysis also found that another drug, acamprosate, is effective at helping people who have already stopped drinking to maintain abstinence, perhaps partly by easing the physical and emotional cravings experienced by heavy drinkers who quit.

So, how does naltrexone work? The drug seems to curb the euphoric and sedative effects of opiates in the brain. Alcohol is known to activate some of the same receptors in the brain that opioids do, and studies find that by tempering the pleasure from alcohol, naltrexone can help people drink less.

"It blunts the effects of alcohol," says Koob. "People [who use naltrexone] will say they have a drink, and it's not doing much for them."

That was exactly John's experience. After taking the naltrexone pill, he didn't get the buzz he was used to getting, so didn't want to keep drinking. "I actually didn't feel the alcohol's effects," he says. "It was startling."

It's now been about five months since he started taking the medication. He has not stopped drinking completely, but says he has cut way back.

"This is helping me," John says. "I can go out with friends and not worry that I'm going to end up inebriated or sloppy."

According to the findings of a recent review, both naltrexone and acamprosate, are safe, cost-effective and efficacious. But they are substantially underused, according to the review.

Many physicians are "unaware that there are medications to treat alcohol use disorders," says Koob. His institute is stepping up efforts to work with the medical community on that front, he says, and is also touting Rethinking Drinking, a website aimed at consumers that offers the latest research-based information on a range of treatment options.

Any health care provider who is licensed to prescribe medicine can prescribe naltrexone — not just mental health professionals or addiction specialists. As as long ago as 1997, a published study showed that treatment of alcohol dependence with naltrexone by primary care doctors can be effective; follow-up research has confirmed that the primary care approach not only works, but makes treatment much more accessible.

According to the NIAAA, "patients can now receive effective alcohol treatment from their primary care doctors or mental health practitioners by combining the newer medications with a series of brief office visits for support."

Naltrexone is certainly not a cure-all, researchers say. And it won't help everyone who has a drinking problem — especially if the disorder is severe.

"I use these medications as an adjunct to therapy, and group [sessions] and 12-step meetings" says Dr. Jeffrey Hsu, a psychiatrist at Johns Hopkins University who is certified in addiction medicine. He says that when used alone the medicines are only modestly effective.

But there's good evidence that the combination of counseling and drugs such as naltrexone can help people cut back on drinking, or move toward abstinence.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included a number of independent sources, and we could detect no potential conflicts of interest that should have been disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With calcium, adolescent girls may be the only group that is getting too little, the panel found. Older women, on the other hand, may take too much, putting themselves at risk for . And there is evidence that excess calcium can increase the risk of heart disease, the group wrote.

As for vitamin D, some prominent doctors have said that most people need supplements or they will be at increased risk for a wide variety of illnesses, including heart disease, and autoimmune diseases.

And these days more and more people know their vitamin D levels because they are being tested for it as part of routine physical exams.

“The number of vitamin D tests has exploded,” said Dennis Black, a reviewer of the report who is a professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at the .

At the same time, vitamin D sales have soared, growing faster than those of any supplement, according to The Nutrition Business Journal. Sales rose 82 percent from 2008 to 2009, reaching $430 million. “Everyone was hoping vitamin D would be kind of a panacea,” Dr. Black said. The report, he added, might quell the craze.

“I think this will have an impact on a lot of primary care providers,” he said.

The 14-member expert committee was convened by the Institute of Medicine, an independent nonprofit scientific body, at the request of the and Canadian governments. It was asked to examine the available data — nearly 1,000 publications — to determine how much vitamin D and calcium people were getting, how much was needed for optimal health and how much was too much.

The two nutrients work together for bone health.

Bone health, though, is only one of the benefits that have been attributed to vitamin D, and there is not enough good evidence to support most other claims, the committee said.

Some labs have started reporting levels of less than 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood as a deficiency. With that as a standard, 80 percent of the population would be deemed deficient of vitamin D, Dr. Rosen said. Most people need to take supplements to reach levels above 30 nanograms per milliliter, he added.

But, the committee concluded, a level of 20 to 30 nanograms is all that is needed for bone health, and nearly everyone is in that range.

Vitamin D is being added to more and more foods, said Paul R. Thomas of the Office of Dietary Supplements at the National Institutes of Health. Not only is it in orange juice and milk, but more is being added to breakfast cereals, and it now can be found in very high doses in supplement pills. Most vitamin D pills, he said, used to contain no more than 1,000 international units of it. Now it is easy to find pills, even in places like , with 5,000 international units. The committee, though, said people need only 600 international units a day.

To assess the amounts of vitamin D and calcium people are getting, the panel looked at national data on diets. Most people, they concluded, get enough calcium from the foods they eat, about 1,000 milligrams a day for most adults (1,200 for women ages 51 to 70).

Vitamin D is more complicated, the group said. In general, most people are not getting enough vitamin D from their diets, but they have enough of the vitamin in their blood, probably because they are also making it naturally after being out in the sun and storing it in their bodies.

The American Society for Bone and Mineral Research and other groups applauded the report. It is “a very balanced set of recommendations,” said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a endocrinologist and the society’s president.

But Andrew Shao, an executive vice president at the Council for Responsible Nutrition, a trade group, said the panel was being overly cautious, especially in its recommendations about vitamin D. He said there was no convincing evidence that people were being harmed by taking supplements, and he said higher levels of vitamin D, in particular, could be beneficial.

Such claims “are not supported by the available evidence,” the committee wrote. They were based on studies that observed populations and concluded that people with lower levels of the vitamin had more of various diseases. Such studies have been misleading and most scientists agree that they cannot determine cause and effect.

It is not clear how or why the claims for high vitamin D levels started, medical experts say. First there were two studies, which turned out to be incorrect, that said people needed 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood, the upper end of what the committee says is a normal range. They were followed by articles and claims and books saying much higher levels — 40 to 50 nanograms or even higher — were needed.

After reviewing the data, the committee concluded that the evidence for the benefits of high levels of vitamin D was “inconsistent and/or conflicting and did not demonstrate causality.”

Evidence also suggests that high levels of vitamin D can increase the risks for fractures and the overall death rate and can raise the risk for other diseases. While those studies are not conclusive, any risk looms large when there is no demonstrable benefit. Those hints of risk are “challenging the concept that ‘more is better,’ ” the committee wrote.

That is what surprised Dr. Black. “We thought that probably higher is better,” he said.

He has changed his mind, and expects others will too: “I think this report will make people more cautious.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The diversity of independent voices included in this story is a real strength. Although it solicits the obligatory comment from a supplement industry spokesman, it didn’t go out of its way to find any of the more widely known vitamin D experts, some of whom have been issuing recommendations that are untenable based on current evidence. The enthusiasm of some of these researchers might be explained by their significant career and financial interests in promoting vitamin D.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Still, the new recommendations for Pap tests are likely to feed a political debate in Washington over health care overhaul proposals. The mammogram advice led some Republicans to predict that such recommendations would lead to rationing.

Senator Tom Coburn, a Republican from Oklahoma who is also a physician, said in an interview that he would continue to offer Pap smears to sexually active young women. Democratic proposals to involve the government more deeply in the nation’s health care system, he said, would lead the new mammography, Pap smear and other guidelines to be adopted without regard to patient differences, hurting many people.

“These are going to be set in stone,” Mr. Coburn said.

Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Democrat and longtime advocate for cancer screening, said in an interview: “And this Pap smear guideline is yet another cut back in screening? That is curious.” Mr. Specter, who was treated for Hodgkin’s lymphoma in 2005 and 2008, said Congress was committed to increasing cancer screenings, not limiting them.

Representative Rosa DeLauro, Democrat of Connecticut, said that the new guidelines would have no effect on federal policy and that “Republicans are using these new recommendations as a distraction.”

“Making such arguments, especially at this critical point in the debate, merely clouds the very simple issue that our health reform bill would increase access to care for millions of women across the country,” she said.

There are 11,270 new cases of cervical cancer and 4,070 deaths per year in the United States. One to 2 cases occur per 1,000,000 girls ages 15 to 19 — a low incidence that convinces many doctors that it is safe to wait until 21 to screen.

The doctors’ group also felt it was safe to test women less often because cervical cancer grows slowly, so there is time to catch precancerous growths. Cervical cancer is caused by a sexually transmitted virus, human papillomavirus, or HPV, that is practically ubiquitous. Only some people who are exposed to it develop cancer; in most, the immune system fights off the virus. If cancer does develop, it can take 10 to 20 years after exposure to the virus.

The new guidelines say women 30 and older who have three consecutive Pap tests that were normal, and who have no history of seriously abnormal findings, can stretch the interval between screenings to three years.

In addition, women who have a total hysterectomy (which removes the uterus and cervix) for a noncancerous condition, and who had no severe abnormalities on previous Pap tests, can quit having the tests entirely.

The guidelines also say that women can stop having Pap tests between 65 and 70 if they have three or more negative tests in a row and no abnormal test results in the last 10 years.

The changes do not apply to women with certain health problems that could make them more prone to aggressive cervical cancer, including H.I.V. infection or having an organ transplant or other condition that would lead to a suppressed immune system.

It is by no means clear that doctors or patients will follow the new guidelines. Medical groups, including the American Cancer Society, have been suggesting for years that women with repeated normal Pap tests could begin to have the test less frequently, but many have gone on to have them year after year anyway.

Debbie Saslow, director of breast and gynecologic cancer for the American Cancer Society, said professional groups were particularly concerned because many teenagers and young women were being tested and then needlessly subjected to invasive procedures.

In addition, Dr. Saslow said, doctors in this country have been performing 15 million Pap tests a year to look for cervical cancer in women who have no cervix, because they have had hysterectomies.

Dr. Carol L. Brown, a gynecologic oncologist and surgeon at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said the new guidelines should probably not be applied to all women, because there are some girls who begin having sex at 12 or 13 and may be prone to develop cervical cancer at an early age.

“I’m concerned that whenever you send a message out to the public to do less, the most vulnerable people at highest risk might take the message and not get screened at all,” Dr. Brown said.

Dr. Kevin M. Holcomb, an associate professor of clinical obstetrics and gynecology at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell hospital, said that when he heard the advice to delay Pap testing until 21, “My emotional response is ‘Wow, that seems dangerous,’ and yet I know the chances of an adolescent getting cervical cancer are really low.”

As with the new mammogram recommendations, women may not readily give up a yearly cancer test.

“For people who’ve been having the testing regularly every year, it’s a big emotional change to test less frequently and there’s this fear of ‘Oh my gosh, I might be missing something,’ ” said Ivy Guetta, 49, of Westport, Conn., who plans to continue with annual Pap tests. Ms. Guetta has three daughters, ages 17, 14 and 8, and at the moment, she would not encourage them to wait until they turn 21.

Jen Jemison, 24, a legal assistant from Babylon, N.Y., said she thought she began getting Pap smears when she was about 18, but said that if she had been aware that the procedure for treating precancerous lesions could lead to premature births, she would have waited until she turned 21.

On the other hand, Ms. Jemison said that now that she is over 21, “I would still go every year” for the Pap test.

“One of my cousins had cervical cancer, so that’s in my head too,” she said. “I’d rather get it checked out regularly than have to worry about that.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Sourcing is excellent. Sources include:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Sharon Belvin's nightmare with cancer began in 2004, when she was just 22.

Belvin was an avid runner but said she suddenly found she couldn't climb the stairs without "a lot of difficulty breathing."

Eventually, after months of fruitless treatments for lung ailments like bronchitis, she was diagnosed with melanoma — a very serious skin cancer. It had already spread to her lungs, and the prognosis was grim. She had about a 50-50 chance of surviving the next six months.

"Yeah, that was the turning point of life, right there," she says.

What Belvin didn't know at the time was that a revolutionary treatment for melanoma had begun testing in clinical trials. An immunologist named Jim Allison, now at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, had figured out that if the immune system was tweaked just right, it could do a better job of killing the cancer than the usual treatments. (Joe Palca worked for Allison early in both men's careers.)

Allison's treatment was still experimental, but if it worked, it had the potential to save Belvin's life.

"It's a new modality for treating cancer," Dr. Samuel Broder, a former director of the National Cancer Institute, says now of Allison's pioneering research. "It used to be there were three basic treatment options for cancer — surgery, radiation and chemotherapy — or some combination of those three. It's fair to say there's now a fourth option."

Allison's long search for this new kind of treatment — one that has since become a lifesaver for some cancer patients — began around a decade before Belvin got sick, when Allison was running a lab at the University of California, Berkeley.

At the time, he was what you could call a research scientist's research scientist. He was fascinated by certain powerful cells of the immune system — T cells. A subset of white blood cells, T cells travel around the body and can "protect us against just about anything," Allison says.

T cells do recognize cancer cells, but not in a way that can eliminate the disease. Allison had been studying T cells for years, and thought that by tinkering with one key molecule on the outside of these cells, he could enhance their response to cancer, enough to eradicate the illness.

He and one of his grad students ran an experiment to test the tweaked T cells on cancerous tumors in mice, and the initial results astounded them. The T cells seemed to be doing just what Allison had hoped they would do — shrink the tumors and kill the cancer.

Allison repeated the experiment with more mice over his winter break. After a few tense days, the tumors again disappeared.

"These mice were cured," Allison says.

"I've been doing this sort of stuff for years, and I'd never seen anything like that," Allison says. "And I thought, 'If we could do that in people, this is going to be amazing.' "

Allison tried to persuade drugmakers to create a human version of the treatment that had worked in mice. He thought they would jump at the chance to try a new approach.

But the biotech companies he met with didn't bite. In those days, most firms were focused on drugs that would target tumors directly, and Allison was asking them to try something very different.

"This was targeting the immune system, not the cancer," he says. "We weren't trying to kill the cancer cells. We were letting the T cells kill the cancer cells."

Thanks, but no thanks, the companies told him.

"I got very depressed," Allison says. He was sure this was the most important work of his career, but he had to get others on board.

Eventually, a scientist attending one of Allison's research talks was intrigued enough to contact a pal at the biotech firm Medarex. The company had recently developed technology that could make a human version of Allison's therapy, and was willing to give it a try.

It took a decade, but eventually Allison's big idea was ready for testing in people. A clinical trial to study the drug — now called ipilimumab, or Ippy for short — was set up at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.

Allison decided he wanted to be part of this next chapter in the testing of immunotherapy, so he packed up his California lab and moved it to Sloan Kettering.

As it happens, Belvin was also in New York — a patient of Dr. Jedd Wolchok at Sloan Kettering. By the fall of 2004, Belvin had run through all the treatment options available to her. Nothing had worked to control the melanoma; it continued to spread dangerously throughout her body.

Belvin remembers feeling sick and depressed, and says she wasn't even paying much attention when Wolchok walked into the exam room and suggested one last treatment.

"Sharon, we have an opportunity to participate in a clinical trial here. It's something you should consider," Wolchok told her.

Belvin says she signed up without hesitation. After just four injections of Ippy across three months, her cancer was nearly gone. And at Belvin's follow-up appointment a year later, Wolchok delivered news that was hard for her to take in: "Sharon, you no longer have cancer."

And in the next breath, Belvin recalls, "he goes, 'Oh, the guy who invented this is upstairs. Do you want to meet him?' "

"Yes, of course I want to meet him!" she told her doctor.

Wolchok called Allison, who was working nearby, and told him to drop everything and come to the clinic — a part of the hospital Allison had rarely seen. Though the research scientist couldn't imagine why Wolchok was in such a rush, he quickly figured it out as he opened the door and was greeted by Belvin with a huge hug.

Belvin says she tried not to tackle him. "It was hard to control myself," she says. "I owe this man my life."

Belvin was the first recipient of the immunotherapy that Allison had ever met. "It really meant a lot," he says. "It reminded me what it's all about at the end of the day."

That was in 2005; today, Sharon Belvin is still cancer-free.

Ippy is now sold under the brand name Yervoy by Bristol-Myers Squibb, which bought Medarex in 2009.

Meanwhile, Jim Allison has become a bit of a celebrity in the cancer research world. Among other honors, he was a 2015 recipient of the prestigious Lasker Award for his achievements in medical science.

He's become well-known among patients, too. Now and again, Allison fields calls from patients yearning to learn from the master himself what it will take to cure their disease.

Allison can't really answer them. Each case is different, and using a patient's own cells to destroy tumors won't work in every patient or in every type of cancer. Still, the approach offers promise to some people that other therapies can't, and has transformed the way doctors think about cancer treatment.

It might be too early to say we're going to cure cancer, Allison says, "but we're going to cure certain types of cancers. We've got a shot at it now."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes a former director of the National Cancer Institute, which is good. And the story clearly outlines Allison’s search for pharmaceutical industry partners to develop ipilimumab into a drug that can be used in clinical practice.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ten sessions of exercises to boost reasoning skills, memory and mental processing speed staved off mental decline in middle-aged and elderly people in the first definitive study to show that honing intellectual skills can bolster the mind in the same way that physical exercise protects and strengthens the body.

The researchers also showed that the benefits of the brain exercises extended well beyond the specific skills the volunteers learned. Older adults who did the basic exercises followed by later sessions were three times as fast as those who got only the initial sessions when it came to activities of daily living, such as reacting to a road sign, looking up a number in a telephone book or checking the ingredients on a medicine bottle -- abilities that can spell the difference between living independently and needing help.

Experts said the federally funded study is a call to action for anyone who has ever worried about developing Alzheimer's, dementia and similar disorders. Americans spend billions of dollars each year on their physical well-being, but there are no comparable efforts to keep people mentally agile and strong.

If anything, the study suggests, there is a bigger payoff to mental exercise, because the brief training sessions seemed to confer enormous benefits as many as five years later. That would be as if someone went to the gym Monday through Friday for the first two weeks of the new year, did no exercise for five years, and still saw significant physical benefits in 2012.

The researchers divided the volunteers into four groups, including a control group that received no training. A second group was trained in reasoning skills -- being asked to spot the pattern in the sequence "a, c, e, g, i," for example -- every other letter of the alphabet. A third group was taught memory skills, which involved remembering word lists and using visualizations and associations as memory aids. A fourth group was given exercises to speed up mental processing -- being asked to identify an object flashed briefly on a computer screen while fighting off distractions.

Each of the groups being trained had 10 sessions, each lasting an hour to 75 minutes, and each session presented progressively more challenging problems. Compared with the control group, those who got memory training did 75 percent better on memory tasks five years later, those who got the reasoning training did 40 percent better on reasoning tasks, and those who got the speed training did 300 percent better than the control group.

Researchers noted that mental skills can sometimes compensate for physical disabilities: Knowing how to figure out directions and find a new route on a map, for example, could allow someone to retain mobility even after their night vision deteriorates to the point where driving on certain roads becomes difficult.

The study tracked 2,802 healthy adults from diverse backgrounds who were, on average, 73 years old. Although it did not examine the effects of mental exercise on people who had begun to show signs of Alzheimer's or other brain disorders, previous studies have pointed toward the conclusion that anyone can benefit.

"People think education is for people who are already educated," said Michael Marsiske, one of the researchers. "This kind of training works no matter where you are in society."

"If you think you have come to a time in your life when new learning is impossible and there are no benefits of continuing mental activity, the study shows that for a large number of people that this is not true," added Marsiske, a clinical and health psychologist at the University of Florida at Gainesville.

The participants in the study ranged from age 65 to their early 90s, but Marsiske said the findings apply to people in their 50s or even younger. Mental skills acquired earlier in life persist well into old age, he said.

"I don't like to play my son's video games, but I keep telling myself to challenge myself," said Marsiske, 41. "What I personally take away from the study is, if you challenge yourself to do some new learning, something that isn't easy at the start, it can have dividends."

The study did not indicate that mental training can hold off all cognitive decline permanently. Rather, as is the case with physical exercise, strengthening the mind appeared to slow decline.

Sherry L. Willis, the lead author of the study and a Pennsylvania State University professor of human development, said those who had the training also reported greater confidence in their ability to solve everyday problems, and this was especially true of the group that got the reasoning training. In performing daily functions, people who got the speed training along with a handful of follow-up sessions significantly outperformed those who did not get such training.

The results, being published today in the Journal of the American Medical Association, are heartening, but Willis and Marsiske cautioned that the biggest challenge lies ahead, in getting people to apply the findings to their lives. Whether it is encouraging people to eat right or to exercise, they said, the hardest part is not getting them to start doing the right things but getting them to keep doing the right things.

"It's just like physical exercise -- when we are approaching the new year we will buy a pass for the gym and go fervently in January and then slack off," Willis said. "Mental exercise is the same way. It has to be consistent, and it has to be challenging. Just like you have to keep increasing the weights at the gym to make it challenging, you have to do the same with mental activity."

To reap the benefits, Willis said, people need to get outside their comfort zones. For someone who likes to solve crossword puzzles, it is important to make sure the puzzles get harder with time -- or to start playing chess. Someone who hates to play games, she said, should find something else that stretches the mind. Mental activities do not have to involve expensive toys; everyday life can offer a variety of mental challenges. Finding a friend who can join in a new activity can be a powerful motivator, she added.

Sally Shumaker, a professor of public health science at Wake Forest University in North Carolina who wrote an editorial accompanying the study, said it pointed the way to a future in which mental training is made widely available.

"I can imagine a situation in which facilities are available in community centers and libraries and aging centers, where people can play some games that are specifically designed to improve cognitive ability," she said. "People are fearful of cognitive decline, and the idea that a small and simple intervention can have an impact is pretty compelling."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two authors of the study and the author of an editorial on the study were used as sources of information for this story.  
 

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Colonoscopy may miss as many as one in every 13 colon cancers, suggests a new study.

Canadian researchers note that their finding should be a heads-up to clinicians performing the exam, as well as to patients preparing for it. Both groups could do things to improve the detection rate, they said.

“Several recent studies have raised questions on the effectiveness of colonoscopy as currently performed in everyday clinical practice on reducing risk of subsequent colon cancer,” lead researcher Dr. Harminder Singh, of the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, in Canada, told Reuters Health by e-mail. “Therefore, it is important to study the factors associated with the diagnosis of colon cancer occurring after colonoscopy.”

During a colonoscopy, a flexible camera is passed through the colon in search of abnormal growths known as polyps and other warning signs of early tumors. It is one of a few screening tests for colon cancer, the second-leading cancer killer in the U.S., according the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Another less expensive test is fecal occult blood testing, which involves taking stool specimens at home and mailing them to the doctor’s office or medical lab. The US Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of medical experts appointed by the federal government, recommends screening people aged 50 to 75 for the disease, but does not specify which test is best.

In their study, Singh and his colleagues identified nearly 5,000 individuals aged 50 to 80 who had been diagnosed with the cancer between 1992 and 2008, across the entire Canadian province of Manitoba.

The team found that about eight percent, or one in every 13 cancers, had been missed during colonoscopies conducted six months to three years prior to diagnosis.

Women were a third more likely to have had their cancer missed, report the researchers in The American Journal of Gastroenterology. And general practice physicians missed cancers 60 percent more often than gastroenterologists.

There are three likely reasons for these “misses,” noted Dr. David Lieberman of the Oregon Health and Science University, in Portland. Tumors may simply have gone unidentified on the exam, or were seen but not completely removed. While rare, he also noted that it is possible that an undetected cancer was actually not present at the exam, but rather grew very quickly afterwards.

No improvement in colonoscopy can do anything to avoid the latter. But the first two reasons are potentially avoidable, Lieberman told Reuters Health in an e-mail.

Given the wide variation in colonoscopy training, the researchers call for standardizing it, including credentialing and re-credentialing.

“There is an urgent need to focus on and improve the outcomes of colonoscopy,” Singh said.

However, Lieberman cautioned against the over-interpretation of the results. “These patients were referred for colonoscopy, most commonly due to symptoms,” Lieberman said. “This is very different from a population undergoing screening.”

Colonoscopy would probably miss a smaller percentage of cancers in such a large population, Lieberman said, because the rate would be lower.

Dr. Charles Kahi of the Indiana University School of Medicine, in Indianapolis, noted that the rate found in the new study was a bit higher than previously reported. But he added that the risk factors identified match those in the earlier studies.

“The key to maximizing protection against colorectal cancer after colonoscopy is performance by an operator with excellent examination” and growth-removal technique, “in a well-prepped colon,” Kahi told Reuters Health by e-mail.

And for this, patients should do their part. “To increase their chances of an early diagnosis, it is important that all individuals undergoing colonoscopy strictly follow the instructions for bowel preparation for colonoscopy,” added Singh, speaking of the large amounts of special drinks consumed before the test to clean out the bowel. “It may be a nuisance but it will help maximize the view during (colonoscopy).”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This story includes two independent sources to great effect. Without their commentary, readers might be inclined to doubt the results of their colonscopies or seek repeated screenings beyond the recommended schedule. In a short amount of space, this story was able to bring in some valuable perspective on an important study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - In an analysis that set off a fierce debate over the health effects of salt, researchers said on Wednesday they had found no evidence that small cuts to salt intake reduce the risk of developing heart disease or dying prematurely.

In a systematic review published by The Cochrane Library, British scientists found that while cutting salt consumption did appear to lead to slight reductions in blood pressure, that was not translated into lower death or heart disease risk.

The researchers said they suspected the trials conducted so far were not big enough to show any benefits to heart health, and called for large-scale studies to be carried out soon.

“With governments setting ever lower targets for salt intake and food manufacturers working to remove it from their products, it’s really important that we do some large research trials to get a full understanding of the benefits and risks of reducing salt intake,” said Rod Taylor of Exeter University, who led the review.

The Cochrane review attracted sharp criticism from nutrition experts. Francesco Cappuccio, head of the World Health Organization’s collaborating center for nutrition at Warwick University, said it was “a surprisingly poor piece of work.”

“This study does not change the priorities outlined worldwide for a population reduction in salt intake to prevent heart attacks and strokes, the greatest killers in the world,” he said in an emailed comment.

Simon Capewell, a professor of Clinical Epidemiology at Liverpool University, said the review was “disappointing and inconclusive” and did not change public health consensus that dietary salt raises blood pressure.

Most experts are agreed that consuming too much salt is not good for you and that cutting salt intake can reduce hypertension in people with normal and high blood pressure.

Many developed nations have government-sanctioned guidelines calling on people to cut their salt or sodium intake for the sake of their longer-term health. The World Health Organization (WHO) lists reducing salt intake among its top 10 “best buys” for reducing rates of chronic disease.

In Britain, the National Institute of Health and Clinical Guidance (NICE) has called for an acceleration of the reduction in salt in the general population from a maximum intake of 6 grams(g) a day for adults by 2015 to 3 g by 2025.

U.S. guidelines recommend Americans consume less than 2.3 g of salt daily, or 1.5 g for certain people who are more at risk for high blood pressure or heart disease.

While previous trials have found there is a blood pressure benefit from cutting salt, research has yet to show if that translates into better overall heart health in the wider population. High blood pressure, or hypertension, is a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases — the leading causes of death worldwide.

Taylor said he thought it did not find any evidence of big benefits because the numbers of people studied and the salt intake reductions were relatively small.

“The people in the trials we analyzed only reduced their salt intake by a moderate amount, so the effect on blood pressure and heart disease was not large,” he said.

For this review, Taylor’s team found seven studies that together included 6,489 participants. This gave the researchers enough data to be able to start drawing conclusions, they said. But even so, the scientists think they would need to have data from at least 18,000 people before they could expect to identify any clear health benefits.

Elaine Rush, a professor of nutrition at Auckland University of Technology in Australia, said that putting a spotlight on single trials and generalizing dietary advice for a single nutrient such as salt was “not helpful.”

“What is helpful is for the food industry to reformulate products to reduce sodium and increase the nutrient quality of foods by using real ingredients,” she said in an emailed comment.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Quotes from several independent sources were included as part of this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A saliva test may someday be able to diagnose a concussion and predict how long symptoms last, according to a study published Monday in the JAMA Pediatrics.

In their study, Penn State College of Medicine researchers found five small molecules called microRNAs in saliva with real potential for identifying concussive symptoms in children, teens and young adults. MicroRNAs influence protein activities throughout the body, and they are easily measured in biofluids, including blood, cerebrospinal fluid and saliva, according to the authors.

Dr. Steve Hicks, senior author of the study and an assistant professor of pediatrics at Penn State College of Medicine, said the "five microRNAs in saliva could predict with approximately 85% accuracy which concussed children would have symptoms one month later. In comparison, standard survey measures that are typically used in clinics were approximately 65% accurate."

The study was funded in part by Quadrant Biosciences, a biotech company that hopes to bring a saliva test for concussion to market in the next 12 to 24 months, Hicks said.

"It's frustrating for both parents and physicians that we can't accurately and objectively predict how long a child's concussion symptoms might last, what those symptoms are likely to consist of and when it might be safe for them to return to sports or school," said Hicks, who, as a practicing pediatrician, has routinely cared for kids with concussions.

For the study, Hicks and his co-authors looked at 52 patients between the ages of 7 and 21, with an average age of 14.

MicroRNA expression was measured in saliva spit into a cup by the patients, who had been injured mostly in sports or car accidents, when they arrived at Penn State Hershey Medical Center for an evaluation. Of the 52, 30 had prolonged symptoms and 22 had short-term symptoms of mild traumatic brain injury.

"We found three microRNAs that were highly associated with specific symptoms one month after injury, such as headache, fatigue and memory difficulties," Hicks said. He added that creating an actual test for use by doctors will require collaboration on the part of researchers.

"Fortunately, the technology required to measure saliva RNA is already employed in medicine; we use it to check patients for upper respiratory viruses in our hospitals and clinics every day," Hicks said. "Modifying this approach for patients with concussions could potentially provide a rapid, objective tool for managing brain injury."

'Way too early to know'

However, the editorial authors, Dr. William P. Meehan III of Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention at Boston Children's Hospital in Massachusetts and Dr. Rebekah Mannix of Brain Injury Center at Boston Children's Hospital, noted that "the relatively small sample size in this study requires larger-scale studies to determine the reliability" of the results.

For example, they noted that the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications is common among those with more severe injury. In the study, those who had used anti-inflammatory medications were the ones with longer-term symptoms. Possibly, then, the drugs may be a potential 'confounding' variable, they wrote, meaning that medication may influence test results and symptoms, adding an element of confusion to the study and its possible interpretation.

Still, "the findings are promising, representing potential biomarkers for the diagnosis, recovery, and prognostic assessment of a sport-related concussion."

Dr. Jeffrey Kutcher, a neurologist and National Director of The Sports Neurology Clinic at The CORE Institute, said that "work like this is important because it does provide potential for tests that can be helpful in the clinical setting."

"I think the main caveat is, this is way too early to know what this type of tool can do for us," added Kutcher, who was not involved in the new research. "The main reason is that there's a difference between simply having a brain that experiences force and being concussed."

The saliva biomarker may be showing that neurons experienced force and not that a there is a concussion, with which the brain cannot perform its typical functions within a normal range, he said: "I would hesitate to assign too much potential groundbreaking science."

Other biomarkers, including blood, are being investigated as potential concussion tests, he said, though "nothing is at this stage or beyond this."

There are also tools that look at the electrical networks that brains form, he said, disclosing that he is consulting for a company working on one such technology. A patient undergoes an electroencephalogram while doing a cognitive task, and the EEG records how the brain responds.

"By actually (measuring) the brain network activity directly, you can look at really what is the functional health of the brain," he said.

In addition, some scientists are exploring functional MRI techniques to look at the metabolic function of different areas of the brain to gain insight into concussion, he said.

Hicks said he and his colleagues are collaborating with others to examine saliva biomarkers in adult athletes and members of the armed services.

"Because the markers we identified in this study are not correlated with patient age, we are hopeful they may be applied in adult populations, as well," he said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes two independent sources: the JAMA Pediatrics editorial and a neurologist, Dr. Jeffrey Kutcher, who directs The Sports Neurology Clinic at The CORE Institute in Michigan. In addition, the story explains that Quadrant Biosciences, which is hoping to market a saliva test for concussions, provided part of the funding for the original study. It also notes that Kutcher is consulting for a company working on an alternative approach to testing for concussion severity using electroencephalograms (EEG).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Leaving a bedroom door or window open may help people sleep better, a study from the Netherlands suggests.

Open windows and doors helped reduce carbon dioxide levels and improve ventilation and air flow, which was related to better sleep quality for the healthy young adults in the study.

“We spend nearly a third of our life in the bedroom environment, but the air quality in our sleeping environment is often overlooked,” said study author Dr. Asit Mishra of Eindhoven University of Technology.

“Imagine this - you are in a confined space and have limited ability to adjust the situation (since you are asleep) while you are possibly surrounded by pollutants,” he told Reuters Health by phone. “This is how things are in bed, covered under duvets or a blanket.”

For one night of the study, 17 volunteers slept with an open window or internal door. On another night, the windows and door to the room were kept closed. In the meantime, Mishra and colleagues monitored carbon dioxide levels, temperature, background noise and humidity. The study participants were asked not to drink alcoholic beverages or caffeinated drinks, which could influence sleep. They each slept alone, and the bedroom layout with furniture arrangement was kept consistent.

For measuring sleep quality, participants wore an armband that measures skin temperature, heat flux, bed temperature and skin moisture levels. They also wore a sensor that tracked their movements at night, including indications of restlessness.

Closed environments tended to have less background noise – but they also had significantly higher carbon dioxide levels, which indicated lower ventilation levels.

Open conditions were slightly cooler than closed, although humidity levels were similar across settings, according to the report in the journal Indoor Air.

Notably, carbon dioxide levels were lower when windows or doors were open.

Overall, skin temperature and the bed temperature were higher in closed conditions than open conditions. The number of awakenings and sleep efficiency improved as carbon dioxide levels decreased.

“Opening an internal door can be a reasonably good alternative if you don’t want to open windows, either for noise concerns or security concerns,” Mishra said.

A limitation of the study is that the motion sensor often slipped off the sleepers at night.

“Sleep quality is affected by many factors, such as health and emotional states, bedding conditions and different environmental conditions, including noise levels and temperature,” said Dr. Nuno Canha of the University of Lisbon in Portugal. Canha, who wasn’t involved with this study, researches indoor air quality and sleep during different ventilation patterns. He is also part of LIFE Index-Air, a European research group that focuses on human exposure to pollutants.

In a recent study, Canha and colleagues found that closed doors and windows led to higher levels of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and other substances such as formaldehyde.

“Sleep is essential to our life in several areas: health, well-being and productivity,” Canha told Reuters Health by email. “The exposure we are under while asleep is continuous . . . and we should play it safe in order to breathe better air during sleep.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A sleep researcher who wasn’t involved in the study was interviewed, and we could detect no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Not every patient feels that way. Ms. Stewart’s physician, Dr. Andrew G. Kaufman, director of interventional pain management at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J., described a patient who tested a stimulator and experienced “unbelievable” pain relief, yet simply couldn’t adjust to the sensation created by the device and decided not to keep it. “She couldn’t get over the background buzzing,” Dr. Kaufman said.

Still, most patients accept this vibrating version of white noise, says Dr. Richard North, a retired neurosurgery professor at Johns Hopkins who developed several patents related to the technology, although he no longer receives royalties.

“When they first feel the sensation they say, ‘That’s weird,’” said Dr. North, who treats patients at the LifeBridge Health Brain and Spine Institute in Baltimore. “It quickly becomes clear that ‘weird’ is going to be just fine if it replaces the pain.”

Chronic pain is a particularly difficult problem to understand and solve. Pain is normal after an injury or because of a health problem. But sometimes the nerves misfire and continue sending intense pain signals to the brain even after the injury heals. Dr. Vijay B. Vad, a sports medicine specialist at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, compares the problem to a thermostat in a cool room. “If it’s 65 degrees in the house, but the thermostat thinks it’s 50 degrees, the heat keeps running,” Dr. Vad said.

The condition, complex regional pain syndrome, or C.R.P.S., typically develops after a medical procedure or an accident. But even minor injuries, like a sprain from a fall, can cause it. The syndrome may follow 5 percent of all injuries, according to the Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy Association, an advocacy group for people with chronic pain.

Spinal cord stimulation works by implanting an electrode near the spinal cord, inserted through the same place where epidural pain relief is injected for women in labor. Electrical pulses scramble or block the pain signals traveling through the nervous system, preventing them from reaching the brain.

But spinal cord stimulators offer significant relief to only about half the patients who try them. In September, the journal Pain published the largest-ever clinical trial of spinal cord stimulators, comparing their use with conventional pain therapies, including drugs, nerve blocks and physical therapy. The study, which was financed by the implant maker Medtronic, followed 100 patients who had undergone spinal surgery and had developed chronic pain in one or both legs.

Every patient received conventional pain treatment, but half were also given a spinal cord implant. Pain fell by half for 48 percent of the implant patients but only 9 percent of the others.

The implants cost about $20,000, and the procedure, hospital care and follow-up can bring the total bill to about $40,000. In August, the medical journal Neurosurgery showed that spinal cord implants were far cheaper than additional operations to treat pain.

Another concern is that patients who require high doses of stimulation drain the battery quickly, requiring surgery to replace the device. New rechargeable versions of the stimulators have helped resolve that concern.

For some patients, relief is only temporary, and the pain returns. Doctors say simple adjustments to the device may solve that problem.

“Sometimes efficacy wanes over time, but I still believe in them,” said Dr. Kaufman, also an assistant professor of anesthesiology at the New Jersey Medical School. “When drugs don’t work, what else is there?”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story provides a good mix of sources, including one patient and three pain experts (one of whom relates the story of a dissatisfied patient). It also reports a potential conflict of interest among the authors of the study it cites, as well as with one of the expert sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers Say Common Test For Prostate Cancer May Not Work

More bad news on the prostate cancer front: A widely used test that's supposed to help doctors and patients predict the outcome of most prostate cancers is basically worthless.

That's according to a study just published in the journal CANCER.

The new study discrediting the test, coupled with persistent questions about how useful prostate screening is for most men anyway, add up to a whole lot of discussion points patients should take to their doctors.

The test in question is called "clinical staging." It relies on certain signs doctors use to classify how advanced an individual patient's cancer is – that is, what stage it's in. It includes criteria like whether the doctor can feel a nodule through rectal examination, and whether a tumor is detected through a test called trans-rectal ultrasound.

Ten years ago, the American College of Surgeons Commission on Cancer decreed that doctors should use these types of clinical staging tests to help decide how to treat cancers.

"Our findings question the utility of our current staging system for localized prostate cancer," says Dr. Adam Reese of the University of California at San Francisco, lead author of the study.

To begin with, doctors err in using this prostate test 35 percent of the time. When these errors occur, the study says, doctors most often conclude the cancer is less serious than it really is.

But even when researchers allowed for these errors, they found the test doesn't predict how patients ultimately do.

Dr. Gerald Andriole of Washington University, who was not involved in the study, told Shots he wasn't surprised by the results. Recently, he says, urologists "have begun to realize these criteria are not adequate. But this is the first study that quantifies the magnitude of the inadequacy."

Even so, Andriole says, the findings may not make too much difference in the real world. Before treatment recommendations are made, doctors put most prostate tumors through other tests, too, like the Gleason score, and they look at the percentage of biopsies that are positive for cancer cells.

"I use all those parameters to tell a patient what his chances of a good outcome are," Andriole says.

Still, both study author Reese and Andriole say the new study may serve as a wakeup call to those who are over-relying on the clinical staging system.

They say what's really needed is a set of tests that classify prostate tumors by what genes are turned on or off in the cells.

Once this is sorted out, doctors treating prostate cancer will be less like the blind men who try to guess what kind of creature they're dealing with when they grasp the elephant's trunk or tail.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An expert in this field without ties to the study reported on was quoted in this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
How To Beat Sleep Apnea? Cut It Out (Surgically)

At 32, it just didn't make sense that Daniel Sheiner was exhausted literally from the moment he woke up. "It didn't get any better over the course of the day, and I knew that was not normal," Sheiner says.

Sheiner is a software designer and programmer. His job suffered as a result of his fatigue.

"I would miss conversations," Sheiner says. "I would ask a question that had already been answered."

Sheiner suspected he had sleep apnea because it ran in his family. But he was not overweight, which is the biggest risk factor for the disorder — some 60 percent to 90 percent of patients diagnosed with apnea have a body mass index, or BMI, over 28.

A sleep study confirmed Sheiner had one of the worst cases of apnea his doctors had ever seen. After trying a number of different treatments, his doctors finally tried a surgery using robots to treat his stubborn apnea — with positive results.

According to Erica Thaler, an ear, nose and throat surgeon at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Sheiner's sleep study found that he woke up about 112 times every hour. That meant Sheiner stopped breathing for at least 10 seconds about two times every minute.

Sleep apnea is a chronic and common sleep disorder. People with this condition stop breathing while sleeping.

Like Sheiner, they often find themselves suddenly and repeatedly gasping for breath during the night. Their airway is clogged, sometimes because their tonsils and tonsilar tissue in the back of their throat are enlarged.

This was exactly the case for Sheiner.

"Daniel's obstruction was both at the level of the soft palate and at the back of the tongue," Thaler says. "He had very large tonsils, but his tonsil tissue was also enlarged in the palate area and also at the back of his tongue."

Sheiner was put on a nighttime breathing machine. In bed he wore a face mask, which was connected to a tube that was connected to a device that pumped air into his nose and mouth.

The Continuous Positive Airway Pressure machine, or CPAP, as it is often referred to, works for about half of all patients who try it. It can be cumbersome, Thaler says.

But Sheiner was extremely committed to trying it. In fact, he tried a number of different types of machines, but none of them worked.

So Thaler suggested a type of robotic surgery currently used to remove cancerous tumors at the back of the throat. Thaler was starting to perform it on sleep apnea patients, to remove tonsils and excess tissue.

"What the robot allows you to do is get into a small, confined space without using hands," Thaler says. "Human hands are huge, and robot hands are tiny, and yet they can do exactly the same thing if you control them remotely."

So, about a year ago, Thaler performed surgery on Sheiner, removing both his tonsils and excess tissue. Sheiner is one of only about a half-dozen patients to have this robotic surgery for apnea.

After surgery, Sheiner says, "it was a whole new life." He had energy, an ability to focus and get things done. "I find myself solving problems much more quickly and more confidently."

He's exercising at the gym three times a week, lifting weights. He is also starting to experiment with recipes and cooking, something he had absolutely no energy or interest in doing before the surgery.

Surgery Not For Everyone

The surgery Sheiner had isn't right for everyone. Rashmi N. Aurora is a sleep specialist at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York. She is also chairwoman of the Standards of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine.

"I wouldn't send a middle-age obese man for surgery as their first option," Aurora says. "I would say let's lose the weight; let's use CPAP and see a nutritionist; let's avoid the alcohol and let's see how you do." The apnea can probably be taken care of with these noninvasive techniques, she says, and invasive surgery can be avoided.

But when she sees a young, thin person with severe apnea, Aurora says, surgery might be the answer.

"The upper airway starts with the nose and mouth and runs down to the vocal chords, so there's a lot of room for obstruction to occur," Aurora says. Some patients may require surgery to remove the uvula or the tonsils or excess tissue, or all of them, she says. Then, there's surgery to remove blockage in the nasal passage.

Oftentimes, Aurora says, patients need a series of surgeries to completely treat apnea. And even then, success rates aren't high; they're effective only 20 to 30 percent of the time.

The only surgery proved effective more than 90 percent of the time is a significant and highly invasive surgery. Maxillomandibular advancement, or MMA, involves literally slicing the jaw in half and moving it forward in order to widen the patient's airway.

For patients with recessed chins, small jaws and airways narrowed by facial structure, this might be the surgery for them. But it can take nearly a year to recover, and many patients opt not to have it.

The "new" CPAP machines are more sophisticated, Aurora says. They're less cumbersome, less noisy and can actually "sense" the magnitude of blockage and adjust air pressure being blown into the nose or mouth, she says. Noninvasive measures are always the first lines of defense, she says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes the perspective of one independent expert.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 12, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Blood pressure drugs that block the protein angiotensin appear to reduce the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia, a new study finds.

"We think it [angiotensin] is one of the most important factors determining healthy blood vessels and also acts in the brain to help neurons to be a little more resilient," said Dr. Benjamin Wolozin, a professor of pharmacology and neurology at Boston University and senior author of a report on the findings, published online Jan. 13 in BMJ.

That report describes a study of more than 819,000 U.S. veterans, nearly all men, that found that those taking blood pressure medications that block cell receptors for angiotensin had a lower risk for dementia than those taking other cardiovascular medicines.

A similar but smaller protective effect was found for a related drug, lisinopril (Prinivil, Zestril), which blocks production of the active form of angiotensin.

Angiotensin causes blood vessels to constrict, raising blood pressure. It is produced when enzymes act to convert a precursor molecule, angiotensinogen. Lisinopril is a member of a drug family called ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors. Other examples of ACE inhibitors are benazepril (Lotensin), enalapril (Vasotec) and ramipril (Altace).

Reducing angiotensin production by giving ACE inhibitors can lower blood pressure. The same effect can be achieved with drugs that block the cell receptors through which angiotensin acts. Called angiotensin receptor blockers, these drugs have a greater protective effect against dementia than ACE inhibitors, the study found. Such drugs include candesartan (Atacand), irbesartan (Avapro), losartan (Cozaar) and valsartan (Diovan).

In the study, men taking an angiotensin receptor blocker had a 24 percent lower incidence of dementia than those taking other cardiovascular drugs. The risk was 19 percent lower for men taking ACE inhibitors. The risk was nearly halved for those taking both angiotensin-targeting drugs.

In men with Alzheimer's disease, use of an angiotensin receptor blocker reduced admission to nursing homes by half. Combined angiotensin medication therapy reduced nursing home admissions by two-thirds.

Wolozin said that it's not clear why the drugs would have a beneficial effect on the brain, but improved blood flow probably plays a role.

"If you get no blood to the brain, you're not going to think well," he said. "Also, in brain cells there is more than one kind of angiotensin receptor. By blocking bad receptors, you are left with the good ones so that helps neurons become more resilient."

But the evidence is not sufficient to support routine use of angiotensin receptor blockers to prevent Alzheimer's disease, Wolozin said. The new report describes an observational study, one that lacks the strict controls that are needed for convincing proof.

"Any study like this is hypothesis-generating," he said. "You only know for sure when you have done clinical prospective trials."

His advice for anyone considering angiotensin receptors blockers to reduce dementia risk: "They should consult with their physicians." There are potential hazards, such as too-low blood pressure that can lead to damaging falls, Wolozin said.

Caution was urged by Dr. Richard B. Lipton, vice chairman of neurology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City, who has done work on the genetics of Alzheimer's disease.

The angiotensin hypothesis makes sense, Lipton said, because improved blood flow to the brain helps nerve cells and reduces formation of Alzheimer's-related amyloid protein.

But there have been a number of observational studies implicating various molecules, including estrogens, in dementia, he said. "The sequence is that when you do the randomized trial, you don't get the same effect," Lipton said.

On the other hand, such randomized trials usually include people who are close to having Alzheimer's disease, and "it could be different if you gave the drugs earlier," Lipton said.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has more on blood pressure medications.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story did quote one independent expert who injected a cautionary note – in addition to the lead researcher. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 2, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Despite the stereotype that Americans are eating more unhealthful foods that leave them vulnerable to assorted diseases, a new study suggests the opposite may be true.

Harvard researchers report that they found evidence that better diets since 1999 have saved more than one million people from dying prematurely. They also believe improved diets have significantly cut diabetes and heart disease, and even slightly trimmed cancer cases.

The findings paint a surprising picture of American health. But study author Dong Wang, a graduate student with the departments of nutrition and epidemiology at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health in Boston, cautioned that it's not time to declare victory in the battle against unhealthy eating.

"The overall American diet is still poor," he said. "Huge room exists for further improvement."

The researchers wanted to understand how changes in the American diet in the 21st century affected health over time. To get insight into the answer, they analyzed the results of seven health and nutrition surveys including almost 34,000 adults aged 20 and older between 1999 and 2012.

The researchers ranked diets on a healthy eating scale from 0 (poor diet) to 110 (perfect diet). From 1999 to 2012, the overall rating increased, from 40 to 48.

On the positive side, over time, Americans ate more fruit, whole grains, nuts and legumes and polyunsaturated fatty acids, Wang said. They also ate less trans fats, sugar-sweetened beverages and juice, and red and processed meat. But the intake of salt actually went up.

The researchers extrapolated their findings and estimated that the improvement in diets prevented over one million premature deaths and lowered heart disease cases by almost 9 percent, type 2 diabetes cases by nearly 13 percent and cancer cases by just over 1 percent.

According to Wang, the study findings suggest that healthier diets lower the risk of death in a variety of ways. Among other things, improved diets appear to lower the risk of chronic diseases and boost the survival of people who have those conditions. Even a year or two of a better diet appears to have the power to affect survival rates, he said.

The study authors didn't analyze whether their estimates match up to actual death rates in the United States. But other research has pinpointed a decline in death rates in this century, Wang said.

Dr. Sonia Anand, a professor of medicine and epidemiology at McMaster University in Hamilton, Canada, praised the study, saying it's "reasonable" to link changes in diet to death rates in this way. But, she said, nutrition research like this has limitations because it relies on people's memories of what they ate. As a result, she said, it's crucial to look at a variety of studies and see if trends hold up.

According to study author Wang, trans fats have been almost eliminated from the food supply, so what is needed next is more taxation on sugary drinks and more regulations requiring salt to be reduced in food.

He also said the government can do more to improve diets for the poor, who haven't seen the same level of improvements as other groups. One option, he said, is to increase the number of farmers markets that accept food stamps.

The study is published in the November issue of Health Affairs.

For more about healthy eating, visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: As noted, the article would have been stronger if it had quoted more senior authors of the paper and more outside experts, but it does quote one and the quote is strong.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists at Newcastle University believe a drug commonly prescribed for Type 2 diabetes could be routinely taken by Type 1 diabetic patients to slow the development or delay heart disease.

Metformin is an inexpensive treatment that is often used for Type 2 diabetes to lower blood sugar levels by reducing glucose production in the liver.

The drug is not regularly given to patients with Type 1 diabetes. However, for the first time, a clinical trial has revealed metformin can promote a patient's ability to repair their own damaged blood vessels by increasing vascular stem cells.

Heart disease is the leading cause of illness in diabetic patients, accounting for more than half of all fatalities. Metformin may be used to lower Type 1 diabetic patients' risk of developing this complication.

Findings of the clinical trial are published today in the journal, Cardiovascular Diabetology. This follows previous laboratory work at Newcastle University which explored the mechanism behind metformin.

Dr Jolanta Weaver, Senior Lecturer in Diabetes Medicine at Newcastle University and Honorary Consultant Diabetologist at Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Gateshead, led both studies.

She believes this new research is a major development in understanding the best ways to further improve treatment in Type 1 diabetes.

Dr Weaver said: "As the outcomes of heart disease is worse in diabetic versus non-diabetic patients, there is a need to identify additional treatment options.

"Metformin could routinely be used by patients with Type 1 diabetes to help lower their chances of developing heart disease, by increasing a repair mechanism created by vascular stem cells released from the bone marrow.

"Our research is an exciting step forward as it may have positive clinical implications for patients with increased risk of cardiovascular disease by improving their treatment options.

"For the first time, this study has shown metformin has additional benefit beyond improving diabetes control when given to patients with relatively well controlled Type 1 diabetes.

"We have established the drug increases patients own vascular stem cells, which will help delay or slowdown heart disease.

"Our findings also show that the cells associated with damaged blood vessels were reduced, confirming that the repair of blood vessels was taking place in our patients."

Researchers studied a treatment group of 23 people aged 19-64 who had Type 1 diabetes for up to 23 years and had no evidence of heart disease.

Patients were given metformin at a dose they could tolerate, between one to three tablets a day, for eight weeks. Participants were advised to adjust their insulin to keep blood glucose levels safe.

Scientists measured patients' stem cells directly in the blood and also grew stem cells in a test tube, observing how they behaved. Another cell type was also counted to assess damaged blood vessels.

The participants were matched with nine patients within the same age bracket who took standard insulin treatment and 23 healthy non-diabetic people aged 20-64.

Experts found that the stem cells of patients who took metformin were able to promote the repair of the blood vessels and there was an improvement in how vascular stem cells worked.

Type 1 diabetes is a lifelong autoimmune condition that develops when the pancreas does not produce any insulin, causing a person's blood sugar level to become too high. It is estimated around 400,000 people in the UK have the condition.

Dr Weaver said: "We have shown that all our patients in the study had their insulin doses reduced after taking metformin and have not suffered any serious adverse effect.

"Patients with Type 1 diabetes may wish to consider discussing with their GP the possibility of adding metformin, even at a very low dose, to the insulin that they are taking. However, care needs to be taken to adjust insulin dose to prevent too low glucose levels."

A pilot study was funded by Diabetes Research and Wellness Foundation and the extended study was financially supported by the Diabetes Research Fund in Gateshead.

Dr Eleanor Kennedy, Research Manager at Diabetes Research and Wellness Foundation, said: "The Diabetes Research and Wellness Foundation is delighted to have funded the initial pilot study that led Dr Weaver and her colleagues to conduct this small clinical trial.

"The results, which indicate that metformin, a drug commonly used in the treatment of Type 2 diabetes, could also have a powerful effect in people with Type 1 diabetes is unexpected.

"We hope that these results can lead to a much larger clinical trial."

Quantity surveyor Alex Laws was part of the Newcastle University clinical trial and is delighted with the results of the study.

The 31-year-old, of Gateshead, was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes at the age of just seven and has good control of her condition. She was enrolled on the clinical trial in the summer of 2013.

Alex said: "I was keen to be part of the clinical trial as I know how important research is into helping people with the condition - I previously worked in the medical research field.

"People with Type 1 diabetes can suffer from a number of complications, especially in the long-term, so it's important as much as possible is done to limit serious problems.

"Heart disease is a concern for people with Type 1 diabetes so any treatment that can help with this and give an advantage to the patient is a good thing."
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that the study was funded by the Diabetes Research and Wellness Foundation and the Diabetes Research Fund in Gateshead. Neither the news release or published study address potential conflicts of interest. The funding foundation lists only its board of directors and no background information on the group is readily available.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Despite the availability of effective therapies, glaucoma remains a leading cause of blindness. Nearly 3 million people in the United States have the condition. It is often marked by elevated internal eye pressure, called intraocular pressure. Medicated eye drops taken daily or twice daily can lower internal eye pressure to help prevent damage to the optic nerve. But studies show that many patients do not take glaucoma eye drops as directed due to factors such as forgetfulness or physical limitations like arthritis. 1 Some studies show that half of patients stop taking their prescription glaucoma eye drops after a year, leaving them vulnerable to vision loss. 2

Researchers are tackling this challenge of medication adherence with new drug delivery methods. One technology involves a thin silicone ring suffused with medication that slowly releases over time. An ophthalmologist fits the patient with the ring. No surgery is required. The ring is designed to be replaced by an ophthalmologist every six months. This eliminates the need for glaucoma patients to regularly put in medicated eye drops themselves.

Ophthalmologists at 10 sites nationwide tested the ring in a phase 2 clinical trial on patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension. In the study, 64 patients received the topical ocular insert containing the glaucoma drug bimatoprost. They were also supplied artificial tears. The control group of 66 patients wore an insert treated with no drug but twice a day used 0.5 percent timolol drops, the regulatory benchmark for glaucoma drugs. Eye pressure in the bimatoprost group fell 3.2 to 6.4 mmHg over six months, in comparison to 4.2 to 6.4 mmHG for the timolol group. Overall, eye pressure decreased in the group wearing the bimatoprost ring by about 20 percent from the initial measurements over six months.

Authors said the device was well-tolerated and safe, with a high retention rate of 89 percent for both groups at six months. The ring became dislodged in 15 patients but was replaced each time, allowing therapy to continue. Some patients experienced itchiness and eye redness, which is not unusual for patients taking glaucoma medication.

"In making effective treatments easier for patients, the hope is that we can reduce vision loss from glaucoma, and possibly other diseases," said study author James D. Brandt, M.D., director of the UC Davis Medical Center Glaucoma Service. "What is exciting is that this is just one of several sustained-release drug delivery methods designed to help patients who have trouble taking daily eye drops."

A phase 3 study of a larger group of patients is expected to begin later in 2016. The authors noted the device could also be used for non-glaucoma medications, with potential applications for dry eye, allergies and inflammation. In addition, the non-invasive nature of the device and its relatively large surface area make this technology a potential candidate for delivering multiple ocular drugs at once, further reducing the burden of self-administration on patients.

"Six-month IOP Reduction with a Topical Bimatoprost Ocular Insert: Results of a Phase 2 Randomized Controlled Study," Brandt, et al. Ophthalmology, article in press, May 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2016.04.026. The results are also being presented today at the Ophthalmology Innovation Summit in New Orleans. The authors receive financial support from ForSight VISION5, manufacturer of the bimatoprost ring.

For more information on glaucoma, visit the American Academy of Ophthalmology's EyeSmart® public information website, www.aao.org/eye-health.

About the American Academy of Ophthalmology

The American Academy of Ophthalmology is the world's largest membership association of eye physicians and surgeons. A global community of 32,000 ophthalmologists, we are passionate about protecting sight and fighting preventable blindness. For more than 120 years, we have been educators, innovators and advocates for the public and our profession to ensure the highest-quality medical and surgical eye care. Our EyeSmart® program is a preeminent source of eye health information for the public and empowers people to preserve their vision. For more information, visit www.aao.org.

About Ophthalmology 

Ophthalmology, the official journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmology, publishes original, peer-reviewed, clinically-applicable research. Topics include the results of clinical trials, new diagnostic and surgical techniques, treatment methods, technology assessments, translational science reviews and editorials. For more information, visit www.aaojournal.org.

1 Patterns of Glaucoma Medication Adherence over Four Years of Follow-Up, Newman-Casey, et al. Ophthalmology, 2015. 

2 Adherence and persistence with glaucoma therapy, Schwartz, et al, Survey of Ophthalmology, Nov. 2008
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the authors of the study receive financial support from ForSight VISION5, which makes the ring.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, March 10, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A thyroid-derived cholesterol-lowering drug that could be an alternative to the widely used statin medications has done well in a small, early trial, Swedish and American researchers report.

In the trial, various doses of the drug, eprotirome, a laboratory-engineered version of thyroid hormone, were added to statin treatment for 168 people whose high levels of LDL cholesterol had not been lowered by previous use of statins. The combination did lower cholesterol levels in the 12-week trial and, most importantly, did not cause the feared side effects on the heart and other organs that have plagued similar thyroid-based treatments.

"There was no doubt that eprotirome would lower LDL cholesterol. Thyroid hormone is nature's own statin," said Dr. Paul W. Ladenson, a professor of endocrinology and metabolism at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and lead author of a report on the trial, published in the March 11 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. "But this is a demonstration of lipid-lowering effect without thyroid toxicity."

Dr. Bo Angelin, a professor of clinical metabolic research at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, where the drug was developed, said that the trial demonstrated that careful targeting of the drug's effect within the body could obtain the benefits of thyroid hormone on blood cholesterol levels, without causing damaging side effects. The trial was funded in part by Karo Bio, a small commercial spinoff of the institute.

"We knew that thyroid hormone could lower lipid [cholesterol] levels but would have side effects on the circulation and bones and cause diarrhea," Angelin said. "Even if the lipid levels were OK, it would be overall negative for patients."

However, he added, "if we can get the thyroid effect in the liver [where cholesterol is metabolized] but not in other organs, we would be OK."

Frequent monitoring showed no ill effects on the hearts and bones of those taking the drug, the report said.

And though statins are widely used and most often successful, an alternative to them would be welcome, Ladenson said. Statins are not effective in up to a quarter of potential users because of unacceptable muscle pain or simple failure to lower cholesterol levels, he said.

"The first importance of the trial is that it shows hepatic [liver] targeting of hormonal action," Ladenson said. "The second exciting part is its impact on lipids other than LDL cholesterol."

Though statins lower LDL ("bad") cholesterol, they have no effect on other blood fats, such as lipoprotein A, which is believed to be equally damaging, Ladenson said. He said that significant reductions of blood levels of those fats were seen in the trial.

Larger and longer studies are needed to determine whether eprotirome will have the hoped-for effect on blood fat levels without side effects and will ultimately reduce the risk of heart attacks and other cardiovascular diseases, both Ladenson and Angelin said, adding that such trials now are in the planning stages.

At best, results would not be available for "at least two to three years," Angelin said.

If eprotirome does pass all the anticipated tests successfully, its use at first probably would be in combination with a statin, Angelin said. Use as a single drug treatment for elevated cholesterol levels could follow, first in selected patients, then more widely, he said.

It's best to move cautiously, agreed Dr. Robert M. Califf, vice chancellor for clinical research at Duke University.

"The effects on LDL cholesterol and lipoproteins are pretty exciting," Califf said. "But if there is one thing we've learned about drugs in this arena, it's that we need large trials to see how they measure up in terms of risk and benefit."

The trial's researchers were careful to list indications of possible harmful side effects, such as a reduction in levels of HDL ("good") cholesterol, Califf said. But he echoed the thought that a longer-term and larger test is needed to determine the incidence of some possible major side effects, such as impotence.

"I'm not sure I'd want to sign up for that one before I had longer-term results," Califf said. "Being impotent is no fun."

The American Heart Association has more on cholesterol-lowering drugs.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Important caveats were included in the independent expert’s views at the end of the story. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
So should U.S. women continue to get routine mammograms? It's a "close call," says H. Gilbert Welch, MD, MPH, of the Dartmouth Institute in Lebanon, N.H.

"This is a test that women who want it should be able to have," Welch tells WebMD. "But it should not be jammed down people's throats. ... The system we are working in leads doctors to coax, scare, and coerce women into having this test."

Why would a woman at normal risk of breast cancer want to get routine mammograms? The obvious answer is that these tests save lives.

How many lives? If the full 10% drop in breast cancer deaths among screened women in the Norwegian study is totally due to mammograms themselves -- Welch calls this an optimistic assumption -- one life is saved for every 2,500 women who get regular mammograms.

But what's the harm of routine mammograms?

"The biggest harm is you are treated for breast cancer unnecessarily, for a cancer that was never going to cause problems," Welch says. "Because we don't know which cancers these are, all cancers are treated. This means some women will undergo needless surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy. On balance, this is about five to 15 of those 2,500 women screened."

Moreover, a large number of screened women will have worrisome mammogram results.

"Among the 2,500 women screened, at least 1,000 will be told something looks wrong on their mammogram, and they will have to worry that they have cancer," Welch says. "The vast majority will turn out not to have cancer, but all of them will worry."

Welch notes that many women may find that the benefits of routine mammograms outweigh these risks.

"Every woman has to make her own decision about how to weigh these very dissimilar things," Welch says. "Some will benefit in a very large way. But to achieve that benefit, a lot of others will have to go through something with very negative effects. It is not wrong to want a routine mammogram, and it is not wrong not to want one."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Swedish Study Finds Surgery For Prostate Cancer Better Than Waiting

For men diagnosed with prostate cancer, uncertainty about what to do remains a big problem, despite years of research on the options.

Now, a Swedish study suggests that radical prostatectomy — complete removal of the prostate gland — is better than "watchful waiting" for the treatment of younger men with low-risk prostate cancer.

On the surface, this seems to contradict a U.S. trend toward holding off on surgery and monitoring men who have low-risk cancers with what's called "active surveillance."

But don't leap to any conclusions. Like every new study of prostate cancer, the results need to be carefully parsed.

First, the study results, which appear in this week's New England Journal of Medicine. It's actually an update of a 2008 report, with an additional three years of data on the nearly 700 men who volunteered for the trial up to 15 years ago. All of them had early-stage prostate cancer at the beginning.

The study found 38 percent fewer prostate cancer deaths among men randomly assigned to the surgery group versus those in what the Swedes called the watchful-waiting group. Men who had surgery had 41 percent lower risk of their cancer spreading throughout the body, and 66 percent less risk of growth within the prostate.

The survival benefits were restricted to men under 65. For this group, surgery saved one life for every seven men who had prostatectomies — considered a favorable ratio. And it applied to men with tumors considered low-risk, meaning they have a relatively low Gleason score, a marker of tumor aggressiveness.

"Our findings show that some tumors that are considered to be low-risk at diagnosis do pose a threat to life, especially if they are not surgically removed," the study authors write.

So is this a slam-dunk for radical prostatectomy? Game over?

Far from it. In an editorial accompanying the study, Dr. Dr. Matthew Smith of Massachusetts General Hospital makes some important points.

First, only about 1 in 20 men in the Swedish study had a prostate cancer diagnosis based on a high PSA level. Almost 90 percent had tumors their doctors could feel on digital rectal exams. But in the U.S., most prostate cancers are identified by PSA screening, and less than half have palpable tumors.

This is important, because experts believe many prostate tumors found by PSA are likely to be slow-growing — perhaps so slow they will never cause a problem before the man dies of something else.

So "low risk" in the Swedish study means higher-risk than the current "low risk" men diagnosed in the United States. By the way, 9 out of 10 prostate cancers in the U.S. these days is considered low risk.

Second, the Swedish study compared radical prostatectomy to watchful waiting. And Smith points out that "watchful waiting" does not mean the same thing as "active surveillance."

"Watchful waiting means we're not going to treat you now and if you progress clinically, we'll treat you with hormone therapy – not with curative intent," Smith tells Shots.

"Active surveillance means observing the patient in a proactive way, with regularly scheduled biopsies," he adds. If there's a sign the cancer is progressing, doctors currently would treat with intent to cure, using surgery, radiation or both.

Smith makes another point: Both surgical techniques and radiation therapy technology have improved since the Swedish study was done. So there's reason to think men followed with active surveillance and treated when necessary would fare better than the "watchful waiting" group in the newly published study.

Unfortunately, there haven't been any large studies in which prostatectomy and radiation therapy have been compared in patients with early-stage prostate cancer who have been randomly assigned to one or the other.

Two such studies are underway. Results are some years off. But Smith warns against assuming those results will settle the question of how men with early-stage prostate cancer should be treated.

"There will always be questions, and an ongoing need to individualize therapy," he says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included quotes from the author of an editorial about the study reported on.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bottom Line: The investigational anticancer therapeutic abemaciclib, which targets CDK4 and CDK6, showed durable clinical activity when given as continuous single-agent therapy to patients with a variety of cancer types, including breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), glioblastoma, and melanoma, according to results from a phase I clinical trial.

Journal in Which the Study was Published: Cancer Discovery, a journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.

Senior authors: Amita Patnaik, MD, associate director of clinical research at South Texas Accelerated Research Therapeutics in San Antonio, Texas, and Geoffrey I. Shapiro, MD, PhD, director of the Early Drug Development Center at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.

Background: In February 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib (Ibrance) for use in combination with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole for treating postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer.

The oral CDK4/6 inhibitor abemaciclib is a very different molecule from palbociclib, with distinct attributes that contribute to its discrete therapeutic effects, in particular, its single-agent activity, according to Shapiro. For example, abemaciclib has greater selectivity for CDK4 compared with palbociclib, which may explain why it does not affect white blood cell counts as severely, allowing it to be taken on a continuous schedule without treatment holidays, he said. Abemaciclib also penetrates the central nervous system, whereas palbociclib does not, raising the possibility that it could be used to treat primary or metastatic brain tumors, he added.

How the Study Was Conducted and Results: Patnaik, Shapiro, and colleagues enrolled 225 patients with a variety of types of advanced cancer in the phase I clinical trial designed to evaluate the safety and preliminary efficacy of abemaciclib. In the dose escalation phase, the researchers determined that the maximum tolerated dose was 200 milligrams (mg) every 12 hours; the dose-limiting toxicity was grade 3 fatigue.

In the expansion phase, single-agent abemaciclib was administered to 47 patients with breast cancer, 68 with NSCLC, 17 with glioblastoma, 26 with melanoma, and 15 with colorectal cancer. Among these patients, the most common treatment-related adverse events were fatigue, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, kidney dysfunction, and decreased red and white blood cell counts.

Radiographic responses were observed for some patients with breast cancer, NSCLC, and melanoma. Among the 36 patients with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, 11 had a partial response, with four of the 11 responders having continued prior endocrine therapy, and an additional 18 patients had stable disease. Among the 68 patients with NSCLC, two had a partial response and 31 had stable disease; one patient who had a partial response and 12 who had stable disease were known to have KRAS-mutant NSCLC. Among the 26 patients with melanoma, one had a partial response and six had stable disease. Three of the 17 patients with glioblastoma had stable disease, with two of them continuing to receive treatment without disease progression for 19 and 23 cycles, respectively.

Author Comment: "These data show that abemaciclib is an oral drug that can be taken on a continuous schedule and achieve durable clinical activity against multiple tumors including breast and lung cancers," said Shapiro.

"The results of the trial supported the FDA decision to grant breakthrough therapy designation to abemaciclib (previously known as LY2835219) for patients with refractory hormone receptor-positive advanced or metastatic breast cancer," added Patnaik.

Limitations: Patnaik explained that because this study included 225 patients with different types of cancer, confirmatory clinical trials in specific patient populations are necessary to precisely define the role of abemaciclib in cancer care. Multiple clinical trials have already been initiated to evaluate abemaciclib as a treatment for certain groups of patients with breast cancer and NSCLC, as well as children with primary brain tumors and adults with brain metastases, she noted.

Funding & Disclosures: The study was funded by Eli Lilly and Company. Patnaik has received research funding from Lilly. Shapiro served on an advisory board for Lilly during the conduct of the study; reports receiving personal fees from Lilly, GI Therapeutics, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, and grants from Lilly for work other than reported here; and is an investigator on several trials using other CDK4/6 inhibitors, including palbociclib and ribociclib.

About the American Association for Cancer Research

Founded in 1907, the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) is the world's first and largest professional organization dedicated to advancing cancer research and its mission to prevent and cure cancer. AACR membership includes more than 35,000 laboratory, translational, and clinical researchers; population scientists; other health care professionals; and patient advocates residing in 104 countries. The AACR marshals the full spectrum of expertise of the cancer community to accelerate progress in the prevention, biology, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer by annually convening more than 30 conferences and educational workshops, the largest of which is the AACR Annual Meeting with nearly 19,500 attendees. In addition, the AACR publishes eight prestigious, peer-reviewed scientific journals and a magazine for cancer survivors, patients, and their caregivers. The AACR funds meritorious research directly as well as in cooperation with numerous cancer organizations. As the Scientific Partner of Stand Up To Cancer, the AACR provides expert peer review, grants administration, and scientific oversight of team science and individual investigator grants in cancer research that have the potential for near-term patient benefit. The AACR actively communicates with legislators and other policymakers about the value of cancer research and related biomedical science in saving lives from cancer. For more information about the AACR, visit http://www. .

To interview Amita Patnaik or Geoffrey I. Shapiro, contact Julia Gunther at julia.gunther@aacr.org or 215-446-6896.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release includes a “Funding & Disclosures” paragraph. It lists funding by Eli Lilly and Company. It also lists some of the payments and other connections between key researchers and the company. We like the format used for this EurekAlert version of the release, which also notes the funder in a box just to the right of the release’s headline.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 20, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have developed a blood test that they say could help physicians predict whether pregnant women will deliver their babies prematurely.

The test isn't ready for prime time, however, and it's not foolproof: a study found that it misses some premature births and incorrectly predicts others.

Still, the test "should be an important tool for an obstetrician who currently has no clue" if premature birth is a possibility until it happens, said Brigham Young University (BYU) chemistry professor Steven W. Graves.

Physicians will "be able to use a simple blood test and then know that this woman is at increased risk or reduced risk of a preterm birth," said Graves, whose laboratory performed the research in the study.

About 10 percent of births are premature, and the rate rises to 30 percent among women who have already had a baby prematurely, Graves said. Premature birth can lead to a long list of medical problems and puts babies at risk of dying.

In the new study, the researchers examined blood samples from 80 women who went on to have normal births and 80 who had premature births. They tried to find signs in the blood that indicate what kind of birth the women would have.

The researchers developed a screening method that looked for so-called peptide biomarkers in the blood that -- in tandem with several other proteins -- predicted 80 percent to 90 percent of the premature births at 28 weeks of gestation. The false positive rate -- referring to tests that wrongly indicated premature birth -- was 20 percent.

The test wasn't as effective at 24 weeks of gestation.

"This may simply indicate that some of the causes for preterm birth may not pre-exist before the pregnancy," Graves said. "Most probably don't, but develop or become apparent as the pregnancy progresses. The closer to the preterm birth, the more likely you are to have significant changes in the physiology of the woman that is observed in the blood."

The test may cost $150 to $250, Graves said. It would require several years to go through the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval process. BYU and the University of Utah have a patent on the test and have licensed it.

Even if the test is found to indicate that a birth will be premature, physicians would have limited options. One option is to provide drugs that dampen the immune system so the baby's lungs develop faster, said Dr. Jennifer Wu, an obstetrician-gynecologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Wu said the study results are promising, but more research is needed to confirm that the test is reliable. "If you are going to be alarming a patient by saying that she may have premature delivery, you want to make sure that's truly the case."

The study appears in the May issue of the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

For more about premature birth, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted one independent expert; it could have been improved with more comment from her or from others.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A large new study is challenging the common practice of recommending that older men forgo treatment for early prostate cancer and instead wait to see whether the malignancy progresses.

The study of more than 44,000 American men ages 65 to 80 found that those who chose to aggressively treat their prostate cancer with surgery or radiation were about 30 percent less likely to die than those who waited, indicating that treatment offered a clear advantage.

The research, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, is the first to directly examine what has become conventional wisdom: that many older men need not treat early prostate cancer because it tends to grow so slowly that they will probably die of something else first.

"For many years, the thinking has been that observation or 'watchful waiting' was the safest option for elderly patients with early prostate cancer," said Yu-Ning Wong of the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, who led the study. "This suggests there may be a benefit of treatment, even in this age group."

The findings prompted debate among specialists, who said the results could have potentially far-reaching implications because they address one of the central quandaries about prostate cancer and because the disease is so common. It is diagnosed in 235,000 U.S. men each year and kills more than 27,000, making it the most common cancer and second-leading cancer killer, after lung cancer, among men. Most cases are diagnosed after age 65.

Some experts said they hope the findings will encourage more doctors to consider treating elderly men.

"This debunks the idea that older men do not benefit from treatment," said Christopher L. Amling of the University of Alabama in Birmingham. "This gives support to the idea that active treatment can be beneficial."

Other experts expressed skepticism, saying the study's design may have missed another explanation for the lower death rate among men who were treated: They were probably healthier in ways that doctors can tell only by examining them, not by looking at their medical records, which is what the study's authors did.

"There was probably something about these guys that made them more likely to get treated that also made them more likely to survive," said Mark S. Litwin of the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California at Los Angeles, who co-authored an editorial accompanying the paper.

Wong acknowledged that the study's design had limitations, making it important that the findings be confirmed by additional research. But she said she and her colleagues analyzed the data carefully to account for factors that could have influenced the findings, such as the subjects' ages and whether they had other health problems.

"We adjusted for as many of those differences as we could," Wong said.

The widespread use of the prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, screening to detect prostate cancer early has led to intense debate about how aggressively to treat the disease. Some doctors fear the cancer is being over-treated, particularly in older men, subjecting them to therapies that leave many impotent and incontinent when their cancer would never bother them if left untreated. Autopsies show that most men will develop prostate cancer in their lifetimes but often die of something else.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article provides multiple sources of information, some of whom appear to be independent of the current study.  The sources also provide a range of opinions about what the latest study means, which adds balance.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ninety-nine people developed dementia over the course of the study, including 71 cases of Alzheimer’s disease. The average level of DHA among all the participants was 3.6 percent of all fatty acids, and the top 25 percent of the population had values above 4.2 percent. People in this top one-quarter in DHA levels had a 47 percent reduced risk of developing dementia, even after controlling for body mass index, diabetes, hypertension, smoking status and other known or suspected risks. Risk reduction was apparent only at that top level of DHA — those in the bottom three-quarters in DHA level showed no detectable difference in risk.

People who ate two or more servings of fish a week reduced their risk for dementia by 39 percent, but there was no effect on the risk for dementia among those who ate less than that.

The finding that DHA alone reduces risk, the authors write, is consistent with earlier data showing high levels of DHA in healthy brain tissue and low levels in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease.

Dr. Ernst J. Schaefer, the lead author of the study, was cautious in interpreting the results.

“This study doesn’t prove that eating fish oil prevents dementia,” he said. “It’s an observational study that presents an identified risk factor, and the next step is a randomized placebo-controlled study in people who do not yet have dementia.” Dr. Schaefer is chief of the Lipid Metabolism Laboratory at Tufts University.

The study was financed in part by Martek, a concern that manufactures DHA, and one author received a grant from Pfizer, France.

Eating fish is not a guarantee of having high levels of DHA. In fact, fish intake accounted for less than half of the variability in DHA levels. Other dietary intake and genetic propensities probably account for the rest. Dr. Schaefer pointed out that the kind of fish consumed is important. Fatty fish, he said, is best, and frying will cause DHA to deteriorate.

Supplements may be an additional source of DHA, but an editorial in the same issue, by Dr. Martha Clare Morris, an associate professor of medicine at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago, points out that there are no published human studies of the effects of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation. The Food and Drug Administration does not endorse DHA or fish oil capsules, but recognizes doses of up to 3 grams a day of fish oil as generally safe. High intakes of fish oil can cause excessive bleeding in some people.

Dr. Morris writes that there are few human studies examining the effect of mercury intake from eating seafood, and it is not known if the risks of eating fish outweigh the benefits.

But, she adds, epidemiological studies consistently show positive health effects from fish consumption on mortality, cardiovascular risk factors and, now, dementia.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This story was based on information from an original research study and included quotes from the study senior author as well as material from an editorial about the research study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About 400,000 Americans have multiple sclerosis, and up until now, the only drugs offered to them to slow the course of the disease had to be injected or dripped into a vein. But soon, it seems, they will have an alternative to this painful regimen: drugs that can be taken by mouth.

Easier To Take, More Impact

This week's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine reports on two new drugs that can be taken orally to slow the progress of MS. The studies for these drugs, which are not yet on the market, were funded by the drug manufacturers.

Dr. John Richert, executive vice president of research and clinical programs at the National MS Society, says the introduction of these pills will mark a major improvement in the lives of MS patients.

"What we've had available the last 16, 17 years has made a big difference," Richert says, "and what we have coming onboard now, these are going to make even a larger difference. It's really an important advance."

The main benefit of the pills will be that they are easier to take. Richert believes this simpler option will encourage more people to seek treatment.

"People will be more prone to take them early, more prone to stay on the drugs," Richert says.

The new pills also appear to be more effective than most current drugs. In clinical tests they reduced the number of flare-ups by more than half. The drugs now on the market typically reduce flare-ups by only a third. Such relapses reflect underlying nerve damage, so reducing their number is an indicator that less damage is taking place.

Jeffrey Babin, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, was diagnosed with MS nearly seven years ago, when he was 39. He says the discovery shook his world.

"This is a very scary disease. And when you have an episode, it is one of the most life-changing and life-re-evaluating events," Babin says.

He has been free of MS relapses for several years now, an improvement that may be attributed to the drug Copaxone, one of a half-dozen drugs on the market now that can slow the course of MS.

Babin says he is grateful for the drug — but he has to go through the painful process of injecting it every day.

"Injections are no fun; nobody likes to inject themselves," Babin says. "In my case, I wouldn't say there are any major side effects, but I do get those painful welts at the injection sites."

Those painful welts are something he would happily do without — and the new pills could be the answer.

Dr. Peter Calabresi of Johns Hopkins University School of Medical is an author of one new study. He is excited about the new drugs, but cautious.

"It's extremely exciting. I'm happy to have a new choice, especially a pill," Calabresi says. "I think we also have to be careful and not use it too abruptly or too easily."

Calabresi says many people think of pills as safer than injections, but this may not be the case.

"In reality, these are extremely potent pills that have the potential to cause a variety of serious side effects," he says.

These dangers are nothing new — the MS drug Tysabri was pulled from the market after some patients came down with rare brain infections. It was later reintroduced with strict monitoring requirements.

In light of that experience, federal regulators may go slowly with the two new drugs, called fingolimod and cladribine.

When considering changes to his own medicinal regimen, Babin says he will go slowly too.

"In spite of the fact that I hate injections, I probably would not leap at the first pill that comes to market," he says. "You want to be careful to jump into something new and risk the side effects from something you haven't tried before."

Meanwhile, approval of another new oral MS drug may come soon. That drug, called fampridine, does not prevent the nerve damage of MS, but in about a third of patients, it improves their damaged nerves, so they can walk better.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story used one independent expert source in addition to interviewing one of the study authors. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There are no laboratory tests to diagnose migraines, depression, bipolar disorder and many other ailments of the brain. Doctors typically gauge such illnesses based on self-reported symptoms and behavior.

Now, a new study shows that a kind of brain scan called functional connectivity MRI (fcMRI) - which shows how brain regions interact - can reliably detect fundamental differences in how individual brains are wired. As such, the technique potentially could be used to distinguish healthy people from people with brain diseases or disorders, and provide insight into variations in cognitive ability and personality traits.

The findings are published April 18 in Neuron.

"This is a step toward realizing the clinical promise of functional connectivity MRI," said senior author Steven Petersen, PhD, the James S. McDonnell Professor of Cognitive Neuroscience in Neurology and a professor of neurosurgery, of biomedical engineering, of psychological and brain sciences, and of radiology. "Before we can develop diagnostic tests based on fcMRI, we need to know what it is actually measuring. We show here that it's not measuring what you're thinking, but how your brain is organized. That opens the door to an entire new field of clinical testing."

Petersen, postdoctoral researcher and first author Caterina Gratton, PhD, and colleagues analyzed a set of data collected by the Midnight Scan Club, a group of Washington University scientists who took turns undergoing myriad scans in an MRI machine late at night, when the demand for such machines and, consequently, the usage fees tend to be low.

The researchers analyzed data from more than 10 hours of fcMRI scans on each of nine people, collected in 10 separate one-hour sessions for each person. During the scans, each person performed tasks related to vision, memory, reading or motor skills, or rested quietly.

Functional MRI scans generate a dynamic map of the outer surface of the brain, showing changing hot spots of activity over time. To create a functional connectivity map, Gratton divided the brain's surface into 333 regions and identified areas that became active and inactive in unison. She then constructed brain network maps for each individual, showing patterns of correlation between parts of the brain.

The sheer quantity of data available on each person allowed her to analyze how much an individual's brain networks changed from day to day and with different mental tasks.

The answer? Not much.

"Brain networks captured by fcMRI are really about the individual," Gratton said. "Whether someone's watching a movie or thinking about her breakfast or moving her hands makes only a small difference. You can still identify that individual by her brain networks with a glance."

The consistency of the fcMRI scans makes them a promising diagnostic tool. Although the technique's potential to identify brain disorders and diseases was noted years ago, fcMRI-based diagnostic tests have yet to make their way into doctors' offices. Progress has been stymied by confusion over whether the scans reflect fundamental, stable features of the brain, or if they change with every passing thought.

Further, the researchers found that the technique was powerful enough to distinguish people who were extraordinarily alike. All of the scanned brains belonged to young, healthy scientists and doctors.

"We need more data before we can know what is normal variation in the population at large," Gratton said. "But the individual differences were really easy to pick up, even in a population that is really very similar. It's exciting to think that these individual differences may be related to personality, cognitive ability, or psychiatric or neurological disease. Thanks to this work, we know we have a reliable tool to study these possibilities."
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funders of the study are listed on a sidebar of the news release hosting site, EurekAlert!
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, March 21, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- For the first time in humans, scientists have successfully used a gene-manipulation therapy to enter tumor cells and block the production of toxic proteins that are causing cancer, researchers report.

"They're basically putting an instruction booklet into the cell saying, 'We don't want this protein expressed for now,'" explained Gregory Adams, co-leader of the developmental therapeutics program at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia. "It's pretty amazing. It's potentially huge."

"This is something we've been waiting to see," he continued.

"This directly interferes with the genetic mechanisms that promote cancer to stop the production of a particular protein," added Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society. "This is one step away from getting into the actual DNA."

As reported online March 21 in Nature, this is the first time the process, known as RNA interference (RNAi), has been shown to work in humans.

The process of RNA interference involves putting two strands of RNA together to form so-called "small interfering RNAs" (siRNAs) and inserting them into cells. Once there, these interlopers cut the messenger RNA (mRNA) that is ordinarily used to make specific proteins. This discovery won the Nobel Prize in 2006.

But the work that nabbed the prize was done in worms -- a far cry from humans.

And there were other challenges, not the least of which was how to get the siRNAs into the appropriate cell and then make sure they did what they were supposed to do.

This team, from the California Institute of Technology (CalTech), devised a super-small nanoparticle system that, when injected into the body, would make its way to the tumor, deposit the siRNAs into the tumor cell and leave them to their assigned task.

This early-phase clinical trial involved actual patients with melanoma, a particularly virulent form of skin cancer.

The experiment proceeded just as planned, as biopsies later showed.

The researchers injected the cargo-laden nanoparticles into the patients, much as you would administer a flu or any other type of shot. They did not inject directly into the tumor as many other researchers have done.

The nanoparticles made their way smoothly to the target -- the tumor cell -- and cleaved the mRNA in just the right place, stopping production of the culprit protein.

The precision of the process is crucial to limiting side effects, the researchers said.

"Now you can go selectively at proteins involved in the disease and not have off-target effects," explained Mark E. Davis, lead author of the paper, and professor of chemical engineering at CalTech in Pasadena. "Normally when you make drugs, it's hard to say 'attack only that protein.' In this particular case, I'm going to go in at the genetic level and eliminate that one protein I want to eliminate."

And unlike conventional gene therapy -- where the offending gene is replaced by a new one or overridden -- this therapy is reversible, said Adams.

"This will run its course. Ultimately, it will restore itself," he said.

The authors believe the same system could provide a highly targeted, selective way to reach many different genes and affect tumors that have untll now eluded drug therapy.

Obviously, the process will have to be refined and optimized before it's actually used for treatment.

"This is the first qualitative 'yes, we can do it' publication and it really has to be kept in that perspective," Adams said.

There's more on RNA interference at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two independent sources were quoted. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Blood drawn from expectant mothers could offer parents an earlier sneak peek at their baby’s sex than methods currently used in the U.S., researchers said Tuesday.

The test may be particularly valuable for families that harbor sex-linked genetic disorders like hemophilia, they add.

Because such disorders mostly strike boys, knowing that the baby is a girl could spare the mother diagnostic procedures, such as amniocentesis, that carry a small risk of miscarriage.

“It could reduce the number of invasive procedures that are being performed for specific genetic conditions,” said Dr. Diana Bianchi of Tufts University School of Medicine, who worked on the new study.

But other researchers voiced concerns, saying it could be misused to terminate a pregnancy if the baby isn’t of the desired sex.

“What you have to consider is the ethics of this,” said Dr. Mary Rosser, an obstetrician and gynecologist at the Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

“If parents are using it to determine gender and then terminate the pregnancy based on that, that could be a problem,” she told Reuters Health. “Remember, gender is not a disease.”

The test looks for small pieces of the male sex chromosome in the mother’s blood, which would mean she is carrying a baby boy. Some European hospitals already rely on the method, called cell-free fetal DNA, although it’s not available from doctors in the U.S.

“What they are finding in England is that many women are not going on to have the invasive tests,” Bianchi told Reuters Health.

In those procedures, doctors either extract a small amount of the fluid that surrounds the fetus (amniocentesis) or they take a sample of the placenta (chorionic villus sampling). Between one in 100 and one in 600 mothers miscarry as a result, according to Bianchi.

In a fresh look at the medical evidence for the blood test, she and her colleagues analyzed 57 earlier studies that included more than 6,500 pregnancies.

They found parents could trust the test 98.8 percent of the time when it said they’d have a boy, and 94.8 percent of the time when it indicated a girl.

That leaves some room for error, which could be important if parents are making medical decisions based on the results — such as whether or not to get an invasive procedure to look for genetic disorders.

However, the current non-invasive alternative — an ultrasound done at the end of the first trimester — isn’t always good at spotting a baby’s sex, Bianchi’s team reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

And the blood test is reliable as early as seven weeks into the pregnancy, whereas ultrasound is not.

Bianchi said one study had estimated the blood test costs about 255 pounds in the UK (about $413), all included. While it’s available over the Internet, she said her team had only looked at hospital-based test performance.

“I don’t know why it is not being incorporated in the US,” she said.

Rosser, however, chalked that up to the ethical issues it raises.

“It is a great test that can be part of our armamentarium of noninvasive testing that we use,” she said. “But it should only be used by families that are at risk for sex-linked diseases.”

Bianchi said she owns stock in Verinata Health, a company that is developing cell-free fetal DNA tests for Down syndrome, although that company had no role in the new study.

The American College of Medical Genetics did not respond to requests for comment on the DNA tests.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story uses independent sources, and notes that the lead author of the JAMA study, Diana Bianchi, is an investor in a related cell-free fetal DNA test for Down syndrome.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, May 8, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Countless people -- often men with enlarged prostates -- need to visit the bathroom during the night. But help could soon be at hand in the form of a nasal spray, new research suggests.

A spritz of a synthetic hormone, already used by bed-wetting kids, might benefit older people struggling with the problem called nocturia.

"Nocturia is very common in patients over 50 years old, and can cause significant problems by causing loss of sleep, and injury due to falls," said study lead author Dr. Jed Kaminetsky.

The millions of people with nocturia wake up two or more times a night to urinate. Besides an enlarged prostate, Kaminetsky said, common causes are bladder problems, poor circulation and obesity.

Kaminetsky is a clinical assistant professor of urology at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.

In the United States there's no approved drug to treat the problem, the study authors said.

The new drug, while promising, is of concern because of its potential to lower blood sodium levels in the elderly, one doctor said. Meanwhile, another researcher suggested that exercise might help stave off nocturia.

Known as SER-120, the nasal spray contains desmopressin, a low-dose synthetic version of the naturally occurring hormone vasopressin. Vasopressin, an anti-diuretic, reduces urine production.

SER-120 appears to delay urine production for four to six hours during sleep, said Kaminetsky, "and wears off by morning when patients awaken and start to drink fluids."

He is scheduled to present his team's research Sunday in San Diego at a meeting of the American Urological Association. The research was funded by the spray's manufacturer, Serenity Pharmaceuticals.

Desmopressin is commonly used to treat bed-wetting among children ages 6 and up, the study authors pointed out.

To assess its potential in adults, the study team enlisted nearly 1,400 men and women, 50 and older, who had a history of nocturia.

For three months, participants were randomly assigned to use either the desmopressin spray (two doses were tried) or a non-medicinal spray (a placebo).

Patients kept three-day urination diaries, and filled out quality-of-life questionnaires.

Desmopressin spray prompted "a significant decrease" in the frequency of nightly bathroom trips compared with the untreated group, Kaminetsky said. On average, patients reported at least two fewer episodes a night.

The treatment group also experienced a "significant increase" in the length of time they could sleep before awakening to urinate. That uninterrupted sleep period extended to more than four hours, Kaminetsky said.

The researchers also found that those in the higher-dose spray group experienced a "significant improvement" in overall quality of life, compared with the untreated group.

Though SER-120 is still considered investigational, Kaminetsky said the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reviewing the findings, with a possible decision late this year.

Dr. Tomas Griebling, a professor of urology at the University of Kansas, described the study results as "promising," but added a note of caution.

"Other researchers have examined the utility and safety of desmopressin for the treatment of nocturia in the past," he said. "However, there have been concerns about safety, particularly in elderly patients."

Griebling said the American Geriatrics Society includes desmopressin in the Beers Criteria for potentially inappropriate medications for older adults, primarily because of concerns about resulting low blood sodium levels.

But the lower doses used in this study (1.5 or 0.75 mcg) "may help to improve the overall safety profile, particularly for geriatric patients," he said. "Additional research will be needed to fully answer this question in the future."

The study team said two of the higher-dose patients developed significantly low blood sodium levels (hyponatremia) as did one person taking the placebo.

Dr. Julien Dagenais, a urologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, explored nocturia from another angle. He analyzed physical activity data reported by more than 10,000 men and women (aged 20 and older) in a U.S. health and nutrition survey conducted between 2005 and 2010.

People who reported higher levels of exercise were less likely to suffer from nocturia, Dagenais found. This suggests that the anti-inflammatory impact of routine exercise may minimize nocturia, he said.

These findings will also be presented at the American Urological Association meeting. Data and conclusions presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

There's more on nocturia at the National Association for Continence.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An outside source was used in this story. We’re also told that the was paid for by the drug company.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
How to treat patients who have microinvasive breast cancer - tumors that are 1 mm or less in size (the thickness of a dime) -- is somewhat controversial. Can these tiny tumors affect the lymph nodes and spread cancer to other areas of the body?

Physicians at the Virginia Piper Cancer Institute wanted to know if surgical procedures to test the lymph nodes for cancer were always necessary.

They examined the outcomes of 294 patients who were treated between 2001 and 2015. Only 1.5 percent had positive lymph nodes - indicating the rare possibility of metastatic cancer. And the only patients with positive lymph nodes had microinvasive tumors that were associated with relatively large non-invasive tumors (ductal carcinoma in situ or DCIS).

"These findings allow surgeons to select which patients with microinvasive tumors may actually benefit from lymph node sampling, while sparing other patients from this procedure," said Tamera Lillemoe, M.D, pathologist and a study co-author.

The study, funded by Engelsma Family Foundation and Abbott Northwestern Hospital Foundation, was published recently in The Breast Journal, the official journal of the National Consortium of Breast Cancers.

The Virginia Piper Cancer Institute®, part of Allina Health, provides comprehensive care through all aspects of cancer prevention, early detection and treatment to help individuals maintain quality of life and find ways to live with and beyond cancer. The Institute was founded in 1990 at Abbott Northwestern Hospital.

In addition to retaining its first place ranking for the best hospital in the Twin Cities and second in the State of Minnesota in the U.S. News & World Report's 2016-17 best hospital rankings, Abbott Northwestern has received nursing magnet certification, a recognition earned by only five percent of hospitals nationwide.

Allina Health is dedicated to the prevention and treatment of illness and enhancing the greater health of individuals, families and communities throughout Minnesota and western Wisconsin. A not-for-profit health care system, Allina Health cares for patients from beginning to end-of-life through its 90+ clinics, 12 hospitals, 15 retail pharmacies, specialty care centers and specialty medical services, home care, home oxygen and medical equipment and emergency medical transportation services.

For more information, visit us at allinahealth.org, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube or Healthy Set Go.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources are listed in the release. No conflicts of interest are mentioned in the published study.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>

• People who have had Type 2 diabetes for up to 10 years can reverse their condition

A new study from Newcastle University has shown that people who reverse their diabetes and then keep their weight down remain free of diabetes.

In addition, the team found that even patients who have had Type 2 diabetes for up to 10 years can reverse their condition.

The study, published today in Diabetes Care, is the latest research from world-renowned Professor Roy Taylor, Professor of Medicine and Metabolism at Newcastle University, who also works within Newcastle Hospitals.

The research is part of a growing body of evidence showing that people with Type 2 diabetes who successfully lose weight can reverse their condition because fat is removed from their pancreas, returning insulin production to normal.

A previous study led by Professor Taylor, published in 2011, showed that diabetes could be reversed by a very low calorie diet. This caused international interest, but the study was very short as it was only eight weeks and the question remained whether the diabetes would stay away.

In this new study, 30 volunteers with Type 2 diabetes embarked on the same diet of 600 to 700 calories a day. Participants lost on average 14 kilograms - just over 2 stone. Over the next 6 months they did not regain any weight.

The group included many people with longer duration diabetes, defined as more than 8 years and ranging up to 23 years.

Overall, 12 patients who had had diabetes for less than 10 years reversed their condition. 6 months later they remained diabetes free. In fact, after 6 months a thirteenth patient had reversed their diabetes.

Though the volunteers lost weight they remained overweight or obese but they had lost enough weight to remove the fat out of the pancreas and allow normal insulin production.

Professor Roy Taylor said: "What we have shown is that it is possible to reverse your diabetes, even if you have had the condition for a long time, up to around 10 years. If you have had the diagnosis for longer than that, then don't give up hope - major improvement in blood sugar control is possible.

"The study also answered the question that people often ask me - if I lose the weight and keep the weight off, will I stay free of diabetes? The simple answer is yes!

"Interestingly, even though all our volunteers remained obese or overweight, the fat did not drift back to clog up the pancreas.

"This supports our theory of a Personal Fat Threshold. If a person gains more weight than they personally can tolerate, then diabetes is triggered, but if they then lose that amount of weight then they go back to normal.

"Individuals vary in how much weight they can carry without it seeming to affect their metabolism - don't forget that 70% of severely obese people do not have diabetes.

"The bottom line is that if a person really wants to get rid of their Type 2 diabetes, they can lose weight, keep it off and return to normal.

"This is good news for people who are very motivated to get rid of their diabetes. But it is too early to regard this as suitable for everyone. That is a separate question and a major study is underway to answer this."

Participants in this study had Type 2 diabetes for between six months and 23 years. The team showed that Type 2 diabetes could be reversed even in people who had the condition for 10 years.

The team were able to identify in advance participants who would not respond to adequate weight loss by reversing their diabetes as at the start they had almost absent insulin production from the pancreas.

The study was funded by a National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR BRC) grant.

A larger trial involving 280 patients is already underway. This will examine how successfully people can reverse their diabetes through weight loss simply under the care of their family doctor and nurse. It is being funded by Diabetes UK.

The research was possible through Newcastle Academic Health Partners, a collaboration involving Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust and Newcastle University. This partnership harnesses world-class expertise to ensure patients benefit sooner from new treatments, diagnostics and prevention strategies.
• 3 diet shakes per day and 240 grams of non-starchy vegetables taking in between 600 and 700kcal a day for 8 weeks
• volunteers then gradually returned to eating normal food over the next two weeks with very careful instruction on how much to eat
• volunteers were seen once a month and supported with an individualized weight maintenance programme over the next 6 months
• to keep weight steady after the weight loss, they were eating around one third less than before the study

Allan Tutty, 57, from Sunderland, transformed his health by taking part in the study.

He said: "I was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes around May 2011 during routine checks by my GP but my family and I were in disbelief because I had no physical symptoms which led me to consider I had the condition.

"While I didn't feel fat, I was fat - on the inside. I've since seen a scan of my liver and you can see the fat around it.

"I took part in the research spending eight weeks on an 800-calorie a day diet which was really tough over Christmas and New Year but I was determined to complete it. The pay-off for me - the possible reversal of my diabetes - was more than worth the effort.

"In the two months, I lost two and a half stones and my pancreas was working within normal limits. With my diabetes in remission, I haven't looked back.

"I eat normal foods though I eat less than I used to, and I enjoy takeaways and chocolate but not on a regular basis so I have maintained my lower weight, it has been a total lifestyle change. In fact, my life has changed completely thanks to this research."

REFERENCE: Very low calorie diet and 6 months of weight stability in Type 2 diabetes: Pathophysiologic changes in responders and non-responders. Sarah Steven, Keiren G Hollingsworth, Ahmad Al-Mrabeh, Leah Avery, Benjamin Aribisala, Muriel Caslake, Roy Taylor.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release does identify multiple funding sources and there is no suggestion of any conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A biotech company today will begin offering the first genetic test to assess a woman's risk for the most common forms of breast cancer, reigniting debate about the growing number of unregulated genetic tests.

The test by Decode Genetics of Reykjavik, Iceland, a respected pioneer in genetic research, promises to determine a woman's risk through a simple blood sample or cheek swab. Previously, the only tests for breast cancer risk were for relatively rare genes, leaving most women with no way to assess their individual genetic predisposition.

"What this does for women is allow them to assess their personal risk for the common forms of breast cancer," said Kári Stefánsson, Decode's chief executive. "That's what you need to do to make early diagnoses or take preventive measures. This test will most definitely save lives."

While welcomed by some patient advocates and doctors, the $1,625 test raises concerns among others. Some questioned its reliability, while others worried that the results could either lull women into a false sense of complacency or needlessly alarm them, prompting them to take unnecessary tests or even undergo unneeded surgery.

"There is at least a significant chance this test will could falsely reassure some women and alarm others," said Eric Winer, a breast cancer expert at Harvard Medical School and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology. "I fear for many women the results could be quite misleading."

"I wouldn't recommend to anyone that she have such a test. I certainly wouldn't want my daughter to have such a test," said Mary-Claire King, a geneticist and breast cancer expert at the University of Washington. "It's meaningless, and it could very easily introduce real confusion."

The test comes as concern has been rising about the proliferation of genetic tests. Hundreds of laboratories are now offering genetic testing for more than 1,200 conditions. The Food and Drug Administration does not regulate such tests when they are performed by the labs offering them.

"There is concern about the validity of many genetic tests that are being offered," said Joan Scott, deputy director of the Center for Genetics and Public Policy at Johns Hopkins University. "Without an external review, the consumer -- be it the physician or the patient directly -- is not going to know which ones have been validated."

An FDA spokeswoman said the agency had just become aware of the new test and could not say whether it would take any action, though she noted that in August the agency sent a letter expressing concern to another company marketing a questionable genetic test for ovarian cancer.

"I can't speculate on this one," said Karen Riley, the spokeswoman.

Breast cancer strikes more than 180,000 women each year in the United States and kills more than 40,000, making it the most common form of cancer after skin cancer and second leading cancer killer among women.

Doctors can estimate a woman's chances of developing breast cancer based on a variety of factors, including her age and family history, but most women have no way of knowing their precise risk. Women with a strong family history can get tested for two genes that sharply increase their predisposition, but they account for only 1 to 3 percent of all breast cancers.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several leading breast cancer researchers, a member of the American Cancer Society and a spokesperson for the FDA are interviewed for this story. These interviewees do not have a vested interest in this test–unlike Decode’s chief executive, who is also interviewed, mainly promoting his company’s product.  Researchers help educate the reader about a new test may have many more cons than pros.  The story does note, via a patient advocate, that some women may still go ahead with the test if they feel it may help guide them in future breast cancer prevention efforts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 3, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new study finds that people with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who haven't done well on other treatments may find relief with Xeljanz (tofacitinib), a drug currently used to treat arthritis.

Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease. It affects about 700,000 Americans, according to the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation (CCF).

The illness causes inflammation, irritation, swelling and sores on the lining of the large intestine. Symptoms include diarrhea with blood or pus and abdominal discomfort, according to CCF.

"There is still a substantial unmet need for new treatments for patients with ulcerative colitis," said study lead author Dr. William Sandborn. He is professor of medicine and chief of the division of gastroenterology at the University of California, San Diego.

Xeljanz targets certain proteins involved in the body's inflammatory and immune responses that other so-called biologic drugs don't, the researchers said.

"Treatment with oral tofacitinib is potentially a new treatment option for patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis, pending review by the [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]," Sandborn said.

The study was funded by Pfizer, Inc., the maker of Xeljanz. Sandborn said he has received research grants from the company and served as a consultant for Pfizer.

Whether Xeljanz should be used as a first treatment is still not clear, said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Because Xeljanz comes as a pill, it could have an advantage for patients, Swaminath said. But so far it has only been tried with patients who have not responded to other treatments, he said.

"How it is used in the real world may be different than how it was used in these studies," Swaminath said. "I am not going out on a limb and say this should be the first choice, because we don't have enough data to say that's the way it should be positioned."

The researchers randomly assigned more than 1,700 people with ulcerative colitis to one of three phase 3 trials.

The first two trials looked at more than 1,100 patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who had failed with conventional treatment or treatment with newer "tumor necrosis factor antagonist" drugs, such as Remicade (infliximab). They received Xeljanz or a placebo twice a day for eight weeks.

In the third trial, nearly 600 patients who responded to Xeljanz were assigned to a maintenance dose (one group with 5 milligrams [mg] and another group with 10 mg) of the drug, or placebo for a year.

In the first trial, nearly 19 percent of the patients taking Xeljanz experienced a remission of their condition in eight weeks. That compared to just 8 percent of patients receiving placebo.

In the second trial, almost 17 percent of those taking Xeljanz had a remission, compared with nearly 4 percent of those taking placebo, the researchers found.

In the third trial, more than 34 percent of patients taking 5 mg of Xeljanz had disease remission after one year. Forty percent of those taking a 10-mg dose of the drug had remission at a year. Only 11 percent of patients on placebo saw a remission.

However, in all of the trials, more patients taking Xeljanz suffered from infections, such as shingles, than those receiving placebo, researchers found.

In addition, five patients taking Xeljanz developed nonmelanoma skin cancer, compared with one patient receiving placebo. Five patients taking the drug experienced heart problems compared with no one on the placebo.

Also, compared with placebo, Xeljanz was associated with an increase in levels of cholesterol.

The report was published May 4 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Dr. Sonia Friedman is an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. She's also the author of an editorial accompanying the study.

"Tofacitinib is a promising new class of medical therapy that has efficacy in ulcerative colitis. It is an oral, small-molecule drug that is different from current biologic therapies, such as infliximab [Remicade], adalimumab [Humira], golimumab [Simponi] and vedolizumab [Entyvio]," Friedman said.

An advantage of Xeljanz is that it is a pill. Other biologic drugs are given by infusion or injection. In addition, patients cannot develop antibodies to Xeljanz as they can with other biologic drugs, Friedman said.

"Tofacitinib may be used in the future as rescue therapy from failure of biologics," she said. "Only future studies will determine whether it can be used as initial therapy for ulcerative colitis and what patients it would help the most."

For more information on ulcerative colitis, visit the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story handles this very well. The study’s lead author is clearly identified, the story clearly states that Pfizer (which makes Xeljanz) funded the study, and that the lead author has consulted for Pfizer. In addition, two independent sources are included in the article. One of those sources was also the author of an editorial on the NEJM paper, which the story notes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have slowed down the ageing process by implanting stem cells into the brains of animals, raising hopes for new strategies to combat age-related diseases and extend the human lifespan.

Implants of stem cells that make fresh neurons in the brain were found to put the brakes on ageing in older mice, keeping them more physically and mentally fit for months, and extending their lives by 10-15% compared to untreated animals.

The work, described as a tour de force and a breakthrough by one leading expert, suggests that ageing across the body is controlled by stem cells that are found in the hypothalamus region of the brain in youth, but which steadily die off until they are almost completely absent in middle age.

Researchers at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York hope to launch clinical trials of the procedure soon, but must first produce supplies of human neural stem cells in the lab which can be implanted into volunteers.

“Of course humans are more complex,” said Dongsheng Cai, who led the research. “However, if the mechanism is fundamental, you might expect to see effects when an intervention is based on it.”

Previous experiments had already hinted that the hypothalamus, an almond-sized part of the brain in humans, played some role in the ageing process, but what it was remained unclear. The latest investigation from the US team pinpoints which cells are important and how they might work.

In the first of a series of experiments in mice, Cai showed that neural stem cells, which are found in a handful of brain regions at birth, disappear from the hypothalamus over time. The stem cells are known to form fresh brain cells in youth, but the process slows down dramatically in adults. Though small, the hypothalamus forms a crucial connection between the body’s nervous and hormonal systems.

To test whether the decline in stem cells was causing ageing, and not itself a result of old age, the researchers injected mice with a toxin that wiped out 70% of their neural stem cells. The effect was striking. Over the next few months the mice aged more rapidly than usual, and performed much worse than control animals on a battery of tests of endurance, coordination, social behaviour and ability to recognise objects. “Behaviourally mice aged faster when these cells were removed during early ageing,” Cai told the Guardian. The animals died months earlier than healthy control animals.

Next, the scientists looked at what happened when aged mice received injections of fresh neural stem cells. This time the mice lived longer than controls, typically several months more, an increase of about 15%. If a similar extension was achieved in humans, a person with a life expectancy of 80 years could live to 92.

Having proved that it was neural stem cells that were important for ageing, the scientists ran further tests to work out what the cells were doing. They found that molecules called microRNAs, or miRNAs, that are released from neural stem cells were responsible for most of the ageing effects. When the molecules are produced in the hypothalamus, they flow into the clear fluid in the brain and spinal cord and affect how genes operate.

“The mechanism is partially due to these cells secreting certain miRNAs which help maintain youth, and the loss of these leads to ageing” said Cai, whose study is published in Nature. The next step is to create human neural stem cells in the lab for testing.

“It is a tour de force,” said David Sinclair at Harvard Medical School. “It’s a breakthrough. The brain controls how long we live. I can see a day when we are implanted with stem cells or treated with stem cell RNAs that improve our health and extend our lives. I would love to know which brain stem cell secretions extend a mouse’s lifespan and if human stem cells make them too.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does quote one source unaffiliated with the research and we didn’t detect any conflicts of interest. (The paper itself notes that the authors of the study have no conflicts of interests.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The study, published Thursday in The , looked at what happened in before and after 1996, when the country began rolling out mammograms for women ages 50 to 69 along with special breast cancer teams to treat all women with breast cancer.

The study is not perfect. The ideal study would randomly assign women to have mammograms or not. But, cancer experts said, no one would do such a study today when mammograms are generally agreed to prevent breast cancer deaths. In the study, which is continuing, women were followed for a maximum of 8.9 years. It is possible that benefits may emerge later.

Nonetheless, the new study is “very credible,” said Dr. Barnett Kramer, associate director for disease prevention at the .

“This is the first time researchers used real populations to compare the effects of treatment and mammography in the modern era of treatment,” Dr. Kramer said. “It shows the relative impacts of screening versus therapy in an era in which therapy has been improving.”

Dr. Otis Brawley of the said in a statement that the investigators used “careful methodology.” The society, Dr. Brawley said, “believes that the total body of the science supports the fact that regular mammography is an important part of a woman’s .”

Dr. Carol Lee, a radiologist at and chairwoman of the breast imaging commission of the American College of Radiology, said the new study affirmed that mammography saves lives.

“Mortality from breast cancer is decreasing, and I have to believe that screening mammography has played a part,” Dr. Lee said.

In their study, the investigators analyzed data from all 40,075 Norwegian women who had received a diagnosis of breast cancer from 1986 to 2005, a time when treatment was changing markedly.

In that period, 4,791 women died. And, starting in 1996, Norway began offering mammograms to women ages 50 to 69 and assigning multidisciplinary treatment teams to all women with breast cancer, similar to the teams at many major medical centers in the . The question was, Did the program of mammograms and optimal new treatment with coordinated teams of surgeons, pathologists, oncologists, radiologists and nurses lower the breast cancer death rate?

The investigators found that women 50 to 69 who had mammograms and were treated by the special teams had a 10 percent lower breast cancer death rate than similar women who had had neither.

They also found, though, that the death rate fell by 8 percent in women over 70 who had the new treatment teams but had not been invited to have mammograms. And Dr. Kramer said he knew of no evidence that breast cancer was more easily treated in women over 70 than in women ages 50 to 69.

That means, Dr. H. Gilbert Welch of Dartmouth wrote in an additional analysis in an accompanying editorial, that mammography could have reduced the breast cancer death rate by as little as 2 percent, an amount so small that it is not really different from zero.

Two percent is an estimate, Dr. Welch said. But, he said, whatever the effect of mammograms is, “all the signals here are that it is much smaller than we believed.”

Dr. Laura Esserman, a professor of surgery and radiology at the in , said it tells her that “if you get the same treatment and the outcome is the same if you find it earlier or later, then you don’t make a difference when you find it early.”

And screening has a cost, Dr. Welch said. Screening 2,500 50-year-olds for a decade would identify 1,000 women with at least one suspicious mammogram resulting in follow-up tests. Five hundred would have biopsies. And 5 to 15 of those women would be treated for cancers that, if left alone, would have grown so slowly they would never have been noticed.

When the study was planned, the scientists expected that screening would be even more effective than it was in studies from decades ago. After all, mammography had improved and, in Norway, each mammogram was independently read by two radiologists, which should make it less likely that cancers would be missed. The researchers expected mammograms to reduce the breast cancer death rate by a third.

“We were surprised,” said Dr. Mette Kalager, the lead author of the paper who is a breast surgeon at University and a visiting scientist at the Harvard School of Public Health.

Marvin Zelen, a statistician at the Harvard School of Public Health and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, who was a member of the research team said even though the mammography benefit is small, if he were a woman he would get screened.

“It all depends on how you approach risk,” Dr. Zelen said. His approach, he says, is “minimax” — he wants to minimize the maximum risk — which, in this case, is dying of a cancer.

Dr. Kalager came to the opposite conclusion. She worries about the small chance of benefit in light of the larger chance of finding and treating a cancer that did not need to be treated.

“Since I’m a breast cancer surgeon, I know what being treated is like,” she says. The decision to be screened, she says, “is a matter of personal preference. Is it worth it to risk becoming a patient without it being necessary?”

Many women may still want mammograms, she says, and that is fine.

“I think we have to respect what women want to do.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


The story includes comments from several independent sources offering a variety of perspectives. It does not mention that the study was funded by the Cancer Registry of Norway and the Research Council of Norway.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center and Ohio State's College of Engineering have developed a new technology, Tissue Nanotransfection (TNT), that can generate any cell type of interest for treatment within the patient's own body. This technology may be used to repair injured tissue or restore function of aging tissue, including organs, blood vessels and nerve cells.

Results of the regenerative medicine study published in the journal Nature Nanotechnology.

"By using our novel nanochip technology, injured or compromised organs can be replaced. We have shown that skin is a fertile land where we can grow the elements of any organ that is declining," said Dr. Chandan Sen, director of Ohio State's Center for Regenerative Medicine & Cell Based Therapies, who co-led the study with L. James Lee, professor of chemical and biomolecular engineering with Ohio State's College of Engineering in collaboration with Ohio State's Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center.

Researchers studied mice and pigs in these experiments. In the study, researchers were able to reprogram skin cells to become vascular cells in badly injured legs that lacked blood flow. Within one week, active blood vessels appeared in the injured leg, and by the second week, the leg was saved. In lab tests, this technology was also shown to reprogram skin cells in the live body into nerve cells that were injected into brain-injured mice to help them recover from stroke.

"This is difficult to imagine, but it is achievable, successfully working about 98 percent of the time. With this technology, we can convert skin cells into elements of any organ with just one touch. This process only takes less than a second and is non-invasive, and then you're off. The chip does not stay with you, and the reprogramming of the cell starts. Our technology keeps the cells in the body under immune surveillance, so immune suppression is not necessary," said Sen, who also is executive director of Ohio State's Comprehensive Wound Center.

TNT technology has two major components: First is a nanotechnology-based chip designed to deliver cargo to adult cells in the live body. Second is the design of specific biological cargo for cell conversion. This cargo, when delivered using the chip, converts an adult cell from one type to another, said first author Daniel Gallego-Perez, an assistant professor of biomedical engineering and general surgery who also was a postdoctoral researcher in both Sen's and Lee's laboratories.

TNT doesn't require any laboratory-based procedures and may be implemented at the point of care. The procedure is also non-invasive. The cargo is delivered by zapping the device with a small electrical charge that's barely felt by the patient.

"The concept is very simple," Lee said. "As a matter of fact, we were even surprised how it worked so well. In my lab, we have ongoing research trying to understand the mechanism and do even better. So, this is the beginning, more to come."

Researchers plan to start clinical trials next year to test this technology in humans, Sen said.

Funding for this research was provided by Leslie and Abigail Wexner, Ohio State's Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell-Based Therapies and Ohio State's Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release names the funders. The published research letter states researchers have no financial conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Washington, DC -- Men can take birth control shots to prevent pregnancy in their female partners, according to a new study published in the Endocrine Society's Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism.

Researchers are still working to perfect the combination of hormonal contraceptives to reduce the risk of mild to moderate side effects, including depression and other mood disorders.

While women can choose from a number of birth control methods, men have few options to control their own fertility. Available methods for men include condoms, vasectomies and withdrawal.

Better birth control options are needed for men. In 2012, 40 percent of all pregnancies worldwide were unintended, according to the Guttmacher Institute.

"The study found it is possible to have a hormonal contraceptive for men that reduces the risk of unplanned pregnancies in the partners of men who use it," said one of the study's authors, Mario Philip Reyes Festin, MD, of the World Health Organization in Geneva, Switzerland. "Our findings confirmed the efficacy of this contraceptive method previously seen in small studies."

The prospective Phase II single arm, multi-center study tested the safety and effectiveness of injectable contraceptives in 320 healthy men ages 18 to 45. The participants had all been in monogamous relationships with female partners between the ages of 18 and 38 for at least a year. The men underwent testing to ensure they had a normal sperm count at the start of the study.

The men received injections of 200 milligrams of a long-acting progestogen called norethisterone enanthate (NET-EN) and 1,000 milligrams of a long-acting androgen called testosterone undecanoate (TU) for up to 26 weeks to suppress their sperm counts. Healthcare professionals gave the men two injections every eight weeks. Participants initially provided semen samples after eight and 12 weeks in the suppression phase and then every 2 weeks until they met the criteria for the next phase. During this time, the couples were instructed to use other non-hormonal birth control methods.

Once a participant's sperm count was lowered to less than 1 million/ml in two consecutive tests, the couple was asked to rely on the injections for birth control. During this period known as the efficacy phase of the study, the men continued to receive injections every eight weeks for up to 56 weeks. Participants provided semen samples every eight weeks to ensure their sperm counts stayed low. Once the participants stopped receiving the injections, they were monitored to see how quickly their sperm counts recovered.

The hormones were effective in reducing the sperm count to 1 million/ml or less within 24 weeks in 274 of the participants. The contraceptive method was effective in nearly 96 percent of continuing users. Only four pregnancies occurred among the men's partners during the efficacy phase of the study.

Researchers stopped enrolling new participants in the study in 2011 due to the rate of adverse events, particularly depression and other mood disorders, reported by the participants. The men reported side effects including injection site pain, muscle pain, increased libido and acne. Twenty men dropped out of the study due to side effects.

Despite the adverse effects, more than 75 percent of participants reported being willing to use this method of contraception at the conclusion of the trial.

Of the 1,491 reported adverse events, nearly 39 percent were found to be unrelated to the contraceptive injections. These included one death by suicide which was assessed not to be related to the use of the drug. Serious adverse events that were assessed as probably or possibly related to the study included one case of depression, one intentional overdose of acetaminophen, and a man who experienced an abnormally fast and irregular heartbeat after he stopped receiving the injections.

"More research is needed to advance this concept to the point that it can be made widely available to men as a method of contraception," Festin said. "Although the injections were effective in reducing the rate of pregnancy, the combination of hormones needs to be studied more to consider a good balance between efficacy and safety."

The study, "Efficacy and Safety of an Injectable Combination Hormonal Contraceptive for Men," will be published online at http://press. , ahead of print.

Other authors of the study include: Hermann M. Behre of Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg in Halle, Germany; Michael Zitzmann of the University of Münster in Münster, Germany; Richard A. Anderson of The University of Edinburgh in Edinburgh, United Kingdom; David J. Handelsman of the University of Sydney and Concord Hospital in Sydney, Australia; Silvia W. Lestari of the University of Indonesia in Jakarta, Indonesia; Robert I. McLachlan of Monash Medical Centre in Melbourne, Australia; M. Cristina Meriggiola of the University of Bologna in Bologna, Italy; Man Mohan Misro of the National Institute of Health & Family Welfare in New Dehli, India; Gabriela Noe of the Instituto Chileno de Medicina Reproductiva in Santiago, Chile; Frederick C. W. Wu of Manchester Royal Infirmary in Manchester, U.K.; Ndema A. Habib and Kirsten M. Vogelsong of the World Health Organization of Geneva, Switzerland; and Marianne M. Callahan, Kim A. Linton and Doug S. Colvard of CONRAD, East Virginia Medical School, a reproductive health organization based in Arlington, VA.

The research was co-sponsored and funded by UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Program of Research, Development, and Research Training in Human Reproduction in Geneva, Switzerland, and CONRAD (using funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the U.S. Agency for International Development). The injectable hormones were provided by Schering AG, which has since merged with Bayer Pharma AG.

For more information on men's health, visit the Endocrine Society's centennial website.

Endocrinologists are at the core of solving the most pressing health problems of our time, from diabetes and obesity to infertility, bone health, and hormone-related cancers. The Endocrine Society is the world's oldest and largest organization of scientists devoted to hormone research and physicians who care for people with hormone-related conditions.

The Society, which is celebrating its centennial in 2016, has more than 18,000 members, including scientists, physicians, educators, nurses and students in 122 countries. To learn more about the Society and the field of endocrinology, visit our site at http://www. . Follow us on Twitter at @TheEndoSociety and @EndoMedia.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the research was co-sponsored and funded by UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Program of Research, Development, and Research Training in Human Reproduction in Geneva, Switzerland, and CONRAD, using funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the U.S. Agency for International Development. It also states that the hormones were provided by drugmaker Schering, which has since merged with Bayer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new paper in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute finds that testing for cervical cancer using HPV testing in addition to the Pap smear is unlikely to detect cancer cases that wouldn't be found using HPV testing alone.

The main goal of cervical screening programs is to detect and treat precancer before cancer develops. Cytology-based screening, known as the Pap test or Pap smear, is used to detect abnormal cells. The Pap test can also find noncancerous conditions, such as infections and inflammation.

Cervical cancer screening guidelines have changed dramatically over the last 15 years, following introduction of testing for the dozen high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) types that cause virtually all cervical cancer and its precursors. Despite more research into HPV, and the introduction of preventive HPV vaccines, screening will remain important and comprise many millions of tests annually for decades to come. But improved screening methods have also introduced some confusion, even controversy.

HPV testing is more sensitive than the Pap test for detecting precancer. The HPV test captures the known cancer causing viruses, but there are gynecologists who believe that there may be unknown cancer causing viruses and so continue to do the Pap smear (plus HPV testing).

However, reports of rare HPV-negative, Pap-test-positive cancers are motivating continued use of both tests (cotesting) despite increased testing costs. An HPV test, in which doctors test a cervicovaginal specimen for the presence of the nucleic acids of carcinogenic types of HPV, is more sensitive than the Pap test (a microscopic examination of exfoliated cells) for detection of precancers. Thus, if a single screening method were chosen to complement HPV vaccination, primary HPV testing likely would gradually supplant the Pap test.

In the US, an interim guidance issued by a committee of experts from several clinical societies recommended primary HPV testing every three years, the same as the Pap test. Alternatively, current guidelines recommend cotesting but, in recognition of the additional reassurance provided by this approach compared with the Pap test alone, the screening interval is extended to every five years. Draft guidelines from the US Preventive Services Task Force recently recommended either primary HPV testing every five years or the Pap test every three years for women 30 to 64, and did not recommend cotesting.

The accumulated evidence supports inclusion of HPV testing in screening; thus, the main choice moving forward is between cotesting and primary HPV testing alone.

Researchers were searching for realistic performance data to quantify the additional benefit of the Pap test component of cotesting, as the costs of intensive screening of all women using two screening tests are substantial.

In January 2003, just prior to US FDA approval of HPV and Pap test cotesting in mid-2003 and interim guidelines in 2004, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, a large integrated health care organization, introduced three-year cotesting in women aged 30 years and older. Kaiser Permanente has now screened over a million women by cotesting. This remains the most extensive experience of HPV testing incorporated into routine screening in the world.

Researchers here quantified the detection of cervical precancer and cancer by cotesting compared with HPV testing alone at Kaiser Permanente, where 1,208,710 women have undergone triennial cervical cotesting since 2003. Screening histories preceding cervical cancers (n=623) and precancers (n=5,369) were examined to assess the relative contribution of the Pap test and HPV test components in identifying cases.

The analysis found that HPV testing identified more women subsequently diagnosed with cancer and precancer than the Pap test. HPV testing was statistically significantly more likely to be positive for cancer at any time point, except within 12 months. HPV-negative/ Pap test-positive results preceded only small fractions of cases of precancer (3.5%) and cancer (5.9%); these cancers were more likely to be regional or distant stage than other cases.

Given the rarity of cancers among screened women, the contribution of the Pap test to screening translated to earlier detection of at most five cases per million women per year. Two-thirds (67.9%) of women found to have cancer up to 10 years of follow-up at Kaiser Permanente were detected by the first cotest performed.

The researchers conclude that the added sensitivity of cotesting versus HPV alone for detection of treatable cancer affected extremely few women.?

The paper "Relative Performance of HPV and Cytology Components of Cotesting in Cervical Screening" is available at: https:/

To request a copy of the study, please contact: Daniel Luzer

 daniel.luzer@oup.com
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funder (NIH/National Cancer Institute) is listed on a sidebar of EurekAlert! where the release is hosted. We encourage releases to also include funders in the release itself. There do not appear to be any conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A daily supplement of pharmaceutical grade chondroitin is as good as celecoxib (Celebrex) at relieving arthritic knee pain and doesn’t have dangerous side effects, researchers say.

Dr. Jean-Yves Reginster of Liege State University in Belgium and colleagues recruited 604 people over age 50 with knee osteoarthritis from five European countries and randomly assigned them to take 800 mg of the extra-pure chondroitin sulfate (Chondrosulf), 200 mg of celecoxib (Celebrex) or a placebo every day for six months.

Those who took chondroitin sulfate or celecoxib had similar levels of pain relief at the end of the study, and in both groups the improvement was greater than for those taking just a placebo, according to the report in Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases.

Reginster told Reuters Health the findings are in line with earlier studies showing pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate could significantly decrease the progression of knee osteoarthritis over a period of three years.

He stressed that pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin is not the same as over-the-counter supplements, which are made differently and can’t get into the joint in high enough concentrations to combat the causes of cartilage degradation and pain.

European regulatory bodies recommend pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate as well as pharmaceutical-grade glucosamine sulfate as first-line treatments for osteoarthritis, Reginster said by email, because of the side effects associated with celecoxib and other non-steroidal inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) including stomach ulcers, bleeding, liver and kidney problems.

Dr. Michael Shepard of Hoag Orthopedic Institute in Orange, California, noted that the study had a relatively low number of participants and that most U.S. studies of this type would run two years rather than six months.

In addition, U.S.-based studies of chondroitin have had mixed results, said Shepard, who wasn’t involved in the study. Some have found the supplements to be as effective as ibuprofen (also an NSAID), and some have found that chondroitin sulfate is no more effective than placebo, he told Reuters Health.

“I tell my patients, ‘buyer beware,’” Shepard said in an email. “I tell them about the mixed results of chondroitin in the literature. I tell them to try chondroitin for one month as a trial and if they like it and feel better with it, then keep taking it.”

If chondroitin doesn’t work for them, he suggests taking an NSAID “periodically,” and to be aware of the side effects.

“If you are going to stay on an NSAID for a prolonged period then you need regular follow up with your doctor,” Shepard cautioned.

Dr. Rachel Wolfe of Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, agreed that chondroitin is “reasonable to try” for some people, especially those with contraindications to NSAIDs.

“However, it should not replace other therapy such as quad strengthening exercises, and weight loss, which we know will provide benefit. It should be used in conjunction with these measures,” said Wolfe, who wasn’t involved in the study.

“Chondroitin is not a miracle pill, but if it allows people to feel less pain and be more active, thereby losing weight and strengthening muscles, then I think there may benefit,” Wolfe told Reuters Health by email. “Studies like this highlight that medicine is still an art - we do not have perfect answers, and we have to individualize for each patient.”

The study was sponsored by IBSA Institut Biochimique SA, a pharmaceutical company based in Lugano, Switzerland, that makes the chondroitin sulfate supplements used in the test.

SOURCE: bit.ly/2rcPLh0 Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, online May 22, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes two American experts, neither of whom seem to be associated with this European study. We applaud the effort to get outside perspective, but wish the article made clear if these sources do or do not have conflicts of interest with pharmaceutical companies that make any kind of arthritis pain medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON, Sept. 29, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The American College of Radiology (ACR), Society of Breast Imaging (SBI) and major medical organizations experienced in breast cancer care continue to recommend that women start getting annual mammograms at age 40. This approach saves many more lives than screening started at a later age or with less frequent exams. To mark National Breast Cancer Awareness Month, women are encouraged to ask their health care providers about scheduling an annual mammogram.

"All women age 40 and over can benefit from annual mammography. Risk-based screening is a poor approach. Seventy-five percent of women diagnosed with breast cancer have no family history or other factors that place them at high risk for the disease. I encourage women to speak with their providers about mammography benefits and limitations and create a schedule to get their annual mammograms," said Debra Monticciolo, MD, FACR, chair of the American College of Radiology Breast Imaging Commission.

Breast cancer remains the second leading cause of deaths among women in the United States. In 2015, according to the National Cancer Institute, 231,840 women will be diagnosed with the disease and 40,290 will die from it. Deaths are highest among women who are not screened regularly and have their cancers found at later stage.

"Mammography screening is not perfect but has been shown to markedly reduce the number of women each year who die from breast cancer," said Elizabeth Morris, MD, FACR, president of the Society of Breast Imaging. "The decision whether or not to get a mammogram remains with women. We want them to know that mammography can detect cancer early — when it's most treatable and can be treated less invasively — which not only saves lives but helps preserve quality of life."

The ACR and SBI believe women 40 and older should have access to mammograms and that Medicare and private insurers should be required to cover them for these exams.

For information on mammography visit Mammography Saves Lives or the Society of Breast Imaging website.

Contact Shawn Farley at 703-648-8936 or PR@acr.org to arrange an interview with an ACR spokesperson.

Contact Joy Burwell at 202-263-2971 or jburwell@amplifypublicaffairs.net to arrange an interview with an SBI spokesperson.

About the American College of Radiology

The American College of Radiology (ACR), founded in 1924, is a professional medical society dedicated to serving patients and society by empowering radiology professionals to advance the practice, science, and professions of radiological care.

About the Society of Breast Imaging

The Society of Breast Imaging (SBI), established in 1985, is a professional medical organization dedicated to improving the practice of breast imaging and the quality of medical education in breast imaging. The SBI also provides a medium for the exchange of ideas among those involved in breast imaging. The SBI includes leading international breast imaging specialists nationwide among its membership.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The Society of Breast Imaging and the American College of Radiology are clearly indicated.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 13, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- For men who have prostate cancer that's considered "intermediate risk," radiation plus four months of hormone therapy appears to improve survival, a new study finds.

This combination of treatments, however, was not effective in men with either low-risk prostate cancer or advanced disease, the researchers said. Men with high-risk cancer need long-term hormone therapy.

The hormone therapy is known as androgen deprivation therapy. It's designed to reduce the levels of male hormones (androgens) in the body, since they can stimulate the growth of prostate cancer cells.

"For patients with early, localized cancer of the prostate who were treated with radiation therapy, [by] adding short-term androgen deprivation therapy, we improved their cure rates and increased their chance of living 10 years from 57 percent to 62 percent," said lead researcher Dr. Christopher U. Jones, from Radiological Associates of Sacramento, Calif.

But when the researchers looked closely at those findings, they found that patients with low-risk prostate cancer did not need hormone therapy because the chance they would survive with radiation alone was already almost 99 percent, Jones said.

And while short term hormonal therapy is "not very toxic, there are [still] some toxicities," Jones noted. "We don't want to treat any man unnecessarily with that type of treatment. We really want to make sure -- if we are going to recommend that treatment -- the person really needs it," he said.

On the other hand, hormone therapy plus radiation was most effective in patients with intermediate-risk prostate cancer. "We decreased the risk of dying from prostate cancer in those patients from 10 percent to 3 percent, at 10 years," Jones said.

For patients with high-risk prostate cancer, using hormone therapy for just a short while is not effective, he added. "We know from other studies that short-term androgen deprivation therapy isn't enough. You need to give long-term androgen deprivation therapy in addition to radiation to have the best results," Jones said.

The report was published in the July 14 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

For the study, Jones' team randomly assigned almost 2,000 men with prostate cancer to radiation therapy alone or in combination with four months of hormone therapy. The hormone therapy started two months before radiation.

Side effects of male hormone therapy can include erectile dysfunction (impotence), loss of sex drive, hot flashes, growth of breast tissue, loss of muscle and bone mass, weight gain, nausea, liver problems, fatigue, memory problems and mood swings.

In October 2010, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration asked manufacturers to add a warning that certain drugs used in hormone therapy (including the one used in the study) were linked to a small but increased risk of diabetes, heart attack, stroke and sudden death in men.

In this study, men treated with hormone therapy experienced a much higher percentage of liver damage; toxic effects of radiation treatment were similar in both groups.

Over an average of over nine years of follow-up, 62 percent of the men who had combination therapy were alive, compared with 57 percent of the men who received radiation therapy alone, the researchers found.

Overall, hormone therapy reduced the risk of dying from prostate cancer over 10 years from 8 percent to 4 percent, Jones said.

He noted that the radiation treatments in use today differ from those given in 1994 when the trial began.

"We can give 15 to 20 percent higher doses of radiation now than we could then, and we can do it more safely and more accurately," he said. So, that brings into question how much, if any, hormone therapy is needed, he added.

An ongoing trial among patients with intermediate risk prostate cancer aims to answer that question, Jones said. "We are going to find out if androgen deprivation therapy still applies to patients treated with modern techniques," he said.

"This study, in conjunction with what we know about hormonal therapy, really nails home the conclusion that hormonal therapy should not be used in men with low-risk disease because the risks outweigh any conceivable benefit," commented Dr. Anthony D'Amico, chief of radiation oncology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and author of an accompanying journal editorial.

D'Amico noted that new studies using up-to-date high-dose radiation also found that the addition of short-term hormone therapy improved outcomes at five years for men with intermediate risk prostate cancer, compared with radiation alone.

"If you are in the low-risk category, stay away from hormone therapy. It does no good. [It] can hurt," D'Amico said. "If you have anything beyond low-risk [prostate cancer], the hormonal therapy helps," he said. "It's just a matter of how long you need it for. It could be four months, six months or longer."

These findings are good news for some men, since the effects of short term of hormone therapy are reversible, D'Amico said. "It's not three years, where men are changed forever," he said.

For more information on prostate cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included quotes from the lead author of the study reported on along with quotes from the expert in the field who wrote an editorial about the study which accompanied its publication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Eric Rowe turned 50, the question was not whether the Washington lawyer would be screened for colon cancer, but how. His wife had undergone a colonoscopy, the gold-standard exam that costs about $1,500, but Rowe's internist recommended an alternative that was less invasive and expensive: a virtual colonoscopy, which uses three-dimensional images from a CT scan to detect benign polyps or cancers.

"It sounded good to me," said Rowe, pleased that he could schedule the $800 procedure for 7:45 a.m. at a downtown medical building. Unlike standard colonoscopy, generally performed under anesthesia, in which a long, flexible scope is inserted into the rectum and snaked through the large intestine to find and snip out polyps, the new procedure doesn't require a ride home or a day off. Rowe planned to be at his desk an hour or so later.

Invented 16 years ago by a radiologist who got the idea while playing video games on a flight simulator during advanced training at Johns Hopkins, virtual colonoscopy has become an increasingly popular alternative to standard, or optical, colonoscopy, which is typically performed by a gastroenterologist. Initially regarded as a high-tech novelty, the new procedure has in recent months received key endorsements as a first-line screening test from influential medical groups, notably the American Cancer Society, after several large studies found it to be effective at finding large polyps.

Like other mass screening tests including mammography, the overarching question is whether the benefits of virtual colonoscopy outweigh the risks.

Its supporters, many of them radiologists who read CT scans, tout virtual colonoscopy as a more palatable alternative that has the potential to boost low rates of screening. One of the most common and deadliest malignancies, colon cancer can be prevented -- or even cured -- if detected early. Currently about half of Americans over 50 are screened for the disease; some shun traditional colonoscopy, which is the only way to remove polyps, because of its invasive nature.

"This is a really good test that's going to find way more cancer than optical colonoscopy," said Mark Klein of Washington Radiology Associates, who has performed more than 1,200 virtual colonoscopies since 2002, Rowe's among them. "Is it perfect? No. But no test is."

The prospects for significant expansion of the procedure, which is covered by a growing number of insurance companies, have collided with a large and unexpected roadblock. In February, officials at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced a preliminary decision not to cover the procedure as a mass screening test for Medicare recipients.

CMS officials, who are scheduled to issue their final ruling May 12, cited reservations expressed by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of health experts, and concluded that there is insufficient evidence that virtual colonoscopy would benefit Medicare recipients. CMS cited concerns about radiation exposure and the number of patients who would require follow-up colonoscopies to remove polyps, as well as the inability of CT scans to reliably detect small or flat growths.

Medicare's decision has sparked a furious lobbying campaign. More than 40 members of Congress have signed letters urging federal officials to reconsider, and the dispute has split doctors in the same specialty: the American Gastroenterological Association favors Medicare coverage, while the American College of Gastroenterology does not.

In many ways, the debate mirrors some of the complexities inherent in overhauling health care, a top priority of the Obama administration. At issue is whether virtual colonoscopy will enhance quality or whether it is, in the words of one physician blogger, "a proxy for high-tech excesses."

"CMS made the right decision," said John Petrini, a Santa Barbara, Calif., gastroenterologist who heads the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. Why, he asks, should patients undergo two tests when one is sufficient?

Klein disagrees. "They got it completely wrong," he said. "Some people will die from that decision, completely unnecessarily," because they won't get a standard colonoscopy.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple sources with differing persepctives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - A 15-minute brain scan could in future be used to test for autism, helping doctors diagnose the complex condition more cheaply and accurately.

British scientists said on Tuesday their rapid test had proved more than 90 percent accurate in adults and there was no reason why it should not work equally well in children.

It could be a boon for patients and their doctors by reducing reliance on time-consuming and emotionally trying assessments based on interviews and behavioral observation.

Autism is a complex brain disorder characterized by difficulties in social interaction and communication, ranging from mild to profound impairment.

The new scanning method — which picks up on structural changes in the brain’s grey matter — could be ready for general use in a couple of years. The next goal is to test it in children.

“What we are working on now is to see if we find the same results in younger people,” research leader Declan Murphy, professor of psychiatry at the Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, said in an interview.

“We would hope that it would work just as well ... there is no reason why not.”

The ability to base a diagnosis on an objective biological test, rather than having to rely on personality traits, should mean patients get treatment more quickly, he added.

Cognitive behavioral therapy and educational treatment can be highly effective for some patients and the impact of a more certain prognosis would be especially beneficial for children.

Murphy and colleagues, who published their findings in the Journal of Neuroscience, studied 20 healthy adults and another 20 individuals previously diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, which also includes Asperger syndrome.

The accuracy of the scan in predicting autism was so high that the results were strongly significant, despite the small number of patients involved.

Experts not involved in the research applauded the research but cautioned further study was still needed.

“Although this method is not ready for normal diagnostic situations, any step to easier diagnosis is welcome,” said Terry Brugha, professor of psychiatry at the University of Leicester.

Murphy said he envisaged that in future autism specialists would use a scan alongside interviews, in much the same way as doctors monitoring diabetes look at blood test results alongside patient histories.

The new system works by analyzing variations in the shape and structure of brain regions linked to language and social behavior, using standard magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines made by companies like General Electric, Siemens and Philips.

The speed of the test makes it some 20 times cheaper than traditional tests, which can take a team of doctors four to eight hours to conduct. The actual brain scan costs around 100 pounds ($157.5).

Autism spectrum disorders are diagnosed in one percent of the population in Britain and the United States, and the condition affects four times as many boys as girls. Researchers agree there is a strong genetic component.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One of the sources for this story was not involved in the research and has no obvious conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PITTSBURGH, Dec. 1, 2016 - In the first analysis of how to treat patients on anticoagulants who suffer a major bleeding event, a clinical practice that routinely gives doctors pause, while also evaluating a new drug, University of Pittsburgh researchers aim to provide much-needed guidance to clinicians trying to balance the risks of stroke versus bleeding when determining the best treatment.

The analysis, published today in the journal Stroke, determined that resuming anticoagulation therapy after a person suffers a major bleeding event was associated with a higher likelihood of stroke-free survival than discontinuing anticoagulation. Furthermore, restarting therapy with the new oral anticoagulant dabigatran was associated with a lower risk of recurrent hemorrhage in these cases than the old standby drug warfarin.

People take anticoagulants to avoid blood clots when they have a risk for stroke or heart attack, but the downside is that these medications increase a person's risk of severe bleeding--such as in the brain or gut--because the blood isn't clotting as well as it otherwise might.

"If a patient who is on an anticoagulant to avoid a stroke has a major bleeding event, doctors are faced with a catch-22: Discontinue the anticoagulant to avoid future bleeding, but again place their patient at increased risk of stroke; or resume the anticoagulant to continue avoiding a stroke, but then have to worry about another bleeding event," said lead author Inmaculada Hernandez, Pharm.D., Ph.D., an assistant professor in Pitt's School of Pharmacy, who completed this work as a doctoral student at Pitt's Graduate School of Public Health.

"It causes a lot of uncertainty for physicians, especially because patients at highest risk of recurrent bleeding also are at highest risk of stroke," said co-author Yuting Zhang, Ph.D., associate professor of health policy and management at Pitt Public Health, and Hernandez's doctoral dissertation committee chair.

The Pitt research team obtained data from 2010 to 2012 for a random sample of Medicare beneficiaries. They then followed nearly 90,000 people who had filled prescriptions for the anticoagulants warfarin, which has been used as a medication since 1954, and dabigatran, which was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2010. More than 1,500 of those people suffered a major bleeding event while using one of the drugs. About half of those people resumed one of the two anticoagulants a few months after the bleeding, while the others did not.

The risk of dying from any cause or having a stroke was 23 to 34 percent higher in patients who discontinued anticoagulation therapy compared to those who resumed it. People who took dabigatran after their initial bleeding event had nearly half the risk of another major bleeding event within one year compared with those who took warfarin.

"Our results should encourage clinicians to seriously consider resuming anticoagulation among patients who survived a major bleeding event, particularly if the source of bleeding was identified and addressed," said senior author Samir Saba, M.D., associate professor of medicine and associate chief of cardiology at UPMC Heart and Vascular Institute. "They should also take into account that the benefit-to-risk ratio of post-hemorrhage use of anticoagulation is not the same for all medications."

Additional authors on this research are Maria M. Brooks, Ph.D., of Pitt Public Health; and Paul K.L. Chin, Ph.D., of the University of Otago in New Zealand.

This research was funded by the Commonwealth Foundation, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality grant R01 HS018657, and National Institute of Mental Health grant R21 MH100721. Dr. Hernandez was supported by a fellowship from "La Caixa" foundation.

The University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, founded in 1948 and now one of the top-ranked schools of public health in the United States, conducts research on public health and medical care that improves the lives of millions of people around the world. Pitt Public Health is a leader in devising new methods to prevent and treat cardiovascular diseases, HIV/AIDS, cancer and other important public health problems. For more information about Pitt Public Health, visit the school's Web site at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states the study’s funding sources: the Commonwealth Foundation, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, the National Institute of Mental Health, and La Caixa foundation. However, it does not state that one of the authors, Samir Saba, M.D., received research support from Boston Scientific, Medtronic, and St. Jude Medical, all of which make mechanical heart valves that require the use of anticoagulants to lower the post-operative risk of complications from blood clots. Since the potential conflict here is not direct, we will give the benefit of the doubt and award a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MILAN, ITALY, Sept. 12, 2017 - An antibody treatment reduces the rate of flare-ups by nearly 20 percent in patients with a subgroup of treatment-resistant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), according to the results of two large international trials presented today at the European Respiratory Society International Congress in Milan, Italy, and simultaneously published in the New England Journal of Medicine.

"The goal of precision medicine is to give the right treatment to the right patient," said lead author Frank Sciurba, M.D., director of the Center for COPD and Emphysema and UPMC Pulmonary Function Exercise Physiology Laboratory, and visiting professor in the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. "These findings are the first example of a precision therapy that is uniquely effective in a subgroup of patients with treatment-resistant COPD."

"There is significant variation between patients in the cells and other proteins responsible for lung inflammation, so there are actually many different subtypes of COPD," said Sciurba.

One subgroup called eosinophilic predominant COPD is present in as many as 40 percent of patients and is characterized by elevated levels of a type of white blood cell known as eosinophils, he said.

The new study reports the results from two Phase III clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of mepolizumab, an antibody treatment that reduces the number of eosinophils in the blood, in moderate to severe treatment-resistant eosinophilic COPD by blocking the pro-inflammatory effects of interleukin-5.

Patients included in the trials were still having flare-ups despite a year of a standard treatment known as "triple inhaled therapy" that includes bronchodilators and glucocorticoids.

"These patients already have been given every treatment we have to offer them and are still having flare-ups that significantly interfere with their quality of life and can lead to deterioration in lung function and higher mortality," said Sciurba. "We hoped to be able to offer them an option."

Mepolizumab is already approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to reduce symptom flare-ups and improve quality of life in eosinophilic asthma.

The first trial, termed METREX, was conducted at 117 sites in 15 countries from 2014 to 2017. A total of 837 COPD patients were stratified by blood eosinophil counts and randomized to receive either 100 milligrams of mepolizumab or placebo, delivered under the skin every four weeks for one year.

The patients with high eosinophil counts who received mepolizumab had a statistically significant 18 percent lower rate of moderate/severe exacerbations (1.4 per year compared to 1.7 per year) than those in the placebo group. The exacerbation rate in the low eosinophil group treated with the biologic did not differ from placebo. The time to the first exacerbation also was higher with mepolizumab than placebo, but only in the high eosinophil group.

In a second, simultaneous trial, termed METREO, the team assessed the effect of a higher dose of mepolizumab in 675 patients with elevated eosinophil levels. Patients were randomized to receive 100 or 300 milligrams of mepolizumab or placebo, with the same delivery method and schedule as METREX.

Similar to METREX, the exacerbation rate was reduced by 20 percent in the high eosinophil group after 100 milligrams of mepolizumab. The METREO results narrowly missed statistical significance. The 300-milligram dose did not provide an advantage over the lower dose.

An analysis of data from both trials found that as baseline blood eosinophil counts increased, so did mepolizumab's reduction in the annual exacerbation rate. This finding indicates that patients with higher initial eosinophil counts benefited more from mepolizumab than those with lower eosinophil counts, Sciurba said. The safety profile of mepolizumab did not differ from placebo in either trial.

"In addition to providing a new treatment option for patients with treatment-resistant, moderate to severe COPD, the new results also are important because they identify a potential biomarker for the disease and demonstrate that eosinophilic inflammation plays a role in flare-ups in COPD," Sciurba said.

Pitt's Division of Pulmonology, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine has a legacy of pioneering treatments for lung disease. UPMC also is home to a leading lung transplant program.

"The findings in these trials exemplify what we hope to achieve not only in COPD but across all lung diseases with regards to a precision approach to treatment," said division chief, Rama Mallampalli, M.D.

Funding for both trials was provided by GlaxoSmithKline, which plans to seek approval from the FDA for the use of mepolizumab in eosinophilic COPD.

Additional authors on the study are Ian Pavord, F.Med.Sci. D.M., University of Oxford, UK; Pascal Chanez, M.D., Ph.D., CIC Nord Aix-Marseille University, France; Gerard Criner, M.D., Temple University; Huib Kerstjens, M.D., Ph.D., University of Groningen, the Netherlands; Stephanie Korn, M.D., Ph.D., Mainz University Hospital, Germany; Njira Lugogo, M.D., Duke University; Jean-Benoit Martinot, M.D., CHU UCL Namur, Belgium; Hironori Sagara, M.D., Ph.D., Showa University, Japan; and Frank Albers, M.D., Ph.D., Eric Bradford, M.D., Stephanie Schweiker Harris, B.Sc., Bhabita Mayer, M.Sc., David Rubin, M.D., and Steven Yancey, M.Sc., all of GlaxoSmithKline.

Patients wishing to learn more about the research being performed at the Center for COPD and Emphysema can call 866-948-2673 or email ecrc@upmc.edu.

About the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine

As one of the nation's leading academic centers for biomedical research, the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine integrates advanced technology with basic science across a broad range of disciplines in a continuous quest to harness the power of new knowledge and improve the human condition. Driven mainly by the School of Medicine and its affiliates, Pitt has ranked among the top 10 recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health since 1998. In rankings recently released by the National Science Foundation, Pitt ranked fifth among all American universities in total federal science and engineering research and development support.

Likewise, the School of Medicine is equally committed to advancing the quality and strength of its medical and graduate education programs, for which it is recognized as an innovative leader, and to training highly skilled, compassionate clinicians and creative scientists well-equipped to engage in world-class research. The School of Medicine is the academic partner of UPMC, which has collaborated with the University to raise the standard of medical excellence in Pittsburgh and to position health care as a driving force behind the region's economy. For more information about the School of Medicine, see http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release identifies GlaxoSmithKline as the funder of both trials and names numerous GSK employees as authors of the study. The latter makes it possible that the biases could have been introduced in the writing process.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A fresh look at the medical evidence shows women who eat more fiber are less likely to get breast cancer.

Chinese researchers found those who ate the most of the healthy plant components were 11 percent less likely to develop breast cancer than women who ate the least.

Their findings don’t prove fiber itself lowers cancer risk, however, because women who consume a lot of it might be healthier overall than those who don’t.

The results “can identify associations but cannot tell us what will happen if people change their behavior,” said John Pierce, a cancer research at the University of California, San Diego, who was not involved in the work.

While earlier research has yielded mixed conclusions on the link between cancer and fiber, it would make scientific sense: According to the Chinese researchers, people who eat high-fiber diets have lower levels of estrogen, which is a risk factor for breast tumors.

So to get more clarity, the researchers combined 10 earlier studies that looked at women’s diets and followed them over seven to 18 years to see who developed cancer.

Of more than 710,000 women, 2.4 percent ended up with breast cancer. And those in the top fifth of fiber intake were 11 percent less likely to do so than women in the bottom fifth.

That was after accounting for differences in risk factors like alcohol drinking, weight, hormone replacement therapy and family members with the disease.

Still, it’s impossible to rule out that big fiber eaters had healthier habits overall that would cut their risk, Jia-Yi Dong of Soochow University in Suzhou and his colleagues write in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

And the potential effect was “very small,” Dr. Eleni Linos of Stanford University, who wasn’t involved in the research, told Reuters Health in an email.

About one in eight American women get breast cancer at some point, with less than a quarter of them dying from it.

Although the connection between breast cancer risk and fiber is a small one, fiber is “something that we know is healthy for you anyway,” said Christina Clarke, a research scientist at the Cancer Prevention Institute of California in Fremont.

Known benefits of a high-fiber diet include lower cholesterol and weight loss. If it turns out to cut cancer risk as well, that would be an extra bonus, Clarke said.

Fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole grains are all high in fiber.

According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 2010 Dietary Guidelines, most Americans don’t get enough fiber. The guidelines recommend that women eat 25 grams of fiber per day and men eat 38 grams, while the average Americans gets just 15 grams a day.

“Increasing dietary fiber intake in the general public is of great public health significance,” the Chinese team concludes.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two expert independent perspectives were included.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"It would certainly be premature to suggest taking statins to prevent rheumatoid arthritis ," he tells WebMD. "But one important message is that people who have been prescribed them should adhere to treatment. Right now about 75% of people who begin taking statins stop within two years."

Study researcher Gabriel Chodick, MD, called the risk reduction "important and meaningful," but he says more research is needed to confirm the association.

The regular use of statins was associated with a 42% reduction in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) risk in a newly reported study of patients enrolled in one of Israel's largest health plans .

Sept. 8, 2010 -- People who take cholesterol -lowering statin drugs to reduce heart disease risk may also be cutting their risk for developing the painful inflammatory joint disease rheumatoid arthritis .

The most widely prescribed class of drugs in the world, statins such as Crestor, Lescol, Lipitor, Pravachol, and Zocor reduce cholesterol in the blood by blocking an enzyme in the liver associated with its production.

There is also a suggestion that statins reduce systemic inflammation and may be protective against RA and other chronic inflammatory diseases.

Several studies have suggested a role for statins in slowing the progression of disease among patients with rheumatoid arthritis, but others failed to find a protective benefit for statin use.

In the newly published study, Chodick and colleagues examined data on 1.8 million members of Israel's Maccabi Healthcare Services HMO. Between 1998 and 2007, 2,578 new cases of rheumatoid arthritis were identified in this group.

The analysis revealed that patients who took statins for at least eight years during the decade-long study period were roughly 40% less likely to develop rheumatoid arthritis than people who did not take statins at all or who took them less persistently.

A more modest 15% reduction in osteoarthritis risk was seen in persistent statin users. Like rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis is a chronic, degenerative joint disease. But it is not driven by inflammation, so statin use is not as likely to affect its development or progression.

The study appears in the September issue of the journal PLoS Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


The story includes comments from an independent source. Although the story does not mention any potential conflicts of interest, none were disclosed by the study authors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Millions of Australians suffering from kidney stones could soon get relief, with researchers discovering a prostrate treatment can also help ease the painful condition.

Patients with kidney stones were treated with the drug Tamsulosin in an Emergency Medicine Foundation Australasia (EMF) funded clinical trial run across five Australian hospital emergency departments.

Trial leader and specialist emergency medicine physician at The Townsville Hospital, Dr Jeremy Furyk, said Tamsulosin was normally used to treat an enlarged prostate, but the research team found the treatment could also assist the passage of large kidney stones in the urine.

"Kidney stones are a bit of a mystery, occur frequently in the community and generally affect young, healthy adults," Dr Furyk said.

"It can be extremely painful to pass these jagged little crystallized minerals and it's very common for sufferers to go to an emergency department for treatment.

"Of more than 400 patients in the trial, we found those who received Tamsulosin passed their large kidney stones more often than the placebo group.

"This means patients with large stones might not need more complicated treatments including surgeries, and this has potential to improve care and reduce costs. We're very excited because Tamsulosin treatment may also allow patients to be treated closer to home rather than needing referral to a major centre."

EMF Australasia awarded more than $270,000 to support Dr Furyk's research, through its Queensland Research Program, which is funded by the Queensland Government Department of Health.

EMF Australasia Chair, Associate Professor Sally McCarthy said this research had the potential to help millions of Australians suffering with this extremely painful condition.

"It may also have implications for patients living in rural and regional areas, where access to urologists - the specialist doctors who treat this condition - can be limited."

Up to 15 per cent of the Australian adult population and 1 in 11 people in the United States suffer from kidney stones, which range in size from a grain of sand to a pearl or even larger, and can be excruciating to pass through the urinary tract.

Dr Furyk's research was recently published in the Annals of Emergency Medicine: http://www.annemergmed.com/article/S0196-0644(16)30364-X/abstract

About the Emergency Medicine Foundation - EMF is an Australasian non-profit organisation funds innovative, evidence-based emergency medicine research that will improve clinical practices to save lives, as well as deliver significant economic benefits to the healthcare system. EMF runs two research grant programs - a national Rural and Remote program and a highly successful Queensland program - as well as a Research Support Network. The Foundation was established in 2007 with the support of the Queensland Government.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the research was funded by Emergency Medicine Foundation Australasia, and that the quoted researcher has received “more than $270,000” from that group to support his research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Small doses of aspirin can lower the risk of heart attack in people who never had heart disease, a new look at the medical evidence shows.

But the blood-thinning drug doesn’t appear to cut the chances of dying from the disease, at least not enough that researchers can say for certain. And experts warn people to consult their doctor before taking the medication, which increases the risk of bleeding ulcers.

“I like to say you have to make the recommendation about aspirin one patient at a time,” Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, who was not linked to the study, told Reuters Health.

LeFevre worked on the 2009 aspirin recommendations from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), a federally supported expert panel.

The task force advises that men age 45 to 79 take aspirin to stave off heart attacks, as long as the benefit outweighs the risk of bleeding. For women age 55 to 79, aspirin is recommended to prevent strokes, with the same caveat.

The new work, by Alfred Bartolucci of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and colleagues, was supported by aspirin-maker Bayer AG.

The research team pooled the results of the nine trials that have tested the drug in the prevention of heart disease so far, including three that weren’t part of the 2009 USPSTF review.

About 100,000 men and women age 45 and up took part in the studies. Some were healthy and some had diabetes, but none had chest pain or other symptoms of an ailing heart.

The researchers found a 19-percent reduction in non-fatal heart attacks among participants who took aspirin compared to those who did not.

They don’t mention how many people actually suffered such a heart attack, but an earlier analysis of six of the trials showed that out of every 1,000 people, 18 individuals taking aspirin had heart attacks every year, compared to 23 individuals taking placebo pills.

On the other hand, that analysis also found aspirin increased the rate of bleeding from 0.7 to 1 per 1,000 people per year, making the authors conclude the drug was of “uncertain net value.”

Heart disease is the leading killer worldwide and accounts for more than a third of deaths in the U.S., according to the American Heart Association. Every year, heart attacks alone kill some 400,000 Americans.

In the current study, published in the American Journal of Cardiology, the researchers also report small decreases in stroke and death risks with aspirin, although those changes might have been due to chance.

“It refines our knowledge of how beneficial aspirin is,” Dr. Graham Nichol, an expert in emergency care at the University of Washington in Seattle, said about the study. “I don’t think this paper is inconsistent with previous work.”

Nichols, who was not involved in the study, said aspirin is clearly beneficial for people who’ve already had heart disease, and that it also seems to help those at high risk.

“There is not universal agreement on what is high risk,” he told Reuters Health. “In my mind, if you have diabetes or multiple risk factors for heart disease — such as smoking or obesity — it is reasonable to take aspirin.”

In addition, working to eliminate those risk factors by other means will not only slash the risk of heart disease, but also a host of other health problems.

LeFevre added that while the new study did add extra evidence compared with earlier work, it failed to analyze the effects on men and women separately.

That muddies the picture because men may see a benefit in the form of fewer heart attacks, whereas aspirin appears to lower the risk of stroke in women.

“We can’t tell from the existing study if that is going to hold up or not,” he said.

One recent study has suggested that despite the increase in bleeding ulcers from aspirin, the reduction in heart attacks might make the cheap drug cost-effective for men over 45.

The question then becomes finding out what your risk of heart attack is in the first place, which your doctor can help with.

“The number of events that you prevent depends on your baseline risk,” LeFevre concluded. “A blanket recommendation that everybody should take an aspirin is not a good idea.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two independent experts were quoted. And the story noted that the research was funded by Bayer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Fat was the food villain these past few decades but sugar is quickly muscling in to take its place. As rates of sugar-related disorders such as diabetes, obesity and heart disease climb, many experts believe that when Americans rid themselves of fat, they simply replaced it with sugar in all its forms.

But that the rise of the chronic diseases was actually linked to higher sugar consumption is a challenge. Dr. Robert Lustig, from the department of pediatrics at the University of California, San Francisco, who has made a name for himself publishing books and research addressing the question of sugar’s effects on the body, wanted clearer answers. Now, in a paper published Tuesday, he and his colleagues believe they have come up with the definitive evidence that sugar, as Lustig says, “is toxic.”

In most lab studies, the doses of sugar that scientists test are quite high; they want to see what the effect is quickly and, depending on the research, they may not have time to wait to study the more gradual effects that might emerge. And in studies where people reduce the amount of sugar they eat, for instance, those people end up eating fewer calories overall, so it’s difficult to know whether any changes are due to the removal of sugar or to the drop in calories.

Lustig and his colleagues think they’ve produced the “hard and fast data that sugar is toxic irrespective of its calories and irrespective of weight.”

MORE: FDA Wants Nutrition Labels to Include More Detail on Added Sugars

Lustig’s confidence comes from the unique study, described in , of 43 Hispanic or African-American children aged eight to 18 years old. He collected detailed food questionnaires from each of the adolescents to get an idea of the average amount of calories they ate per day, then designed a special menu for each of them for nine days that matched the total numbers of calories they would normally eat. The only difference in the nine-day diet was that most of the sugar the children ate was replaced by starch — the overall number of calories remained the same. The children weighed themselves daily, and if they were losing weight, they were told to eat more of the provided food in order to keep their weight the same throughout the study.

“Everything got better,” says Lustig. Some of the children went from being insulin resistant, a precursor state to developing diabetes, in which the body’s insulin levels can no longer keep up with the pace of breaking down sugar that’s coming in from the diet, to insulin sensitive.

MORE: Artificial Sweeteners Aren’t the Answer to Obesity: Here’s Why

“We took chicken teriyaki out, and put turkey hot dogs in. We took sweetened yogurt out, and put baked potato chips in. We took pastries out and put bagels in,” says Lustig. “So there was no change in [the children’s] weight and no change in calories.”

After nine days of having their total dietary sugar reduced to 10% of their daily calories, however, they showed improvements in all of these measures. Overall, their fasting blood sugar levels dropped by 53%, along with the amount of insulin their bodies produced since insulin is normally needed to break down carbohydrates and sugars. Their triglyceride and LDL levels also declined and, most importantly, they showed less fat in their liver.

MORE: 7 Amazing Things That Happen to Your Body When You Give Up Soda

Because some of the children lost weight, to convince themselves that the effects weren’t due to the small amount of weight that some of the children lost, Lustig and his team compared those who lost weight to those who didn’t during the study, and found similar improvements in both groups.

“Up until now, there have been a lot of correlation studies linking sugar and metabolic syndrome,” says Lustig. “This is causation.”

The diet he provided the children isn’t considered ideal from a health perspective — starches are still a considerable source of calories and can contribute to weight gain. But Lustig relied on the starches to prove a point in a scientific study — that the effect sugar has on the body goes beyond anything connected to its calories and to weight. “I’m not suggesting in any way, shape or form that we gave them healthy food,” he says. “We gave them crappy food, shitty food, processed food — and they still got better. Imagine how much even better they would have gotten if we didn’t substitute and took the sugar out. Then they would have gotten even better yet. That’s the point.”

MORE: The Trouble With Sugar Free Kids

Not everyone is convinced that the results definitely prove sugar, and not weight loss, is the culprit, however. Susan Roberts, professor of Nutrition, USDA Nutrition Center at Tufts University notes that because some of the children lost weight, it’s still possible that shedding the pounds helped their metabolic measures to improve. She also points out that the children self-reported their initial diet, which can often be inaccurate. “We know that a healthy diet and weight loss cause good metabolic changes, and although this study tries to attribute its effects to low fructose, in fact it is impossible to do that because of the study design.”

Some experts are concerned for other reasons. They’re worried that the findings may shift attention away from what they consider to be the more fundamental issue — that overall, we’re eating too much. “Too much calorie intake is still the biggest problem,” says Dr. Mark Corkins, professor of pediatrics at University of Tennessee Health Science Center and member of the American Academy of Pediatrics committee on nutrition. He notes that the study involved children who were obese already and consuming too many calories. “It’s an important study, and the facts coming out of it are very important. It means we need to look at sugars, and at the type of sugars and sugar intake. But I worry that people are going to hang everything on this when we still need to reduce consumption.”

Lustig hopes that won’t happen as more data emerges that details how sugar is altering the body in unhealthy ways outside of its caloric contribution. That wasn’t the subject of the current paper, but he promises follow up studies based on this work that will address that. This study does hint however, at what might be happening. While there has been a lot of attention on the presence of belly fat and its connection to metabolic syndrome, the fact that the children saw improvements in the amount of fat in their liver suggests that might be an important way that sugar is contributing to chronic disease. Obese children and those with diabetes often suffer from fatty liver, a condition normally associated with alcohol abuse but increasingly common among non-drinkers who gain excessive amounts of weight.

This new view of sugar could change the advice that doctors and government health officials give about eating the sweet stuff. Lustig’s hope is that the information is considered as the U.S. Department of Agriculture finalizes its latest Dietary Guidelines, expected by the end of the year, which delineate recommendations for what, and how much of different types of foods and nutrients Americans should eat.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes restraining comments from two independent experts, although those comments come far down in the story and should have been placed higher. The story perhaps also could have mentioned that Dr. Lustig is author of a 2012 book called “Fat chance: Beating the Odds Against Sugar, Processed Food, Obesity, and Disease,” and so may have an intellectual and financial conflict of interest when it comes to sugar.  The study was funded by the NIH and Touro University, as well as UCSF — another aspect that could have been mentioned for context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Calcium in the arteries of the breast predicts early buildup of plaque in the heart's arteries, and may improve risk assessment in many women, especially young women

Routine mammography--widely recommended for breast cancer screening--may also be a useful tool to identify women at risk for heart disease, potentially allowing for earlier intervention, according to a study scheduled for presentation at the American College of Cardiology's 65th Annual Scientific Session.

Data from this study show for the first time a link between the amount of calcium in the arteries of the breast--readily visible on digital mammography--and the level of calcium buildup in the coronary arteries. Coronary arterial calcification, or CAC, is considered a very early sign of cardiovascular disease. Importantly, the presence of breast arterial calcification also appears to be an equivalent or stronger risk factor for CAC than other well-established cardiovascular risk factors such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure and diabetes. Earlier research had shown a link between breast arterial calcification and atherosclerotic disease--even heart attack, stroke and other cardiovascular disease events, but researchers said these data provide a more direct relationship between the extent of calcified plaque in the mammary and coronary arteries, as well as a comparison to standard risk evaluation.

"Many women, especially young women, don't know the health of their coronary arteries. Based on our data, if a mammogram shows breast arterial calcifications it can be a red flag--an 'aha' moment--that there is a strong possibility she also has plaque in her coronary arteries," said Harvey Hecht, M.D., professor at the Icahn School of Medicine and director of cardiovascular imaging at Mount Sinai St. Luke's hospital, and lead author of the study.

All told, 70 percent of the women who had evidence of breast arterial calcification on their mammogram were also found to have CAC as shown on a noncontrast CT scan of the chest. For women under 60 years of age with CAC, half also had breast arterial calcification--an important finding as very few would be thinking about or considered for early signs of heart disease. There were even fewer false positives among younger patients; researchers said that if a younger woman had breast arterial calcification, there was an 83 percent chance she also had CAC.

Notably, breast arterial calcification also appeared to be as strong a predictor for cardiovascular risk as standard risk scores such as the Framingham Risk Score, which underestimates women's risk, and the 2013 Cholesterol Guidelines Pooled Cohort Equations, which tends to overestimate risk, Hecht said. When researchers added 33 asymptomatic women with established CAD, breast arterial calcification was more powerful than both risk assessment formulas, which suggests the presence of subclinical atherosclerosis may be a more important indicator of heart disease than other risk factors.

"This information is available on every mammogram, with no additional cost or radiation exposure, and our research suggests breast arterial calcification is as good as the standard risk factor-based estimate for predicting risk," Hecht said. "Using this information would allow at-risk women to be referred for standard CAC scoring and to be able to start focusing on prevention--perhaps even taking a statin when it can make the most difference."

Multivariate analysis showed that early signs of a buildup of plaque in the coronary arteries were most strongly related to breast arterial calcification. While CAC was about two times as likely with advancing age or high blood pressure, it was three times more likely with breast arterial calcification.

"The message is if a woman is getting a mammogram, look for breast arterial calcification. It's a freebie and provides critical information that could be lifesaving for some women," Hecht said, adding he hopes these findings will prompt clinicians, who rarely report breast arterial calcification, to routinely report not just the presence or absence of breast arterial calcifications but also to estimate and note the amount.

"The more breast arterial calcification a women has, the more likely she is to have calcium in her heart's arteries as well. If all it requires is to take a closer look at the images, how can we ignore it?," he said.

A total of 292 women who had digital mammography and noncontrast CT scans within one year were included in the study. Of these, 124, or 42.5 percent, were found to have evidence of breast arterial calcification. Mammograms were reviewed by a second radiologist who was blinded to the CAC results. Women with breast arterial calcification were more likely to be older, have high blood pressure and chronic kidney disease, and less likely smokers. Women with established cardiovascular diseases were excluded. Breast arterial calcification was evaluated on a scale from zero to 12 by increasing severity, and CAC was measured on the CT using a validated 0-12 severity score. The overall accuracy of breast arterial calcification for the presence of CAC was 70 percent, and 63 percent of those with CAC also had breast arterial calcification.

To date, there is no consensus on using CAC as a screening test, though a very large outcome study of 39,000 subjects is underway in the Netherlands. Mammography, however, is widely used and accepted and, as Hecht said, may provide an opportunity to risk stratify asymptomatic women by breast arterial calcification who might have calcium in the coronary arteries and ordinarily would not have been readily considered for cardiovascular screening.

Heart disease is the leading cause of death among women, yet breast cancer is often the most feared.

Roughly 37 million mammograms are performed annually in the U.S. Mammography is recommended annually for women over 40 years of age by the American Cancer Society and every other year for women 50-75 years old and women at high risk for breast cancer by the U.S. Preventive Service Task Force. Digital mammography is more sensitive to the presence of calcifications and is now available in 96 percent of mammography units in the U.S.

Another intriguing point that deserves additional study, according to the researchers, is that the nature of the atherosclerosis is different in breast arterial calcification and CAC, making it unclear why one should be related to the other.

Hecht stresses that these findings warrant further evaluation and validation in larger studies. Future prospective trials are needed to see what the prognostic significance of breast arterial calcification might be. Because the study involved women who received both mammography and CT scan for clinical indications, these women may have been more likely than the average woman to have coexisting conditions, although Hecht said these were unrelated to heart disease.

This study is being published simultaneously online in JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging.

In an accompanying editorial in JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging, Khurram Nasir, M.D., M.P.H., and John McEvoy, from the Center for Healthcare Advancement and Outcomes at Baptist Health South Florida, said that the report provides impetus to document breast arterial calcification in mammography reports, to improve education of primary care and radiology providers on the link with heart disease, and other actions to establish best practices for incorporating this research into care.

"Even by the conservative estimate of 10 percent, approximately 4 million women nationwide undergoing screening mammography will exhibit breast arterial calcification; with 2 to 3 million of them likely to have signs of premature coronary atherosclerotic disease," the authors said. "Whether the best use of breast arterial calcification is to trigger additional testing or to directly inform preventive treatment decisions, either by flagging high-risk women to their providers or by reclassifying traditional (heart disease) risk estimates, is worth further discussion."

The study was funded, in part, by the Flight Attendants Medical Research Institute.

The study, "Digital Mammography: Screening for Coronary Artery Disease?," will be presented on April 3, 2016, at 9:45 a.m. CT/10:45 a.m. ET/3:45 p.m. UTC at the American College of Cardiology's 65th Annual Scientific Session in Chicago. The meeting runs April 2-4.

The ACC's Annual Scientific Session, which in 2016 will be April 2-4 in Chicago, brings together cardiologists and cardiovascular specialists from around the world to share the newest discoveries in treatment and prevention. Follow @ACCMediaCenter and #ACC16 for the latest news from the meeting.

The American College of Cardiology is a 52,000-member medical society that is the professional home for the entire cardiovascular care team. The mission of the College is to transform cardiovascular care and to improve heart health. The ACC leads in the formation of health policy, standards and guidelines. The College operates national registries to measure and improve care, offers cardiovascular accreditation to hospitals and institutions, provides professional medical education, disseminates cardiovascular research and bestows credentials upon cardiovascular specialists who meet stringent qualifications.

Laurie Margolies, M.D., associate professor of radiology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and co-author of the study will be available to the media in an embargoed web briefing on Tuesday, March 22, 2016, at 2 p.m. ET/1 p.m. CT/6 p.m. UTC. Eligible media should contact Shealy Molpus, smolpus@acc.org, to receive access to the briefing.

Hecht will present the study, "Digital Mammography: Screening for Coronary Artery Disease?," on Sunday, April 3, 2016, at 9:45 a.m. CT/10:45 a.m. ET/3:45 p.m. UTC in Poster Area, South Hall A1.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release states that the Flight Attendants Medical Research Foundation was a partial funder. We aren’t told who else sponsored the research or if there were any potential conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, March 29, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A minimally invasive treatment for enlarged prostate that limits blood supply to the prostate seems to be just as effective as surgery but without the risk of debilitating side effects, such as impotence and urinary incontinence.

The treatment -- called prostatic artery embolization, or PAE -- is ready to be used in certain patients, namely those with a prostate larger than 60 cubic centimeters, "with severe lower urinary tract symptoms and a weakened urinary stream," said Dr. Joao Martins Pisco, lead author of a study slated to be presented March 29 at the annual meeting of the Society of Interventional Radiology in Chicago.

But other experts aren't so sure.

Drugs are used to treat most patients with an enlarged prostate, with only about 10 percent qualifying for surgery to remove the entire gland, said Dr. Elizabeth Kavaler, a urologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"Because medication is so effective, most of the patients that we treat surgically are in pretty bad shape," she added. And while this study showed some symptomatic improvement, it didn't have enough objective data to show that the new technique would surpass surgery, she said.

Benign prostate hyperplasia, also known as enlarged prostate, is a non-cancerous condition familiar to millions of aging males. The condition occurs when the prostate gland slowly enlarges and presses on the urethra, constricting the flow of urine.

Enlarged prostate is characterized by a host of unpleasant symptoms, including weak or slow urine flow, an urgent need to urinate frequently, incomplete bladder emptying and having to get up repeatedly at night to urinate.

The surgery for enlarged prostate -- transurethral resection of the prostate, or TURP -- is used for men whose prostates are smaller than 60 to 80 cubic centimeters. The procedure is performed under general anesthesia and involves a hospital stay.

Meanwhile, there is no size limitation for PAE, which requires only local anesthesia and also lowers the risk of other side effects, such as blood loss and retrograde ejaculation, which occurs when semen leaks into the bladder, researchers said. PAE can be an outpatient procedure as well.

For the procedure, a catheter is inserted into the femoral artery in the groin. The catheter delivers tiny "grains" to the arteries that lead to the prostate, which block blood flow and lead to shriveling of the gland.

In this study, PAE helped most of the 67 patients who underwent the procedure, according to the researchers, who noted that 66 men who had not responded to medications experienced improvements in symptoms as well as a reduction in prostate volume. After nine months, none had experienced sexual dysfunction and 25 percent still reported improvements.

However, the authors did not see as great an improvement in "urodynamic" results, such as improved flow rate of the urine, which would indicate how well the bladder and urethra are performing; in this area, the patients did not improve as much as those who underwent TURP surgery, they noted.

Another drawback is that few doctors are trained in PAE so far, said Pisco, chair of radiology at Hospital Pulido Valente and professor in the Faculty of Medical Sciences at New University of Lisbon in Portugal.

Other minimally invasive treatments for enlarged prostate that are currently available are less effective and have a greater risk of a need for reoperation, according to background materials that accompanied the study.

Dr. Franklin Lowe, associate director of urology at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in New York City, said PAE was "unlikely" to be used much to treat enlarged prostate.

Current surgical procedures typically require no more than one night in the hospital and complications such as incontinence and impotence are uncommon, he said.

"PAE is potentially fraught with complications," Lowe said, adding that the study follow-up of less than one year was short for a disease that lasts decades.

Since the study is being presented at a medical meeting and has not yet been published in a peer-reviewed journal, the findings should be considered preliminary.

The U.S. National Institutes of Health has more on enlarged prostate.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Clinicians with expertise in treating benign prostatic hyperplasia and without apparent ties to the study reported on were quoted in this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women With A Berry-Snacking Habit May Have Healthier Hearts

When it comes to supernutritious foods, the blueberry has long had a health halo floating over it.

Going back to Colonial times when Native Americans and English settlers ground up blueberries and added them to porridge, in both dried and fresh forms, there have been hints of health-promoting effects.

In recent years, regular consumption of berries has been linked to better brain health and a decreased risk of Type 2 diabetes.

Now, a new study published in the American Heart Association's journal Circulation suggests eating three servings per week of blueberries and strawberries helps cut the risk of heart attacks among some women.

"We showed for the first time that a regular intake of substances that are naturally present in red-, blue-colored fruits and vegetables can reduce the risk of a heart attack by about 32 percent in young and middle-aged women [ages mid-40s to 60]," compared with women who ate berries once a month or less, says study author Aedin Cassidy of the University of East Anglia. The researchers found other fruits such as apples and pears were not associated with a decreased risk.

To study the relationship between berry consumption and heart disease, Cassidy and her collaborators at the Harvard School of Public Health analyzed findings from the Nurses Health Study 2 which includes more than 90,000 nurses in the U.S. Periodically over the past 18 years the nurses have reported details about their diets and lifestyles to researchers. At the same time, researchers have monitored the nurses' health to see which diseases they go on to develop, or not.

It's certainly not a perfect way to detect how certain foods may influence health, but it identifies important associations. Cassidy says the association between berry consumption and heart disease was strengthened when she and her collaborators controlled for other reasons that could have explained the finding.

"Even when we adjusted for things like fat intake, fiber intake, medication use, or body size, and for example, exercise, we still got these strong reductions in risk," Cassidy says.

So what's in blueberries that makes them so good for us? Researchers have pinpointed a class of plant compounds known as anthocyanins. These compounds give the red and blue color to everything from berries to eggplants to cherries. And when you eat a steady diet of them, they seem to have a number of positive health effects.

"They have effects on blood pressure in animal models," says Cassidy. And in lab experiments they're shown to exert anti-inflammatory effects, as well as help modulate nitric oxide in the body, which could help arteries stay more elastic and flexible.

All of these effects could be beneficial, explains Robert Eckel, a preventive cardiologist at the University of Colorado. But he says it's important to point out that the women in this study weren't prime candidates for heart attacks anyway.

"Having a heart attack when you're a woman between ages of 45 and 60 is distinctly unusual," says Eckel.

Would the protective effect hold up for older women? Eckel says it's not clear.

"But nonetheless, for the first time I think we have some evidence that the intake of theses anthocyanins may have a protective effect."

So, go ahead. Load up on berries. And if they're out of season, like now, studies show frozen berries have similar levels of beneficial compounds.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Cardiologist Dr. Robert Eckel is the independent source in the study who talks about a major study limitation. His comments are extremely helpful and bring more perspective to the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jan. 13, 2010 - A new anticlotting drug works better than Plavix, one of the most prescribed and most profitable drugs in the world, a huge clinical trial finds.

The new kid on the block is AstraZeneca's ticagrelor, to be named Brilinta if the experimental drug gets FDA approval.

That approval seems likely, given the results of a new clinical trial that compared Plavix to Brilinta in patients with acute coronary syndromes who had stents placed in their arteries to improve blood flow. Such patients need anticlotting drugs because blood clots can be a deadly complication of getting a stent.

Plavix is the drug most often used to prevent this complication. But there's a problem with Plavix, and with a newer, stronger drug in the same class called Effient.

Both drugs increase the risk of dangerous bleeding. And since the drugs irreversibly bind to blood-clotting platelets, a patient has to stop taking these drugs for five to seven days before the body can make enough new platelets.

Brilinta lets go of platelets more quickly than Plavix -- in about two or three days. And in the new study, patients had less bleeding after stent installation.

That's probably why the 6,732 study patients who got Brilinta were 16% less likely to die, or have a heart attack or stroke, than were the 6,676 patients who got Plavix. Brilinta reduced overall death rates by 1.1% .

"We estimate that use of [Brilinta] instead of [Plavix] for one year in 1,000 patients with acute coronary syndromes and who are planning to undergo an invasive strategy at the start of drug treatment would lead to 11 fewer deaths, 13 fewer myocardial infarctions, and six fewer cases of stent [clotting] without an increase in the rates of major bleeding or transfusion," conclude study researcher Christopher P. Cannon, MD, and colleagues.

The findings impress Columbia University researcher Gregg W. Stone, MD. Stone has in the past received honoraria from the makers of both Plavix and Brilinta and serves on the advisory boards of Boston Scientific and Abbott Vascular.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  The story quotes one independent source and identifies potential conflicts of interest. It would have been better if the "independent" commenter didn’t have industry ties. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women who undergo Caesarean sectionsmore than seven days before their due dates put their babies at higher risk of respiratory problems, longer hospital stays and other complications.

A multisite study that appeared Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine reinforces recommendations by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists that discourage scheduling C-sections before 39 weeks of pregnancy unless there is documentation of lung maturity or it is medically necessary. (Due dates are set at 40 weeks gestation, and infants are considered full term at 37 weeks.)

The findings offer important guidance to the growing number of women who face planned C-sections -- one in three babies in the United States, estimates the National Center for Health Statistics.

"We recognize that by the end of a long pregnancy there is a desire to see the baby and to move forward," said Dr. Brian Mercer, one of the study's authors and director of both the division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and obstetrics at MetroHealth Medical Center in Cleveland.

"But mothers and families need to recognize the potential risk of moving forward before it's time," he said.

The findings from the study sponsored by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development's Maternal Fetal Medicine Units Network also underscore the importance of a woman seeking medical care as early into her pregnancy as possible, so that doctors can accurately gauge the gestational age with an ultrasound, Mercer said.

Researchers at 19 medical centers studied more than 24,000 women who gave birth to a single child by C-section from 1999 to 2002. Of those, more than 13,000 had elective C-sections. All of the women had previously had C-sections.

More than one-third of the surgeries performed during that time happened at 37 or 38 weeks. Babies born at 37 weeks were twice as likely to have breathing problems, infections or to stay in intensive care than babies born a week later. Breathing problems -- already a high risk because labor helps clear the baby's lungs of fluid -- happened four times as often in babies born at 37 weeks than those born at 39 weeks.

Dr. Justin Lavin, director of theMaternal-Fetal Medicine Departmentat Akron Children's Hospital and a high-risk obstetrician, said he hopes the study's findings help people understand why doctors like him say nowhen it comes to scheduling unnecessary C-sections early.

"This happens to me every day," Lavin said. "Sometimes [the mother] is a bit uncomfortable, or sometimes Dad has to go on a business trip or Grandma wants to fly in," Lavin said. "It's human nature."

The standard practice has been that doctors planning repeat C-sections do so between 36 and 40 weeks, when most fetuses have developed enough to survive outside the womb.

The tests the doctors perform to determine the extent of the fetus's development are often not sophisticated enough to determine subtle milestones for breathing and processing food independently, said Dr. John Thorp, a University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill obstetrician and one of the authors of the study.

"I think there is something inherent in labor -- probably a signal from baby to mother that the baby is ready to make the transition -- that we choose to circumvent when we schedule an elective, repeat C-section," Thorp said.

"I think it points to a role for the baby in the initiation of labor and the baby's readiness to make the transition."

The Associated Press and McClatchy Newspapers contributed to this story.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple experts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A scientifically based approach that includes a tooth-decay risk assessment, aggressive preventive measures and conservative restorations can dramatically reduce decay in community dental practices, according to a study by researchers at UC San Francisco.

The findings, which support earlier research demonstrating positive results of the assessment and treatment method in a university setting, have the potential to transform dental care for high-risk patients at a lower cost to both patients and dental clinics and practices. Results appear online Jan. 22, 2018, in Advances in Dental Research.

"We put the 2012 UCSF clinical study into the real world and showed it works," said lead author Peter Rechmann, DMD, PhD, professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences in the UCSF School of Dentistry. "The patients at high caries risk who used prescription products went down significantly over time in their risk level. Those in the control group also reduced their risk to a lesser degree, simply by using over-the-counter products that also protect teeth and affect the bacteria."

Dental caries (tooth decay) is caused by bacteria on the tooth surface feeding on carbohydrates, then making acids as waste. These acids destroy the protective tooth enamel and the dentin layer beneath it. If not halted or reversed, this leads to a cavity.

CAries Management By Risk Assessment (CAMBRA?) is an evidence-based approach to preventing or treating dental caries at its earliest stages. It was launched in 2003 through the UCSF School of Dentistry by the paper's senior author, John Featherstone, PhD, MSc, former dean of the school and distinguished professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences.

A dentist who uses CAMBRA obtains the patient's dental and medical history and conducts a clinical exam to assess caries early enough to reverse or halt progression and to determine caries risk factors. These factors include, among other things, acid-producing bacteria, frequent eating and drinking of fermentable carbohydrates ("snacking"), and abnormally low saliva flow and function.

From this assessment, the dentist utilizes behavioral approaches and chemical treatments to optimize protective factors. The treatment plan typically incorporates remineralization through the use of fluoride and/or antibacterial therapies such as chlorhexidine and xylitol, minimally invasive restorative procedures to conserve tooth structure, and regular patient follow up.

The authors published their initial validation of CAMBRA for ages 6 through adult in 2006, followed by several additional years of data published in 2011, 2012, 2015 and 2016. Since then, more than half of the U.S. schools and colleges of dentistry have adopted CAMBRA in one form or another as part of their standard curriculum. The authors said now that this has been shown to be effective in a non-academic clinical setting, there also is potential for insurance companies to reimburse CAMBRA and other preventive therapies for adults, thereby lowering patient costs while increasing profits for dental practices.

In the Advances in Dental Research study, Rechmann and his colleagues recruited 20 dentists - 17 in private practice, three in community clinics - to participate in a two-year CAMBRA trial of 460 patients ages 12-65 years old, with 239 in a CAMBRA group and 221 in a control group.

In the CAMBRA group, high-risk patients received prescription fluoride toothpaste, chlorhexidine antibacterial rinse, xylitol mints and fluoride varnish. The control group received regular fluoride toothpaste, an assumed inactive mouth rinse, sorbitol candies and a non-fluoride varnish.

Follow-up visits occurred at six, 12, 18 and 24 months, in which new caries lesions or changes in caries risk level were recorded. Overall, the researchers found that a significantly greater percentage of high-risk participants were classified at lower risk after receiving CAMBRA preventive therapies. Dental decay was low in both groups.

Among 242 patients (137 intervention, 105 control) initially identified as high risk for caries, only a quarter of the patients remained at high risk in the CAMBRA group at 24 months, while just over half (54 percent) of the control group did. Of the 192 low-risk participants (93 intervention, 99 control), most participants remained low risk, indicating that the assessment correctly identifies who is at risk for caries.

The researchers said the risk reduction among the control group may have been caused by the fluoride toothpaste enhancing tooth repair, as well as the mouth rinse enhancing saliva flow and having bactericidal effects. While not as significant as the CAMBRA group in this study, the risk level of these patients dropped more dramatically over time than for those in the 2012 UCSF CAMBRA study.

"It was surprising to see the benefits gained by the control group," Rechmann said. "More research is needed to see if the products and treatment administered to this group function in the way we speculate, and if so, they might be made easily available to dental patients. Doing so can change the whole picture of caries control."

Among the study limitations, the researchers noted a high study attrition (65 percent), which partly may have contributed to observed declines in risk level at each subsequent recall visit.

Co-authors on the paper were Benjamin Chafee, DDS, MPH, PhD, assistant professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences and director of the Global Oral Health program, and Beate Rechmann, research associate, both from the UCSF School of Dentistry. Funding was provided by the National Institutes of Health National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, PacifiCare/United Healthcare, DentaQuest and California Dental Association. Proctor & Gamble, 3M Espe and Epic provided products for study participants at reduced or no cost.

UC San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with nationally renowned programs in basic, biomedical, translational and population sciences; and a preeminent biomedical research enterprise. It also includes UCSF Health, which comprises three top-ranked hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals in San Francisco and Oakland, and other partner and affiliated hospitals and healthcare providers throughout the Bay Area. Please visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources are listed, and there are no apparent conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MEMPHIS, Tenn., Oct. 26, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Imagine. A nick of the skin, a flash of cold and 25 minutes on an exam table. For thousands of women, this may soon replace surgery as a treatment for breast cancer.

Cryoablation, using extreme cold to destroy diseased cells, is potentially the first ever procedure to treat breast cancer tumors without the trauma of surgery. Following numerous limited studies, a growing number of women are now being treated with the technique as part of a groundbreaking clinical trial involving leading breast cancer specialists across the country. Utilizing IceCure Medical's innovative IceSense3™ cryoablation system, the multi-center trial is examining cryoablation of certain types of breast cancer. Potentially, it will usher in a new and gentler pathway for the treatment of a disease that affects one in every eight women annually.

The benefits of cryoablation over traditional breast cancer surgery are significant. The procedure is typically performed in a physician's office under ultrasound guidance in less than 30 minutes. It involves a small incision and placement of an IceSense3™ nitrogen-cooled probe into the center of a tumor to freeze it from the inside out. The diseased cells then crack open and die. Eventually they are absorbed by the immune system and new cells take their place.

By contrast, surgical cancer removal often means several hours in the operating room, complications of general anesthesia and weeks or months of recovery. Surgery also typically involves significant breast tissue damage and disfigurement due to large incisions and removal of sizable breast mass.

Cryoablation, however, precisely targets the tumor site and involves insertion of only a slim probe. Therefore, it boasts fast recovery time, significantly improved cosmetic results and greater patient comfort overall. In fact, most women are able to resume normal activities almost immediately following treatment. They experience minimal scarring and excellent cosmetic results.

Physicians participating in the trial report that patients feel minimal discomfort and can watch the procedure on the ultrasound screen. Most are extremely relieved to avoid painful, disfiguring surgery and long recovery times.

"For women with certain types of breast cancer, cryoablation is showing promise as an alternative to surgery, particularly for patients over age 65," says Susan K. Boolbol, MD, Chief of the Appel-Venet Comprehensive Breast Service, Mount Sinai Beth Israel, who is participating in the trial. "For older patients the risks associated with invasive procedures and general anesthesia as well as the discomfort of long recoveries also makes this procedure particularly desirable. As our understanding of tumor biology grows, the ability to offer treatment options other than surgery is important."

"There is growing awareness treatment should be based on individual tumor biology. We are excited to be participating in this trial where some breast cancer patients can be treated without surgery," adds Richard Fine, MD, The West Comprehensive Breast Center, Memphis, TN, another surgeon active in the cryoablation trial. "Over the next 15 years, women 65 and older will make up one of the fastest growing populations diagnosed with breast cancer. We are confident that the ICE3 trial can prove certain women can be successfully treated less aggressively than in the past. The option of a non-surgical treatment has significant benefits for patients and the overall health care system."

Cryoablation is well-established in the treatment of liver, kidney, prostate and other cancers. Its effectiveness in breast cancer has been proven in a number of smaller studies, including a recent American College of Surgeons Oncology Group (ACOSOG) trial and extensive long-term ongoing, unpublished studies in Japan. The ICE3 trial, which began patient enrollment in October 2014, will significantly expand data on the technique as a treatment for breast cancer. Patents will be followed for five years to ensure they remain cancer free.

Developed by IceCure Medical (Caesarea, Israel/Memphis, TN), specifically for breast applications, the IceSense3 Cryoablation System™, has a long history of successful treatment of benign breast fibroadenomas. The ongoing refinement of the technology makes treatment more precise and extremely reliable. The IceSense3™ device delivers a stable cycle of extremely cold temperatures and relies on a maneuverable, disposable probe and compact high tech console. For the first time, these advances make precise targeting of tumors extremely reliable.

The ICE3 trial is recruiting and following women aged 65 years and older diagnosed with certain tumor sub-types and measuring less than 1.5 centimeters in diameter. Developed by a diverse, esteemed scientific advisory board, the trial is underway at 20 carefully selected sites throughout the United States. As a market leader in cryoablation treatment of breast disease, IceCure will utilize its resources to provide clinical and technological support to sites in the cancer trial.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: IceCure Medical, the manufacturer of ICE3, is named as the source of the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental Ebola vaccine was highly protective against the deadly virus in a major trial in Guinea, according to results published today in The Lancet. The vaccine is the first to prevent infection from one of the most lethal known pathogens, and the findings add weight to early trial results published last year. [1]

The vaccine, called rVSV-ZEBOV [2], was studied in a trial involving 11,841 people in Guinea during 2015. Among the 5,837 people who received the vaccine, no Ebola cases were recorded 10 days or more after vaccination [3]. In comparison, there were 23 cases 10 days or more after vaccination among those who did not receive the vaccine.

The trial was led by the World Health Organization, together with Guinea's Ministry of Health and other international partners.

"While these compelling results come too late for those who lost their lives during West Africa's Ebola epidemic, they show that when the next Ebola outbreak hits, we will not be defenceless," said Dr Marie-Paule Kieny, WHO's Assistant Director-General for Health Systems and Innovation, and the study's lead author [4].

The vaccine's manufacturer, Merck, Sharpe & Dohme, this year received Breakthrough Therapy Designation from the United States Food and Drug Administration and PRIME status from the European Medicines Agency, enabling faster regulatory review of the vaccine once it is submitted.

Since Ebola virus was first identified in 1976, sporadic outbreaks have been reported in Africa. But the 2013-2016 West African Ebola outbreak, which resulted in more than 11,300 deaths, highlighted the need for a vaccine.

The trial took place in the coastal region of Basse-Guinée, the area of Guinea still experiencing new Ebola cases when the trial started in 2015. The trial used an innovative design, a so-called "ring vaccination" approach - the same method used to eradicate small pox.

When a new Ebola case was diagnosed, the research team traced all people who may have been in contact with that case within the previous 3 weeks, such as people who lived in the same household, were visited by the patient, or were in close contact with the patient, their clothes or linen, as well as certain "contacts of contacts". A total of 117 clusters (or "rings") were identified, each made up of an average of 80 people.

Initially, rings were randomised to receive the vaccine either immediately or after a 3-week delay, and only adults over 18 years were offered the vaccine. After interim results were published showing the vaccine's efficacy, all rings were offered the vaccine immediately and the trial was also opened to children older than 6 years.

In addition to showing high efficacy among those vaccinated, the trial also shows that unvaccinated people in the rings were indirectly protected from Ebola virus through the ring vaccination approach (so-called "herd immunity"). However, the authors note that the trial was not designed to measure this effect, so more research will be needed.

"Ebola left a devastating legacy in our country. We are proud that we have been able to contribute to developing a vaccine that will prevent other nations from enduring what we endured" said Dr KeÏta Sakoba, Coordinator of the Ebola Response and Director of the National Agency for Health Security in Guinea [4].

To assess safety, people who received the vaccine were observed for 30 minutes after vaccination, and at repeated home visits up to 12 weeks later. Approximately half reported mild symptoms soon after vaccination, including headache, fatigue and muscle pain but recovered within days without long-term effects. Two serious adverse events were judged to be related to vaccination (a febrile reaction and one anaphylaxis) and one was judged to be possibly related (influenza-like illness). All three recovered without any long term effects.

It was not possible to collect biological samples from people who received the vaccine in order to analyse their immune response. Other studies are looking at the immune response to the vaccine including one conducted in parallel to the ring trial among frontline Ebola workers in Guinea.

"This both historical and innovative trial was made possible thanks to exemplary international collaboration and coordination, the contribution of many experts worldwide, and strong local involvement," said Dr John-Arne Røttingen, Specialist Director at the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, and the chairman of the study steering group [4].

In January, GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance provided US$5 million to Merck towards the future procurement of the vaccine once it is approved, prequalified and recommended by WHO. As part of this agreement, Merck committed to ensure that 300,000 doses of the vaccine are available for emergency use in the interim, and to submit the vaccine for licensure by the end of 2017. Merck has also submitted the vaccine to WHO's Emergency Use and Assessment Listing procedure, a mechanism through which experimental vaccines, medicines and diagnostics can be made available for use prior to formal licensure.

Additional studies are ongoing to provide more data on the safety of the vaccine in children and other vulnerable populations such as people with HIV. In case of Ebola flare-ups prior to approval, access to the vaccine is being made available through a procedure called "compassionate use" that enables use of the vaccine after informed consent. Merck and WHO's partners are working to compile data to support license applications.

The rapid development of rVSV-EBOV contributed to the development of WHO's R&D Blueprint, a global strategy to fast-track the development of effective tests, vaccines and medicines during epidemics.

Also published in The Lancet (embargo as above), is a phase 2 trial of a different Ebola vaccine candidate, the recombinant adenovirus type-5 Ebola vaccine. The trial was led by the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology and was conducted in Sierra Leone in 2015. It involved 500 healthy participants, followed for 6 months - 250 were given a high dose vaccine, 125 a low-dose and 125 a placebo. The study found that the vaccine was safe and induced an immune response that peaked at 28 days, but decreased during the six months post injection. One serious adverse event was reported, in an individual with a history of asthma. Further research on this vaccine is needed in order to assess its efficacy.

The rVSV-ZEBOV trial is funded by WHO, with support from the Wellcome Trust, the United Kingdom Department for International Development, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Norwegian Institute of Public Health through the Research Council of Norway, the Canadian Government through the Public Health Agency of Canada, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, International Development Research Centre and Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development and Médecins Sans Frontières.

The trial team includes experts from The University of Bern, the University of Florida, the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Public Health England, the European Mobile Laboratories among others. The trial was designed by a group of experts including the late Professor Donald A. Henderson of John Hopkins University, who led the WHO smallpox eradication effort by using the ring vaccination strategy.

[1] http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)61117-5/abstract 

[2] VSV-EBOV was developed by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The vaccine was licensed to NewLink Genetics, who in turn licensed it to Merck & Co. The vaccine works by replacing a gene from a harmless virus known as vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) with a gene encoding an Ebola virus surface protein. The vaccine does not contain any live Ebola virus. Earlier trials have shown the vaccine to be protective in animals, and be safe and produce an immune response in humans. 

[3] Analysis only included cases occurring 10 days after receiving the vaccine to account for the incubation period of the Ebola virus. 

[4] Quotes direct from authors and cannot be found in the text of the Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release identifies the funding sources for the study, which included WHO and a number of government agencies from Canada, the United Kingdom, Norway, along with the international organizations the Wellcome Trust and Médecins Sans Frontières. The news release also identifies the organizations with which the study’s research team members were associated, although it does not give any indication of the extent to which research team members or their organizations receive additional funding from Merck, which obviously stands to gain the most if the vaccine proves effective and is recommended for use by the World Health Organization.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new device worn like a visor can detect emergent large-vessel occlusion in patients with suspected stroke with 92 percent accuracy, report clinical investigators at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC), Mount Sinai, the University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center and elsewhere in an article published online on March 6, 2018, in the Journal of Neurointerventional Surgery. Patients with large-vessel occlusions can then be routed to a Comprehensive Stroke Center with endovascular capabilities. In contrast, a standard physical examination achieved only 40 to 89 percent accuracy in identifying patients with large-vessel occlusion who could benefit from endovascular therapy.

The volumetric impedance phase shift spectroscopy (VIPS) device (Cerebrotech VisorTM, Cerebrotech Medical Systems, Pleasanton, CA) works by sending low-energy radio waves through the brain that change frequency when passing through fluids. Such waves are reflected back through the brain and then detected by the device. When a patient is having a severe stroke, the brain's fluids will change, producing an asymmetry in the radio waves detected by the VIPS device. The greater the asymmetry, the more severe the stroke.

Endovascular therapy within 24 hours is the standard of care for emergent large-vessel occlusion, but the chance of achieving a good outcome decreases by approximately 20 percent for each hour that passes before treatment.

The researchers hope that the device will save valuable time -- especially important in stroke where time is brain -- when it is deployed with emergency medical personnel in the field. This is because the accuracy of the device simplifies the decision made by emergency personnel about where to take patients first, according to Raymond D. Turner, M.D., professor of neurosurgery and chief of the Neuroscience Integrated Center of Clinical Excellence at MUSC. Turner served as principal investigator for MUSC in the VIPS for the Non-Invasive Detection of Hemispheric Bioimpedance Asymmetry in Severe Brain Pathology (VITAL) study reported in the article.

"Transfer between hospitals takes a lot of time," said Turner. "If we can give the information to emergency personnel out in the field that this is a large-vessel occlusion, that should change their thought process in triage as to which hospital they go to."

In the study, the VIPS device was deployed with emergency medical personnel in regions served by five Comprehensive Stroke Centers equipped with the endovascular capabilities to treat large-vessel occlusions that underlie severe stroke. Their goal was to use the device to accurately identify severe stroke and then compare the results to established physical examination methods practiced by emergency personnel such as the Prehospital Acute Stroke Severity Scale.

Both healthy participants and patients with suspected stroke were evaluated by emergency personnel using the VIPS device. Three readings were taken and averaged -- a process that takes about 30 seconds. Patients were also later evaluated by neurologists who provided definitive diagnoses using neuroimaging.

Compared to the neurologists' diagnoses, the device displayed 92 percent specificity -- the ability to detect the difference between patients with severe stroke and those with other conditions such as mild stroke or healthy participants with no brain pathology. This places the VIPS device above standard physical examination tools used by emergency personnel that display specificity scores between 40 and 89 percent.

The VIPS device is made by Cerebrotech Medical Systems, which paid consultants to analyze the neuroimaging data independently. The neuroimaging data was needed to teach the VIPS device which radio waves were indicative of stroke. Yet the consultants did not have access to the VIPS radio wave data during their review of the images, thereby eliminating the potential of the consultants to choose data that might artificially inflate the device's accuracy. It is also not clear how the device would work for patients with cranial implants, as metal interferes with the device's operating radio frequencies.

The device's success may be found in its ability to give emergency personnel a clear answer as to whether a patient is experiencing a severe stroke. The VIPS device requires very little training to operate compared to that required to learn standard emergency examination skills, thereby reducing the possibility of human error during emergency diagnosis.

In their next steps, the researchers are undertaking the VITAL 2.0 study to determine if the VIPS device can use complex machine learning algorithms to teach itself how to discriminate between minor and severe stroke without the help of neurologists. If so, the VIPS device could have widespread clinical implications, helping emergency personnel decide whether to take a patient to a comprehensive stroke center or a primary stroke center for treatment.

Turner likens the use of the VIPS device in detecting severe stroke to the use of electrocardiography (ECG) to definitively detect acute myocardial infarction. He predicts that the device has the potential to be used widely by emergency personnel but also to appear in other public spaces. "This could potentially be something like a defibrillator," said Turner. "You can find out if a patient is having a stroke, just like you can put a defibrillator on a patient to see if they're having a heart attack."

This study was funded by Cerebrotech Medical Systems.

About MUSC Founded in 1824 in Charleston, The Medical University of South Carolina is the oldest medical school in the South. Today, MUSC continues the tradition of excellence in education, research, and patient care. MUSC educates and trains more than 3,000 students and residents, and has nearly 13,000 employees, including approximately 1,500 faculty members. As the largest non-federal employer in Charleston, the university and its affiliates have collective annual budgets in excess of $2.2 billion. MUSC operates a 750-bed medical center, which includes a nationally recognized Children's Hospital, the Ashley River Tower (cardiovascular, digestive disease, and surgical oncology), Hollings Cancer Center (a National Cancer Institute designated center) Level I Trauma Center, and Institute of Psychiatry. For more information on academic information or clinical services, visit musc.edu. For more information on hospital patient services, visit muschealth.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release identifies the funding company, Cerebrotech Medical Systems, and notes that Cerebrotech “paid consultants to analyze the neuroimaging data independently.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Hospitals can improve patient care and reduce costs associated with coronary angioplasty if cardiologists perform more of these procedures through an artery in the wrist and if they take steps to discharge such patients on the same day, according to a new study led by Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.

Coronary angioplasty is a procedure in which arteries are opened to increase blood flow to the heart.

The research, published Feb. 20 in JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions, suggests that the lower costs of the wrist approach largely are due to the fact that patients experience fewer complications and can be discharged earlier, compared with procedures that access the heart through the larger, deeper artery in the groin. The researchers estimated that shifting standard practice by 30 percent to the wrist approach, along with same-day discharge, could save the United States $300 million per year.

“We have unequivocal evidence and data that show better outcomes when we access the heart’s coronary arteries and perform angioplasty through a blood vessel in the wrist rather than through the femoral artery in the groin,” said first author Amit P. Amin, MD, an assistant professor of medicine. “The femoral artery is the traditional route, but when we go in through a vessel in the wrist, we see less bleeding, fewer complications, less pain and discomfort, higher patient satisfaction, shorter hospital stays, and lower costs.”

Patients may undergo coronary angioplasty — also called percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) — to alleviate chest pain or shortness of breath. Such symptoms suggest the coronary arteries that deliver blood to the heart are blocked or narrowed and oxygen delivery to the heart muscle is reduced. Interventional cardiologists insert a small tube into an artery in the wrist or the groin, which can be used to view the narrowed heart artery, deliver an inflatable balloon to open up the narrowed section, and possibly deliver a stent to hold the vessel open.

Using the National Cardiovascular Data Registry CathPCI Registry, the researchers analyzed data from almost 280,000 Medicare patients who underwent PCI and were eligible for same-day discharge. Despite the fact that all of these patients were capable of leaving the hospital the same day as their procedures, only about 5 percent of these patients actually were discharged without having stayed overnight.

“We have seen that it is very safe to send these patients home the same day,” said Amin, who treats patients at Barnes-Jewish Hospital. “We use risk-prediction models to predict their risks ahead of time, and we plan ahead to mitigate any issues so we can facilitate a same-day discharge. This is really about patient care. We want to outline health-care pathways that provide the best care for patients.”

The analysis demonstrated an average cost of $13,389 for the wrist approach with same-day discharge, compared with $17,076 for the groin approach with at least one night of hospitalization, resulting in a cost savings of about $3,700 for outpatients who get the wrist-access procedure. Independent of the length of stay, the wrist approach costs about $900 less than the groin approach, on average.

The investigators estimated that if a hospital performing 1,000 of these procedures annually shifted 30 percent of these patients to the wrist-access with same-day discharge approach, the hospital would save $1 million over that period. Expanding that practice to hospitals nationwide might save the United States $300 million in health-care spending per year. Health-care costs for the 600,000 patients who receive PCI each year in the U.S. are estimated to be $10 billion.

Of the study’s patient population receiving PCI, 9 percent received the procedure in which doctors used wrist access. According to Amin, improved technology has allowed wrist access to become a viable route to the coronary arteries, even for complex cases, and should be considered for more patients.

“The traditional way has been to go through the bigger femoral artery that is a straight pathway to the heart,” Amin said. “Unfortunately, that artery is also deep. It’s associated with more bleeding complications. In contrast, the wrist artery is small and is associated with fewer complications. The minor challenge is in the difficulty of navigating a smaller, more twisting path of an artery through the wrist. But with advances we have in technology and equipment, those challenges are rapidly decreasing.”

This work was supported by a grant from Vita Solutions, a subsidiary of The Medicines Company, for whom Amin has provided consultation; and by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers UL1TR000448, KL2TR000450, TL1TR000449 and 1KM1CA156708-01. Amin also reported consulting for Terumo. Co-authors from other institutions reported receiving grant funding from or providing consultations to the National Institutes of Health; the American College of Cardiology Foundation; Eli Lilly; Amorcyte; Gilead; Genentech; UnitedHealthcare; Amgen; Janssen; Health Outcomes Sciences; Blue Cross Blue Shield of Kansas City; Edwards Lifesciences; Medtronic; St. Jude Medical; Abbott Vascular; Saint Luke’s Hospital Foundation of Kansas City, partially funded by Merck; Boston Scientific; Biomet; Daiichi Sankyo; AstraZeneca; and Bellerophon.

Amin AP, Patterson M, House JA, Giersiefen H, Spertus JA, Baklanov DV, Chhatriwalla AK, Safley DM, Cohen DJ, Rao SV, Marso SP. Costs associated with access site and same-day discharge among Medicare beneficiaries undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions. Feb. 20, 2017.

Washington University School of Medicine‘s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release is to be commended here for how it discloses funding sources and potential conflicts of interest. It includes these disclosures in an end note which doesn’t interfere with the flow of the release. This is what we’d like to see in all news releases.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An estimated 170 million people worldwide suffer from age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a serious eye condition marked by the death of light-sensitive cells in the retina. Doctors can slow macular degeneration with vitamins, laser surgery, stem cell treatments, and even implantable miniature telescopes. But many sufferers ultimately go blind.

In 2013, the FDA approved an artificial retina that could help restore limited vision to people with degenerative eye diseases. But the device relied on a sunglass-mounted external camera and a transmitter that relayed sight information to the retinal implant.

Now researchers at the Italian Institute of Technology in Genoa and the University of California, San Diego have crafted artificial retinas that can be implanted entirely inside the eye, which offer hope to those with macular degeneration.

The devices are only experimental prototypes with many years of additional research and development likely before they might be ready for commercial use. But Dr. Grazia Pertile, director of ophthalmology at the Sacred Heart Don Calabria in Negrar, Italy and one of the Italian researchers, said in a written statement that her team's device could be “a turning point in the treatment of extremely debilitating retinal diseases.”

She’s not alone in that assessment.

“This is definitely a game changer,” Dr. Kapil Bharti, an investigator at the National Eye Institute in Bethesda, Maryland who is not involved with the research, says. “Previous versions of these work in a very, very low-resolution range. Patients were practically still blind and incapacitated as far as everyday tasks were concerned. These promise that patients could become more independent.”

When healthy, retinal cells transmit visual information to the brain. As these cells die off, AMD sufferers lose their central vision. The new prosthesis is designed to be implanted onto the back wall of the eye, where it absorbs light and transforms it into an electrical signal that stimulates the still-active retinal cells to restore vision.

Related: This Revolutionary Gene-Editing Tool Could Change the World

When the prosthesis was tested in rats, the animals' pupils constricted in response to exposure to light. The researchers were unable to determine how well the rats were able to see, if at all, but they noted that the animals’ eyes continued to react to light more than six months after the implant was installed.

"We hope to replicate in humans the excellent results obtained in animal models," Pertile said. The team will conduct human trials later this year.

The findings were published in the journal Nature Materials.

The researchers in San Diego have taken a different approach to solving AMD that they think can restore vision to resolutions as sharp as a healthy eye.

There, engineers have partnered with Nanovision Biosciences Inc. to create a retinal implant that uses silicon nanowires smaller than the width of a cell to sense light entering the eye and stimulate retinal neurons. Powered by a small wireless device, this circular array of nanowires mimics densely packed retinal cells to help achieve "functional vision," says Gabriel A. Silva, professor of bioengineering and ophthalmology at UC San Diego.

“We want to create a new class of devices with drastically improved capabilities to help people with impaired vision,” Silva said.

The findings were reported in the Journal of Neural Engineering.

Neither of the implants is able to restore color to vision yet, and Bharti has questions about the durability of organic eye implants. But, he says, “Those are things that can be easily worked out and can be done in the coming future. Overall, this is very exciting.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Three sources are quoted in the story. One researcher from the Italian team, one researcher from the Californian team, and one researcher who is independent of both research groups.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If mass mammography screening for breast cancer worked well, fewer women would die from the disease.

And yet, a new study published in JAMA Internal Medicine has found something that may seem counterintuitive: More breast cancer screening didn't actually save lives. Screening did however lead to more "overdiagnosis," detecting cancers that would not have been fatal or even harmful.

The research, led by Richard Wilson of Harvard University, revealed that in more than 500 US counties, mammography screening programs were linked with more diagnoses of smaller breast cancers — but not with fewer deaths or with fewer larger breast cancers (which theoretically would be prevented by finding the disease early through screening).

You can see this clearly in the chart below: The number of diagnosed breast cancers rose with more screening, yet the number of deaths from breast cancer 10 years later remained stubbornly stable.

To be clear: Mass screening is different from using technologies like ultrasounds to diagnose people at risk of a disease or who have symptoms that require investigation. And not all mass screening programs are bad. Colorectal cancer screening, for example, has been shown to save lives as a result of early detection, and the Pap test transformed cervical cancer into a treatable disease.

But this isn't the first study to call into question the benefits of mammography and whether women are too often the victims of overdiagnosis. 



The trouble with overdiagnosis is that while the cancers doctors find wouldn't have harmed their patients, the treatment and stress that result from the diagnosis probably will.

We have to find a better way to screen women for breast cancer

The medical community has known about overdiagnosis and overtreatment for years, documenting the problem in a range of cancers — in breast, prostate, lung, and thyroid (which you can see in the chart above).

This raises a tough question: What should the medical community do about overdiagnosis? In a related commentary in the journal, a pair of doctors from the University of Washington School of Medicine note that the estimates of overdiagnosis of breast cancer are "frustratingly broad" — from less than 10 percent to 50 percent or more of women who get screened. In other words, we don't actually know how bad the problem is.

"Sadly," they write, "we are left in a conundrum. Women will increasingly approach their physicians with questions and concerns about overdiagnosis, and we have no clear answers to provide."



The authors of the newest study don't advocate no screening. Instead, they note that the benefits of screening will probably be more favorable when screening is directed at people with a high risk of the disease — such as those with a family history of breast cancer.



The US Preventive Services Task Force, which analyzes the best available evidence to create guidelines for doctors, now recommends biennial mammography screening for the general population in women ages 50 to 74. For women under 50 and over 75 — who aren't at a high risk of breast cancer — the benefits of mass screening are less clear.

There are small things doctors can do that still don't happen often enough. For example, most women aren't told about the potential downsides of mammography screening — even though they're almost always briefed on the benefits.

For now, it's up to patients to talk to their doctors about their particular risk profiles and how to screen accordingly. We also need to remember that in medicine, more often than not, we generally overestimate the benefits and underestimate the harms.

WATCH: The naked mole rat might help us cure cancer
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story cites independent commentary from an accompanying editorial that provides useful context. Inclusion of a second independent voice might have drawn attention to some of the study’s limitations as discussed above. The story doesn’t discuss potential conflicts of interest among the study authors, but the only conflict disclosed with the manuscript was related to a company that makes thermometers. Overall, this seems Satisfactory to us.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, scientists have precisely identified and targeted an area of the brain which is involved in "hearing voices", experienced by many patients with schizophrenia. They have been able to show in a controlled trial that targeting this area with magnetic pulses can improve the condition in some patients. This early clinical work is presented at the ECNP conference in Paris on Tuesday 5th September, with later publication in Schizophrenia Bulletin*.

"This is the first controlled trial to precisely determine an anatomically defined brain area where high frequency magnetic pulses can improve the hearing of voices", said lead researcher, Professor Sonia Dollfus (University of Caen, CHU, France).

Schizophrenia is a serious long-term mental health problem. People with schizophrenia experience a range of symptoms, which may include delusions, muddled thoughts and hallucinations. One of the best-known is hearing voices, also known as Auditory Verbal Hallucination (AVH), which around 70% of people with schizophrenia experience at some point. These voices, may be 'heard' as having a variety of different characteristics, for example as internal or external, friendly or threatening, they may be continuously present or present only occasionally, and so on.

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) has been suggested as a possible way of treating the hearing of voices in schizophrenia. TMS uses magnetic pulses to the brain, and has been shown to be effective in several psychiatric conditions. However, there is a lack of controlled trials to show that TMS works effectively with AVH sufferers.

The French research team worked with 26 patients who received active TMS treatment, and 33 as a control group, who received sham (placebo) treatment. The researchers interviewed the patients using a standard protocol - the Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale - which revealed most of the characteristic features of the voices which they were hearing. The treated patients received a series of 20 Hz high-frequency magnetic pulses over 2 sessions a day for 2 days. Using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the pulses were targeted at a specific brain area in the temporal lobe, which is associated with language (the exact area is the crossing of the projection of the ascending branch of the left lateral sulcus and the left superior temporal sulcus)

After 2 weeks, the patients were re-evaluated. The researchers found that 34.6% of the patients being treated by TMS showed a significant response, whereas only 9.1% of patients in the sham group responded ('significant response' was defined as a more than 30% decrease in the Total Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale score).

Professor Sonia Dollfus said: "Auditory Verbal Hallucinations, or "hearing voices" can be a disturbing symptom of schizophrenia, both for patients and for those close to sufferers. This is the first controlled trial to show an improvement in these patients by targeting a specific area of the brain and using high frequency TMS. This means two things; firstly it seems that we now can say with some certainty that we have found a specific anatomical area of the brain associated with auditory verbal hallucinations in schizophrenia. Secondly, we have shown that treatment with high frequency TMS makes a difference to at least some sufferers, although there is a long way to go before we will know if TMS is the best route to treat these patients in the long-term".

Commenting, Professor Andreas Meyer-Lindenberg, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim and member of the ECNP executive board, said: "This work builds on previous studies that have shown a critical role of excessive activity of subregions of the temporal lobe in the generation of voice hallucinations in schizophrenia. To move this into treatment, controlled trial such as the one by Dollfus and coworkers are important. While response rates were moderate, TMS is a welcome addition to the therapeutic repertoire especially for patients who do not respond to medication."

NOTE: The full title of this release is "Scientists discover brain area which can be targeted for treatment in patients with schizophrenia who 'hear voices'" It has been shortened in some versions to comply with Eurekalert title limits.

*This work has been accepted in the peer-reviewed journal Schizophrenia Bulletin: The Journal of Psychoses and Related Disorders. The exact publication date has still to be determined.

Note: Around 220,000 people have been diagnosed as having schizophrenia in England and Wales (https:/ )
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The study funders (French Health Ministry (PHRC) and Basse Normandie Regional Council) are listed on a sidebar of the EurekAlert! site, where the release is hosted. We encourage news release writers to include funders in the text as well. The release doesn’t address whether the researchers had any conflicts of interest. To be clear, we are not claiming that such conflicts of interest exist (it’s impossible to tell, since the release doesn’t tell us the names of all the researchers involved). But a release should make clear whether any such conflicts exist. If there are no conflicts, say so.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A team of researchers from the National Cancer Institute reported yesterday that they have successfully treated two cancer patients using gene therapy, the introduction of genes into the human body for medical purposes.

Two men, both with the rapidly growing skin cancer melanoma, were given immune system cells taken from their own blood and engineered to attack their tumors. They are alive, with no evidence of cancer, 18 months later. Fifteen other patients who got the same treatment died.

The report, published online by the journal Science, is the latest result of a three-decade effort by surgeon Steven A. Rosenberg to find ways to manipulate the human immune system to fight cancer.

Four years ago, Rosenberg and his colleagues treated a group of melanoma patients with naturally occurring anti-cancer cells extracted from their tumors, and some of those patients also have had long-term disappearance of their cancers. The new report, however, is believed to be the first time that genetically engineered immune system cells -- specifically, T lymphocytes -- have produced the same effect.

Neither Rosenberg nor others would describe the two patients as cured. At least five years would need to pass before such a declaration would be considered. And cancer sometimes returns even after that much time has elapsed.

Gene therapy was once viewed as the great hope for treating, or even curing, a long list of dread diseases. But tests of the concept since the late 1980s have been overwhelmingly disappointing.

"I do consider this a proof of the principle that it can work," Rosenberg said yesterday. "I have every expectation that we can get it to work better."

Response by others in the field was positive but not effusive.

"I think it is an important landmark to see some cancer patients respond to a gene therapy -- finally," said Patrick Hwu, a physician and gene-therapy researcher at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, in Houston, who was not involved in the new study. "I think that clearly all of us want to do better than two out of 17."

Michael T. Lotze, a professor of surgery and bioengineering at the University of Pittsburgh, said that "the work is heroic. The question is, does it advance the field in a major way?"

While the good results in two patients are encouraging, "in terms of response rates, the overwhelming data is that T cells, even in high numbers, are inadequate to mediate sufficient anti-tumor effects," Lotze said.

In the study, Rosenberg and his colleagues took lymphocytes from the blood and inserted into them genes for a receptor capable of "recognizing" a protein on melanoma cells called MART-1. This would allow the lymphocyte to attach to a tumor cell and kill it.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This article included helpful comments from clinicians familiar with the experimental approach but who were not directly involved with this particular study. They help to temper the enthusiasm of the principal investigator on this project and to balance the piece.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The spread of some sexually transmitted infections could potentially be dramatically reduced by instructing people who have had unprotected sex to take antibiotics within 24 hours after the intercourse, a new study suggests.

But such a strategy, which was tested in a population of men who had frequent unprotected sex with a number of male sex partners, could spark a controversy over the use of antibiotics and the general threat of growing antibiotic resistance.

“My message with that study would be that we need to do more research to prevent STIs — because that’s a concern. And this strategy … could potentially be used,” said Dr. Jean-Michel Molina, head of infectious diseases at Saint-Louis Hospital in Paris and the lead author of the study.

Molina insisted he would never support long-term use of antibiotics to prevent STIs, but said that the approach might be an effective short-term strategy when paired with other control approaches, like more frequent STI testing among high-risk populations.

“I don’t want this strategy to be used widely in any person, clearly,” Molina said. “But if you can select a group with a high incidence rate of syphilis or chlamydia, and you want to try to reduce the rate of syphilis quite quickly in this group of people, you may think that this strategy could be used for a couple of months.”

Rates of syphilis in particular have risen steadily in recent years; the rate in 2015-2016 — 8.7 cases per 100,000 people — was the highest since 1993, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported. The rate of infection increased in every age group over the age of 15, in both men and women, and in all ethnic groups.

Molina’s study was recently published by the journal Lancet Infectious Diseases. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation was one of its funders.

The researchers randomly assigned 232 men to one of two groups. One of the groups was given antibiotics — the drug doxycycline — to take if they had unprotected sex. They were told to take two pills per encounter, and no more than six in a week, ideally within 24 hours and no later than 72 hours after the intercourse. In reality, the median use among the men was about 6.8 pills per month.

The men were tested regularly for STIs, and in the nine or so months they were followed, the rates of some sexually transmitted infections fell dramatically in the treatment group. The overall reduction of all STIs was 47 percent, but that average was dragged down by the fact that doxycycline doesn’t cure gonorrhea.

There was, however, a 70 percent reduction in chlamydia infections and cases of syphilis decreased by 73 percent. The authors noted, however, that the study length was short and they can’t tell if the strategy would work as well over the long term.

The results can’t be taken in isolation, others experts warned. Using doxycycline this way could drive the bacteria that cause the infections to develop resistance to the drug, warned Dr. Brad Spellberg, an infectious diseases specialist and chief medical officer at the Los Angeles County-University of Southern California Medical Center in Los Angeles.

Spellberg also said people who used the drug this way would be exposing the bacteria they have in their gastro-intestinal tracts — their own gut flora — to regular doses of doxycycline. And those bacteria too could develop resistance to the drug, leading to a host of other health problems.

The full picture of the knock-on effects of exposing your gut flora to antibiotics is still coming into focus, said Ramanan Laxminarayan, director of the Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics, and Policy and a leading voice on the dangers of mounting antibiotic resistance. He noted a recent report in the journal Science revealed that some cancer immunotherapy drugs worked less well in people who had recently taken antibiotics.

Molina noted that antibiotic resistance to doxycycline has not been seen in chlamydia or syphilis, despite the fact that the drug has been used to treat these infections for decades. Still, he said the possibility it could arise cannot be discounted.

A commentary published with the study argued that reducing infection rates in men who have sex with men and who are highly sexually active might lower STI infection rates more generally in a community.

Authors Christopher Fairley and Eric Chow, of Australia’s Melbourne Sexual Health Center at Monash University, said pressure from patients to be given doxycycline on a preventative basis might be substantial, given that the drug is also prescribed in six-month courses to treat acne. Like Molina and his co-authors, they said STI preventive use at this point is premature.

Laxminarayan did not dismiss the notion of this type of use out of hand, however. “I certainly think that for a small subset of the population, if this helps prevent syphilis, then it certainly is worth exploring further,” he said.

But he said additional studies should be conducted first to try to get a better picture of the potential consequences of using doxycycline this way, including the risk of resistance developing, the potential that it might further erode condom use, and any other unintended consequences.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A strength of the story is that it includes multiple independent sources. It reports funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. However, the story does not report funding from a French government agency, nor does it refer to the lengthy list of industry financial ties that many of the researchers disclosed. But we will give the story a satisfactory rating because doxycycline is available as a generic drug produced by a number of companies, not just those the researchers have ties to.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Eating a type of powdered food supplement, based on a molecule produced by bacteria in the gut, reduces cravings for high-calorie foods such as chocolate, cake and pizza, a new study suggests.

Scientists from Imperial College London and the University of Glasgow asked 20 volunteers to consume a milkshake that either contained an ingredient called inulin-propionate ester, or a type of fibre called inulin.

Previous studies have shown bacteria in the gut release a compound called propionate when they digest the fibre inulin, which can signal to the brain to reduce appetite. However the inulin-propionate ester supplement releases much more propionate in the intestines than inulin alone.

After drinking the milkshakes, the participants in the current study underwent an MRI scan, where they were shown pictures of various low or high calorie foods such as salad, fish and vegetables or chocolate, cake and pizza.

The team found that when volunteers drank the milkshake containing inulin-propionate ester, they had less activity in areas of their brain linked to reward -- but only when looking at the high calorie foods. These areas, called the caudate and the nucleus accumbens, found in the centre of the brain, have previously been linked to food cravings and the motivation to want a food.

The volunteers also had to rate how appealing they found the foods. The results showed when they drank the milkshake with the inulin-propionate ester supplement they rated the high calorie foods as less appealing.

In a second part of the study, which is published in July edition of the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, the volunteers were given a bowl of pasta with tomato sauce, and asked to eat as much as they like. When participants drank the inulin-propionate ester, they ate 10 per cent less pasta than when they drank the milkshake that contained inulin alone.

In a previous research study by the same team, published in 2013, they found that overweight volunteers who added the inulin-propionate ester supplement to their food every day, gained less weight over six months compared to volunteers who added only inulin to their meals.

Professor Gary Frost, senior author of the study from the Department of Medicine at Imperial, said: "Our previous findings showed that people who ate this ingredient gained less weight -- but we did not know why. This study is filling in a missing bit of the jigsaw -- and shows that this supplement can decrease activity in brain areas associated with food reward at the same time as reducing the amount of food they eat."

He added that eating enough fibre to naturally produce similar amounts of propionate would be difficult: "The amount of inulin-propionate ester used in this study was 10g - which previous studies show increases propionate production by 2.5 times. To get the same increase from fibre alone, we would need to eat around 60g a day. At the moment, the UK average is 15g."

Claire Byrne, a PhD researcher also from the Department of Medicine explained that using inulin-propionate ester as a food ingredient may help prevent weight gain: "If we add this to foods it could reduce the urge to consume high calorie foods." She added that some people's gut bacteria may naturally produce more propionate than others, which may be why some people seem more naturally predisposed to gain weight.

Dr Tony Goldstone, co-senior author of the study from the Department of Medicine added: "This study adds to our previous brain imaging studies in people who have had gastric bypass surgery for obesity. These show that altering how the gut works can change not only appetite in general, but also change how the brain responds when they see high-calorie foods, and how appealing they find the foods to be."

Dr Douglas Morrison, author of the paper from the Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre at the University of Glasgow, commented: "We developed inulin-propionate ester to investigate the role of propionate produced by the gut microbiota in human health. This study illustrates very nicely that signals produced by the gut microbiota are important for appetite regulation and food choice. This study also sheds new light on how diet, the gut microbiome and health are inextricably linked adding to our understanding of how feeding our gut microbes with dietary fibre is important for healthy living."

The research was funded by the National Institute for Health Research Imperial Biomedical Research Centre and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release discloses funding sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 6, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Long-term use of a daily low-dose aspirin dramatically cuts the risk of dying from a wide array of cancers, a new investigation reveals.

Specifically, a British research team unearthed evidence that a low-dose aspirin (75 milligrams) taken daily for at least five years brings about a 10 percent to 60 percent drop in fatalities depending on the type of cancer.

The finding stems from a fresh analysis of eight studies involving more than 25,500 patients, which had originally been conducted to examine the protective potential of a low-dose aspirin regimen on cardiovascular disease.

The current observations follow prior research conducted by the same study team, which reported in October that a long-term regimen of low-dose aspirin appears to shave the risk of dying from colorectal cancer by a third.

"These findings provide the first proof in man that aspirin reduces deaths due to several common cancers," the study team noted in a news release.

But the study's lead author, Prof. Peter Rothwell from John Radcliffe Hospital and the University of Oxford, stressed that "these results do not mean that all adults should immediately start taking aspirin."

"They do demonstrate major new benefits that have not previously been factored into guideline recommendations," he added, noting that "previous guidelines have rightly cautioned that in healthy middle-aged people, the small risk of bleeding on aspirin partly offsets the benefit from prevention of strokes and heart attacks."

"But the reductions in deaths due to several common cancers will now alter this balance for many people," Rothwell suggested.

Rothwell and his colleagues published their findings Dec. 7 in the online edition of The Lancet.

The research involved in the current review had been conducted for an average period of four to eight years. The patients (some of whom had been given a low-dose aspirin regimen, while others were not) were tracked for up to 20 years after.

The authors determined that while the studies were still underway, overall cancer death risk plummeted by 21 percent among those taking low-dose aspirin. But the long-term benefits on some specific cancers began to show five years after the studies ended.

At five years out, death due to gastrointestinal cancers had sunk by 54 percent among those patients taking low-dose aspirin.

The protective impact of low-dose aspirin on stomach and colorectal cancer death was not seen until 10 years out, and for prostate cancer, the benefits first appeared 15 years down the road.

Twenty years after first beginning a low-dose aspirin program, death risk dropped by 10 percent among prostate cancer patients; 30 percent among lung cancer patients (although only those with adenocarcinomas, the type typically seen in nonsmokers); 40 percent among colorectal cancer patients; and 60 percent among esophageal cancer patients.

The potential impact of aspirin on pancreatic, stomach and brain cancer death rates was more problematic to gauge, the authors noted, due to the relative paucity of deaths from those specific diseases.

They also found that higher doses of aspirin did not appear to boost the protective benefit. And while neither gender nor smoking history appeared to affect the impact of low-dose aspirin, age definitely did: the 20-year risk of death went down more dramatically among older patients.

And while cautioning that more research is necessary to build on this "proof of principle," the authors suggested that people who embark on a long-term, low-dose aspirin regimen in their late 40s and 50s are probably the ones who stand to benefit the most.

Dr. Alan Arslan, an assistant professor in the departments of obstetrics and gynecology and environmental medicine at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City, described the findings as "very significant."

"[This] is the largest study to show that people who take aspirin for a long period of time have a reduced risk of death from many cancers, especially gastrointestinal cancers," he noted.

"The take-home message for patients is that if someone is taking low-dose or regular aspirin, it may put them at a reduced risk of death from cancer," Arslan added. "However, if someone is not already taking aspirin they should talk with their physician before starting. Aspirin has risks of side effects, including bleeding and stroke."

For more on aspirin, visit the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes comments from an independent cancer expert. That’s the most important factor in this case, so we will pass this story on this criterion. However, while the study itself did not receive outside funding, readers should have been told that some of the authors have had consulting relationships with pharmaceutical companies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 3, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- A new class of sleep medications appears to help people fall asleep without causing grogginess the next day, researchers say.

These new medications -- known as dual orexin receptor antagonists (DORA) -- target a more specific region of the brain than popular sleep drugs such as Ambien and Lunesta, promoting sleep without affecting learning and memory (also called "cognition"), according to the new research.

"We've shown that these compounds improve sleep at doses that don't impact cognition," said Jason Uslaner, lead author of a study published in the April 3 issue of Science Translational Medicine. Uslaner is director of In Vivo Pharmacology at Merck & Co., which funded the study.

Merck already has one such drug, suvorexant, under review by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

More than 30 million Americans struggle to get a good night's sleep, and about one-third of these use drugs to help the process, the study authors pointed out.

But widely prescribed sleep medications such as Ambien (zolpidem) and Lunesta (eszopiclone) can leave people feeling hung over and inattentive the next day. So much so that the FDA recently cut recommended doses of Ambien and other drugs that contain zolpidem for fear that their use, even the night before, might impair driving or other activities the next day.

Lunesta and Ambien affect GABA receptors, which are found throughout the brain and are associated with side effects, including thinking disturbances, and deficits in attention and memory, explained Uslaner.

About 15 years ago, scientists discovered chemical messengers known as orexins, which are released by a relatively small brain region known as the lateral hypothalamus. This area of the brain releases orexins during the day to keep us awake and lowers levels at night so we can sleep.

The appeal of orexin antagonists, said Dr. Michael Thorpy, director of the Sleep-Wake Disorders Center at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City, is that they "target a system that's more specific for sleep."

That means, theoretically, fewer side effects and perhaps less of a tendency to be habit forming, Thorpy explained.

Uslaner and his colleagues investigated a compound called DORA-22, which has the same mechanism of action as suvorexant, to see how it fared alongside not only Ambien and Lunesta but also diazepam (Valium) in rats and rhesus monkeys.

DORA-22 did not lead to the same mental impairments as the other three drugs. Rhesus monkeys and rats performed just as well on memory and attention tasks shortly after being administered DORA-22 as they did on an inactive placebo.

In each case, the minimum dose to achieve sleep was compared with the minimum dose that altered memory and thinking. DORA-22 promoted sleep at lower doses than those that impaired mental skills when compared with the "control" drugs.

This is the first time in years that scientists have targeted a totally different receptor in the quest to combat insomnia, said Dr. Alexandre Abreu, co-director of the UHealth Sleep Center at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

But many questions remain: Do the drugs truly have fewer side effects? Will they be habit forming? And will they change the quality of sleep in any way?

Those questions will only be answered with more testing and use in humans, he said.

Experts note that findings from animal studies do not always hold up in human trials.

The U.S. National Institutes of Health has more on insomnia.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that the researchers work for Merck, the maker of a drug similar to the one they tested. It also includes comments from two independent sources. This story does a better job of providing independent perspectives than the Reuters story we also reviewed. But neither unaffiliated expert points out the study design and the inherent liabilities in interpretation to humans.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Post-operative cognitive dysfunction (POCD), a condition mostly observed in older patients following surgery under general anesthesia, is characterized by impaired memory and concentration. The impairment may be temporary or permanent and incapacitating.

The problem has become more frequent as the population ages and also as a growing number of older adults undergo surgical procedures made possible by more advanced medical technology. Data from the scientific literature suggest a rise in mortality from POCD in the first year after surgery under general anesthesia.

The good news, according to a Brazilian study published by the journal PLoS One, is that two relatively simple measures can help to reduce the incidence of POCD: administering a small dose of the anti-inflammatory drug dexamethasone immediately before an operation and avoiding profound anesthesia during the operation.

Opinions on the adequate depth of anesthesia and the risks of very profound anesthesia currently diverge. Excessively superficial anesthesia is known to incur a risk of patient recall of the procedure, which is undesirable.

"Our findings confirm recent evidence that the deeper the anesthesia-induced hypnosis, the higher the incidence of POCD. The literature points to a link with the systemic inflammatory response induced by surgical trauma, damaging the central nervous system. If so, the use of an anti-inflammatory drug may have a protective effect," said Maria José Carvalho Carmona, a professor of anesthesiology at the University of São Paulo's Medical School (FM-USP) and principal investigator for the study.

The researchers evaluated 140 patients aged between 60 and 87 who underwent surgery under propofol-induced general anesthesia at the Central Institute of Hospital das Clínicas, FM-USP's teaching hospital, in most cases for removal of gallstones.

Pre-operative assessment included a battery of tests to measure mental and cognitive status. Patients who failed to achieve a cutoff score were excluded. The remaining subjects were divided randomly into four groups. In the operating room, deep anesthesia typical of major surgical procedures was induced in the first and third groups, and more superficial anesthesia in the second and fourth. Only the third and fourth groups received dexamethasone.

The depth of anesthesia was monitored using bispectral index (BIS) technology, which processes electroencephalogram signals to measure drug-induced unconsciousness. The researchers classified a BIS of 35-45 as deep anesthesia and a BIS of 46-55 as superficial anesthesia.

In the fourth group (superficial anesthesia with dexamethasone), the incidence of POCD was 15.3% immediately after surgery, but after six months the pre-operative cognitive status was restored in all patients.

"The results reinforce recent evidence of the importance of avoiding deep anesthesia," Carmona said. "With regard to the use of dexamethasone, more research is needed to confirm our finding, preferably in multicenter trials, but there are strong indications that it can be beneficial in many cases."

The earliest trials with patients who developed POCD were performed after the 1950s. Before that, older patients were rarely subjected to major surgery, and significant research in this field has only been conducted for approximately 15-20 years.

"The causes of and risk factors for POCD are still being discussed," she said. "Little is said about rehabilitation or ways of helping patients recover pre-operative cognitive function."

One of the obstacles to reliable diagnosis and rehabilitation is a lack of practical and secure instruments for pre- and post-operative cognitive assessment. "The tests available today are either too time consuming or quick but unreliable," Carmona said. "This makes it hard to follow up on patients."
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release does not explicitly note who funded the study. However, the study does not appear to have received any external funding. According to the ClinicalTrials.gov page for the study, the work was sponsored primarily by the University of São Paulo and Duke University (where the authors work), with additional support from the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (or São Paulo Research Foundation), which is public. It’s not unusual for universities to avoid mentioning funding for projects that they funded themselves. But it would have been a stronger release if it didn’t leave readers wondering who paid for the work.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 6, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- There's too little evidence to say definitively whether treating early, localized prostate cancer with radiation is a better option than "watchful waiting," new research finds.

In a study funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), researchers from Tufts University reviewed the available literature on radiation and prostate cancer, including 10 randomized controlled trials and 65 observational studies.

They concluded there was "insufficient evidence" to say with certainty whether radiation treatment compared to watchful waiting is more likely to save lives.

"We just don't have sufficient information to say much of anything," said Dr. Stanley Ip, an assistant professor of medicine at Tufts University Medical Center.

In part, that's because researchers found no randomized controlled trials -- considered the gold standard of research -- that compared radiation therapy with watching waiting, Ip said. Though there were observational studies, those may be biased because men who opt to hold off on treatment may be those whose tumors are lower risk to begin with, he said.

The study is published in the June 6 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Watchful waiting -- which does not involve cancer treatment -- means having regular exams while keeping an eye on the tumor to see if it grows or spreads. It is usually recommended when doctors feel someone's advanced age will allow them to outlive the generally slow-moving cancer or when someone has other conditions that are more likely to prove lethal.

Men who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer -- meaning it's confined to the prostate gland and has not spread -- are confronted with a bewildering array of options for treating it: surgery; radiation; drugs to deprive the tumor of the hormone androgen that may drive its growth; or watchful waiting.

In 2008, AHRQ also commissioned a review of studies on other prostate cancer treatment options, but that report could not draw conclusions on the best approach either.

"What all of these analyses have found is there is very limited data that allows us to determine which of these approaches in the best approach," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate cancer for the American Cancer Society.

Brooks said more comparative effectiveness research, which compares different kinds of treatments, is needed.

In the meantime, what are men diagnosed with early prostate cancer to do?

Men and their doctors need to consider what the tumor looks like under the microscope, which can help gauge how aggressive it may be. They should also consider age and overall health status, including whether or not the patient has other conditions more likely to cause death than the prostate cancer.

Finally, patients and their doctors should weight the potential debilitating side effects of the treatments, such as incontinence and erectile dysfunction, against how comfortable the man is with holding off on treatment, experts say.

"Men need to learn as much as they can about the possible outcomes and benefits of the various treatments and the potential side effects, and choose which direction they are most comfortable with," Brooks said.

In the current review, researchers found several trials that compared different doses of radiation and different types of radiation therapy, including external beam radiation therapy, in which a radiation is delivered through a beam through the skin, or brachytherapy, in which radioactive isotopes are delivered via injection into the prostate.

For those methods, too, there was too little research to say with confidence which method was superior in preventing deaths from prostate cancer, the researchers said. Retrospective studies, however, found that radiation treatments were associated with increased urinary or bowel problems, compared with no treatment or no initial treatment.

There was also "moderate strength evidence" that a higher external beam radiation was more effective than a lower dose.

Taken together, the review "does point out that based on current evidence, doctors should not be telling their patients that this form of radiation is better than that form," Brooks said. "Some of the distinctions being made are not really supported by the evidence."

Proton beam therapy in particular is expensive, but according to this report, there isn't enough evidence to show it's any better than other option.

Radiation, he noted, may be the best option for men whose tumors have spread outside the gland, since simply removing the prostate gland surgically is not likely to be as effective, he said.

The American Cancer Society estimates that in 2009, approximately 192,000 men were diagnosed with prostate cancer and approximately 27,000 men died of the disease.

The National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story turned to Dr. Durado Brooks of the American Cancer Society for an independent perspective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PSA stands for prostate-specific antigen, a substance produced only by the prostate gland and found in the ejaculate. Its purpose is to liquefy the semen to release sperm, freeing them to fertilize an egg. The PSA level, measured in nanograms per milliliter of blood, reflects how much of this antigen is being produced and released into the bloodstream. The larger a man’s prostate, the more PSA is produced, which makes the test very confusing in older men with benign enlargement of this gland.

Aside from cancer and prostatic growth with age, factors that can change PSA measurements include inflammation or infection of the prostate; a decline in testosterone levels or the drug finasteride, taken for hair loss, both of which lower the PSA; and variations in laboratory assays and in the inherent biology of a person. Biological variability can result in as much as a 15 percent difference between readings, and in nearly half of men with an abnormal PSA, the test will normalize in one to four years without any treatment.

But Dr. H. Ballentine Carter, a urologist at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, notes that no significant changes in PSA result from recent sexual intercourse or ejaculation, a digital rectal examination or riding a bicycle. “Even long-distance bikers do not have prostate trauma” that causes their PSA to increase, Dr. Carter said.

Current guidelines recommend that all men have an annual PSA test starting at age 50 and that biopsies be conducted if the level exceeds 4 or if a “significant rise” occurs between two tests. The guidelines also suggest limiting screening to men with more than a 10-year life expectancy.

This approach has resulted in many biopsies in men who did not have cancer — about 70 percent of those with elevated PSAs are cancer free — and debilitating prostate surgery in men with cancers that would never have become a threat in their remaining years of life.

On the Way: New Guidelines

Based on recent studies, the American Urological Association will soon release revised guidelines that, experts hope, will reduce unnecessary biopsies and prostate surgeries, which even in the best hands can leave a man impotent and incontinent. The revised guidelines are expected to reduce the cost of screening, the cost per life saved and overall deaths from prostate cancer.

The new guidelines will no longer rely on a single reading. Rather, they will suggest that doctors focus on changes in levels over time. They will also suggest that testing start at 40 to obtain a baseline measurement, with the test repeated at 45 and 50, after which it should be given annually until 70.

“If a 70-year-old man has a PSA history that hasn’t changed over the years, maybe he doesn’t need further testing,” Dr. Carter suggested. “PSA testing of men over 70 is not rational.”

He pointed to a Scandinavian study showing that among men older than 65, to prevent one death from prostate cancer over 10 years, 330 men would have to have prostate surgery.

“This has created a huge dilemma in urology,” Dr. Carter said. “We don’t want to miss the possibility of a life-threatening disease, but we end up diagnosing and treating disease that would never have caused harm.”

The new guidelines will lower the PSA level at which a biopsy should be considered, because, as Dr. Carter put it, “there’s no level below which we can tell a man he doesn’t have prostate cancer or life-threatening prostate cancer.”

As one important trial showed, among men with a very low PSA — that is, a reading below the current cutoff of 4 — biopsies found that 15 percent had prostate cancer. Among that 15 percent, Dr. Carter said, 15 percent had high-grade, potentially life-threatening cancers. That means that 2.25 percent of the total number of men with a PSA less than 4 had life-threatening cancers.

But, he added, “If we biopsied every man with a PSA below 4, we’d be looking at a sea of cancers that would never grow to be life threatening.”

These facts and the results of a recent study by Dr. Carter, among others, indicated that rather than acting on the basis of a single PSA test, the rate of change in levels over time is a better indicator of who might have a serious cancer. This rate, known as PSA velocity, will be part of the new guidelines, which will suggest that in men with low readings, doctors consider the changes in levels over the course of three measurements.

“We need at least 1 ½ to 2 years’ worth of data” to make a meaningful judgment about how to proceed, Dr. Carter said.

He explained that in men with an initially high level — say 10 or higher— velocity is not an issue. For them, if other factors like prostate infection are not the cause of the high level, a biopsy is in order. But in men with a PSA from 0 to 4, knowing the velocity of changes can add useful information, he said.

Another approach to assessing the meaning of a PSA reading is to analyze how much antigen is traveling free in the blood and how much is bound to a companion protein, Dr. Scardino suggested. If more than 25 percent of the PSA is free, chances are that it is being produced by a benignly enlarged prostate. The lower the amount of free PSA, the more likely cancer is the cause and the more likely the disease is aggressive, requiring treatment, according to Dr. Patrick C. Walsh, a Johns Hopkins urologist and the author of “Dr. Patrick Walsh’s Guide to Surviving Prostate Cancer.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several sources are quoted.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When a couple is struggling to conceive, it's the woman who is usually the first — and often the only one — to be poked, prodded and analyzed, experts say. The burden of figuring out infertility is too often placed on the woman alone.

"Unfortunately, the majority of society looks at infertility as a women's issue, but that's just not the case," said Brad Imler, American Pregnancy Association president.

Placed among dozens of pregnancy, ovulation and female fertility kits, an at-home sperm test that hit retail shelves in April could help change that mentality, experts said.

SpermCheck Fertility, which determines in minutes whether a man's sperm count is low, offers almost instant insight into one of the many aspects of male fertility. Although it's not a comprehensive evaluation and could give some consumers a false sense of security, the test does provide a starting point while drawing attention to male infertility as a legitimate health concern.

"It may provide (an opportunity for) both physicians and couples to take a closer look at ways for men to step up to the plate and optimize their reproductive potential," said Dr. Robert Brannigan, urologist at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. "I think anything that highlights the fact that men can have issues, that men do play a role in infertility, is important."

Approximately 15 percent of U.S. couples of reproductive age who are trying to conceive face infertility issues, said Brannigan, an expert in male fertility.

Male infertility contributes to 50 percent of those cases, he said. Male infertility alone is the cause 30 percent of the time; a combination of male and female factors account for the other 20 percent.

SpermCheck Fertility is designed to help couples determine more quickly whether male infertility might be a problem for them, said Ray Lopez, CEO of SpermCheck, based in Charlottesville, Va. Many men put off having a semen analysis because they don't want to provide a sample in a doctor's office or lab, he said.

"No one wants to go through the embarrassment of jumping in that room and looking at dirty magazines," Lopez said.

Giving men the opportunity to take a test in the privacy of their home helps get the process moving, he said.

Men tend to think they're perfectly healthy, especially when it comes to their sexuality, APA's Imler said. This test, which is noninvasive, could be wake-up call for some.

"If there is a problem with him, it's identified a little quicker," Imler said. "We love the idea of avoiding that heartache of that month to month struggle of trying to conceive without success."

SpermCheck Fertility is the only FDA-approved home sperm test currently on the market and available in retail stores, Lopez said. The test costs about $40; the average cost of a semen analysis in a doctor's office is about $100.

At-home sperm tests are a fairly new idea, Imler said, but SpermCheck Fertility is not the first one. Four years ago an FDA-approved home test called Fertell, which is no longer for sale, offered an evaluation of both male and female fertility.

There are also several at-home sperm analysis kits available online. They each include a microscope and cost at least $80.

Although it's not the first ever at-home test, SpermCheck Fertility is the first one to use the lateral flow assay method, Lopez said. When the semen sample is applied to the test strip, the liquid works its way up the paper until it reaches the results window.

"It's very, very similar to a pregnancy test," Lopez said. "The concept behind our test is to keep it simple, user friendly."

For Brittany Scott, a Cortland resident whose husband took the SpermCheck Fertility test, however, it seemed a little more complicated than a pregnancy test. Scott said she was surprised by the number of steps involved, although none were very difficult.

Scott, a "mommy blogger" who requested and received a free test to review, said she wanted her husband to take the test to see if a recent vasectomy had worked. The result showed that the father of four's sperm count was below the test's threshold.

"It was blatantly negative. I was really glad that the test was not ambiguous at all," she said. "There was no line I could mistake."

Scott said she wished the test had been available when the couple was struggling to conceive their first child. After about 11 months of trying, she had pushed her husband to get a semen analysis from a doctor.

"If this test had been around back then, he would have definitely been more willing to do it" than the semen analysis, she said.

SpermCheck Fertility tests were created after a scientist at the University of Virginia discovered a specific protein found only in the head of sperm, Lopez said. By detecting that protein, the test indicates whether or not a semen sample contains 20 million sperm per milliliter.

About 90 percent of fertile men have sperm counts above that concentration, according to the SpermCheck Fertility instructions.

But there is not a strict cutoff point between normal or abnormal, Brannigan said. Some men might be considered in the infertile range and have no problem impregnating a woman. And others have sperm counts that seem fine, but they have difficulty.

"If his sperm concentration is indeed greater than 20 million, that's very encouraging," Brannigan said. "But it's by no means a definitive marker of proven fertility because there is a significant overlap between fertile and infertile men."

As stated in the SpermCheck Fertility instructions, sperm count is not the only factor that contributes to male fertility. The test is not intended to be a complete semen analysis or an overall indicator of a man's fertility, Lopez said.

The male reproductive system should not be oversimplified, Brannigan said. There are several characteristics of sperm alone — at least three that aren't addressed by SpermCheck — that affect male fertility. In addition, hormones and the delivery of the sperm play a part.

"There are a number of components that lead to a man having normal fertility potential," Brannigan said. "It's a complicated picture."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story extensively quotes Dr. Robert Brannigan, a urologist at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. And Brannigan provides much needed context for the test. For example: “The male reproductive system should not be oversimplified, Brannigan said. There are several characteristics of sperm alone — at least three that aren’t addressed by SpermCheck — that affect male fertility. In addition, hormones and the delivery of the sperm play a part.” The story also quotes Brad Imler, the president of the American Pregnancy Association, who provided good comments.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You no longer live in a world where you can pretend you’re only eating for one; the trillions of bacteria in your gut, we now know, also feed on what you put in your mouth—and they behave very differently depending on what that is.

It’s increasingly clear that the composition of your gut bacteria likely influences your risk for many health problems, from obesity and type-2 diabetes and even certain autoimmune diseases. Scientists are hard at work trying to determine how and why that’s that case, as well as which bacteria are beneficial—and how to protect them. A recent study published in adds to the growing evidence that fiber might be a critical gut-nourishing nutrient. (Unfortunately, less than 3% of Americans eat the government-recommended amount daily.)

“You really hold the reins to guiding this community [of bacteria] through the choices you make,” says Justin L. Sonnenburg, PhD, associate professor in the department of microbiology and immunology at Stanford University School of Medicine and author of . Sonnenburg was not involved with this study, but research from his lab also suggests that fiber plays a big role in promoting good bacteria.

The authors of the new study wanted to look at what changes in diet do to one particular gut microbe species: a strain that’s been associated with leanness and better glucose tolerance in mice. They wrangled a group of 49 overweight and obese adults, took stool and blood samples and asked them to follow a six-week calorie-restricted diet (between 1,500-1,800 calories per day) while increasing their fiber intake. The diet was followed by six weeks of eating normally. They kept a food journal throughout, and the researchers biopsied their fat tissue.

The people who had more in their gut from the very start had better clinical measures after they completed the diet, compared to the people with less of the bacterium. Both groups of people lost the same amount of weight, but the high- group had a stronger decrease in visceral fat than the others, says study author Patrice D. Cani, PhD, professor and group leader of the Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group at Université Catholique de Louvain in Belgium. “We discovered that the patients who exhibited higher amounts of were the patients who had a very strong improvement in cholesterol, in glycemia, in waist to hip ratio and also a reduction in different parameters in both cardiovascular disease and risk factors.”

Higher levels of , the findings suggest, seem to have favorable effects on health.

The good news is that your initial levels are not your fate. People who started out with lower stores of had more after they followed the fiber-rich calorie-restricted diet. You can increase these bacterial populations by eating fiber, Cani’s research suggests, which acts as a prebiotic in the gut and has a beneficial effect on some bacteria.

Now, Cani says he is working on an experiment with obese and diabetic patients to administer alone, without any dietary modifications, to see what effect it has on insulin resistance and cardiovascular disease risk factors. “If we can improve these different parameters, that would be something great,” he says.

Here’s why fiber is so important to intestinal flora: your gut microbes feed on it and produce short-chain fatty acids, which get absorbed into the bloodstream and regulate the immune system and attenuate inflammation, Sonnenburg says. “That means if you’re not eating dietary fiber, your immune system may be existing in kind of a simmering pro-inflammatory state,” he says—the very state that predisposes us to different Western diseases. “Our diet and deteriorated microbiota are really a major piece of the puzzle in trying to understand why Western diseases are rising like crazy.”

Sonnenburg says that when researchers try on mice what many of us do on a regular basis—eat food depleted of dietary fiber—their gut microbes behave erratically. “They turn and start eating the mucus lining of the intestine,” says Sonnenburg, “because that’s also a carbohydrate source and it’s kind of a fallback food for them.” In mice on a low-fiber diet, the mucus lining thins to about half of its normal width, he says. It’s so far unclear whether the same thing happens in humans, but Sonnenburg thinks it might. “We start to see these correlates that we think over the course of decades in a human could lead to something problematic,” he says.

Loading up on fiber-fortified processed foods isn’t likely a good way to increase the kind of fiber that benefits the gut. Studies done on single fibers—those, like inulin, which are added to foods—haven’t shown to have the same effects as fiber that occur naturally in whole foods. “All of the vegetables we’re encouraged to eat by our mothers and by the government guidelines, these are all filled with fiber, and filled with a diversity of fiber, and probably the best route for encouraging a diverse microbiota,” Sonnenburg says.

Nuts, seeds, whole grains, legumes and even dark chocolate are high in fiber—as are vegetables. “You can eat massive amounts of plant material and it can be incredibly good for you, you can feel really satisfied and full,” Sonnenburg says. “I find that a really nice way to eat—just kind of gorging myself on plant material.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes one source who was not affiliated with the relevant study, but makes clear that the source is a vocal proponent of the idea that a high-fiber diet is important for maintaining a “healthy” gut microbiome and that the microbiome can have a significant impact on health.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Brain surgery for children whose epilepsy is resistant to drug therapy can produce a 10-fold increase in the odds of being seizure-free after one year and can do it without affecting IQ, according to a new Indian study of 116 patients in The New England Journal of Medicine.

Seventy-seven percent of the children were free of seizures at one year after the surgery, compared with seven percent in a control group of youngsters who received medical therapy alone while waiting for surgery. Behavior and quality of life also improved.

But surgery also produced serious adverse effects in one-third of the children, most frequently a weakness on one side of the body, known as hemiparesis. The researchers said that was to be expected and, without surgery, patients probably would have experienced similar problems as a result of their continuing seizures.

“What the study clearly shows is surgery for children produces seizure freedom compared to children not operated on for similar conditions,” senior author Dr. Manjari Tripathi, a professor of neurology and epilepsy at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences in New Delhi, told Reuters Health in a telephone interview.

Not only “does it reassure us that several surgical procedures are effective,” she said, it demonstrates that surgery “should be done as early as possible” once it becomes clear that a child is not responding to two anti-seizure medications.

About 50 million people worldwide suffer with epilepsy and drugs can’t control the seizures in approximately 30 percent of the cases.

“This is the first randomized study to look at surgical outcome in children,” said Dr. Donald Schomer, director of the Comprehensive Epilepsy Program at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. He was not involved in the research.

“The results are impressive,” he told Reuters Health by phone. Adults who undergo surgery often suffer from the collective effect of years of uncontrolled seizures. “The study in kids shows if you reduce the time from the onset of seizures from the 15 to 20 years you see in adults down to four to five years, the outcome is much better. It’s documentation that these techniques really work.”

Although 77 percent were judged by the Tripathi team to be seizure-free at the end of the study, some of those children actually had seizures immediately after surgery. Yet the cases were judged to be a success because the seizures decreased in frequency over time. Ultimately, 37 percent never had a seizure in the year after surgery.

When all seizures were taken into account, children who did not have surgery were four times more likely to have a seizure during that year than youngsters in the surgery group, the researchers calculated.

Success rates ranged from 87 percent to 100 percent depending on the type of surgery used to correct the child’s particular brain abnormality.

Surgery improved quality of life and social well-being, and it didn’t affect IQ, something that can decline with ongoing seizures. But Dr. Schomer said the children were only followed for one year, and “that may be too soon to see a noticeable change” in the intelligence quotient.

Post-surgery weakness was seen in 15 of the 19 patients who had a serious side effect following surgery.

The weakness “is significant,” Dr. Tripathi said. “The child may not be able to ambulate by his- or herself. But with physical therapy, all regain the lower and upper limb function within six months. The only thing that does not improve is the wrist and the fingers. They are left with this minor deficit. But even before surgery, some of them have this weakness.”

Other side effects depended on the area of the brain that was removed or disconnected from the rest of the brain.

In contrast, 16.5 percent of the children waiting for surgery had a serious injury as a result of their continuing seizures.

The surgery “had a transforming effect on how they get along in life,” Dr. Tripathi said. “Many could go back school earlier or go back to being tutored, and get on with their life.”

But a major problem facing these children is getting insurance companies to pay for such surgeries, said Dr. Schomer of Beth Israel.

Rather than pay $35,000 to $50,000 on surgery that might cure the problem and prevent further damage to the child, insurance companies prefer to demand that more drugs be tried, even if the odds of them working in drug-resistant cases is small, he said.

“Studies like this lend credence to the idea that the earlier you do it, the better the outcome,” he said. “I hope insurance companies will look at this and realize that early detection and surgery, if appropriate, will ultimately save them money in the long term.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/2gVClQv The New England Journal of Medicine, online October 25, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article does quote a Boston specialist who was not a part of the study, which was conducted in India.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But in many cases it is just not known whether what is seen on a scan is the cause of the pain. The problem is that all too often, no one knows what is normal.

“A patient comes in because he’s in pain,” said Dr. Nelda Wray, a senior research scientist at the Methodist Institute for Technology in Houston. “We see something in a scan, and we assume causation. But we have no idea of the prevalence of the abnormality in routine populations.”

Now, as more and more people have scans for everything from headaches to foot aches, more are left in a medical lurch, or with unnecessary or sometimes even harmful treatments, including surgery.

“Every time we get a new technology that provides insights into structures we didn’t encounter before, we end up saying, ‘Oh, my God, look at all those abnormalities.’ They might be dangerous,” said Dr. David Felson, a professor of medicine and epidemiology at Boston University Medical School. “Some are, some aren’t, but it ends up leading to a lot of care that’s unnecessary.”

That was what almost happened with Mrs. Weinstein, an active, athletic 64-year-old who lives in New London, N.H. And it was her great fortune to finally visit a surgeon who told her so. He told her bluntly that her pain was caused by arthritis, not the torn cartilage.

No one had told her that before, Mrs. Weinstein said, and looking back on her quest to get a scan and get the cartilage fixed, she shook her head in dismay. There’s no surgical procedure short of a knee replacement that will help, and she’s not ready for a knee replacement.

“I feel that I have come full circle,” she said. “I will cope on my own with this knee.”

In fact, Mrs. Weinstein was also lucky because her problem was with her knee. It’s one of only two body parts — the other is the back — where there are good data on abnormalities that turn up in people who feel just fine, indicating that the abnormalities may not be so abnormal after all.

But even the data on knees comes from just one study, and researchers say the problem is far from fixed. It is difficult to conduct scans on people who feel fine — most do not want to spend time in an M.R.I. machine, and CT scans require that people be exposed to radiation. But that leaves patients and doctors in an untenable situation.

“It’s a concern, isn’t it?” said Dr. Jeffrey Jarvik, a professor of radiology and neurosurgery at the University of Washington. “We are trying to fix things that shouldn’t be fixed.”

As a rheumatologist, Dr. Felson saw patient after patient with knee pain, many of whom had already had scans. And he was becoming concerned about their findings.

Often, a scan would show that a person with arthritis had a torn meniscus, cartilage that stabilizes the knee. And often the result was surgery — orthopedic surgeons do more meniscus surgery than any other operation. But, Dr. Felson wondered, was the torn cartilage an injury causing pain or was the arthritis causing pain and the tear a consequence of arthritis?

That led Dr. Felson and his colleagues to do the first and so far the only large study of knees, asking what is normal. It involved M.R.I. scans on 991 people ages 50 to 90. Some had knee pain, others did not.

On Sept. 11, Dr. Felson and his colleagues published their results in The New England Journal of Medicine: meniscal tears were just as common in people with knee arthritis who did not complain of pain as they were in people with knee arthritis who did have pain. They tended to occur along with arthritis and were a part of the disease process itself. And so repairing the tears would not eliminate the pain.

“The rule is, as you get older, you will get a meniscal tear,” Dr. Felson said. “It’s a function of aging and disease. If you are a 60-year-old guy, the chance that you have a meniscal tear is 40 percent.”

It is a result that paralleled what spine researchers found over the past decade in what is perhaps the best evidence on what shows up on scans of healthy people. “If you’re going to look at a spine, you need to know what that spine might look like in a normal patient,” said Dr. Michael Modic, chairman of the Neurological Institute at the Cleveland Clinic.

After Dr. Modic and others scanned hundreds of asymptomatic people, they learned abnormalities were common.

“Somewhere between 20 and 25 percent of people who climb into a scanner will have a herniated disk,” Dr. Modic said. As many as 60 percent of healthy adults with no back pain, he said, have degenerative changes in their spines.

Those findings made Dr. Modic ask: Why do a scan in the first place? There are some who may benefit from surgery, but does it make sense to routinely do scans for nearly everyone with back pain? After all, one-third of herniated disks disappear on their own in six weeks, and two-thirds in six months.

And surgeons use symptoms and a physical examination to identify patients who would be helped by operations. What extra medical help does a scan provide? So Dr. Modic did another study, this time with 250 patients. All had M.R.I. scans when they first arrived complaining of back pain or shooting pains down their leg, which can be caused by a herniated disc pressing on a nerve in the spine. And all had scans again six weeks later. Sixty percent had herniated disks, the scans showed.

Dr. Modic gave the results to only half of the patients and their doctors — the others had no idea what the M.R.I.’s revealed. Dr. Modic knew, though.

In 13 percent of the patients, the second scan showed that the herniated disk had become bigger or a new herniated disk had appeared. In 15 percent, the herniated disk had disappeared. But there was no relationship between the scan findings at six weeks and patients’ symptoms. Some continued to complain of pain even though their herniated disk had disappeared; others said they felt better even though their herniation had grown bigger.

The question, though, was whether it helped the patients and their doctors to know what the M.R.I.’s had found. And the answer, Dr. Modic reported, is that it did not. The patients who knew recovered no faster than those who did not know. However, Dr. Modic said, there was one effect of being told — patients felt worse about themselves when they knew they had a bulging disk.

“If I tell you that you have a degenerated disk, basically I’m telling you you’re ugly,” Dr. Modic said.

Scans, he said, are presurgical tools, not screening tools. A scan can help a surgeon before he or she operates, but it does not help with a diagnosis.

“If a patient has back or leg pain, they should be treated conservatively for at least eight weeks,” Dr. Modic said, meaning that they take pain relievers and go about their normal lives. “Then you should do imaging only if you are going to do surgery.”

That message can be a hard sell, he acknowledged. “A lot of people are driven by wanting to have imaging,” Dr. Modic said. “They are miserable as hell, they can’t work, they can’t sit. We look at you and say, ‘We think you have a herniated disk. We say the natural history is that you will get better. You should go through six to eight weeks of conservative management.’ ”

At the Partners Healthcare System in Boston, spine experts have the same struggle to convince patients that an M.R.I. scan is not necessarily desirable, said Dr. Scott Gazelle, director of radiology there.

“The consensus is that you are a surgical candidate or not based on your history and physical findings, not on imaging findings,” he said.

Dr. Gazelle had a chance last year to test his own convictions. He had the classic symptoms of a herniated disk — shooting pains down his left leg, a numb foot and difficulty walking.

Dr. Gazelle went to see his primary-care doctor but, he said, “I didn’t get an M.R.I.” That decision, he added, “was the right thing to do.”

About three months later, he had recovered on his own.

In 1998, two medical scientists, writing in The Lancet, proposed what sounded like a radical idea. Instead of simply providing patients and their doctors with the results of an X-ray or an M.R.I. scan, he said, radiologists should put the findings in context. For example, they wrote, if a scan showed advanced disk deterioration, the report should say, “Roughly 40 percent of patients with this finding do not have back pain so the finding may be unrelated.”

It is an idea that only would work for back pain, because that is the one area where radiologists have enough data. But it made eminent sense to Dr. Jarvik. “It gives referring physicians some sort of context,” he said.

So, a few years ago, with some trepidation, his radiology group starting including epidemiological data in their reports. “We thought, ‘What’s going to be the reaction among referring physicians?’ ” Dr. Jarvik said. Their fear was that doctors would start choosing other places for M.R.I.’s and that Dr. Jarvik’s group would lose business.

Because of the way the university’s records are kept, it’s hard to know whether the new reporting system had that effect, Dr. Jarvik said. But he was heartened by the responses of some doctors, like Dr. Sohail Mirza, who recently moved to Dartmouth Medical School.

“We often see patients who have already had M.R.I. scans,” Dr. Mirza said. “They are fixated on the abnormality and come to a surgeon to try to get the abnormality fixed. They’ll come in with the report in hand.”

The new sort of report, Dr. Mirza said, was “very helpful information to have when talking to patients and very helpful for patients to help them understand that the abnormalities were not catastrophic findings.”

Others, like Dr. Modic, are hesitant about reporting epidemiology along with a patient’s scan findings.

“It’s an interesting idea,” he said. But, he added: “The problem isn’t what happens after they get their imaging. It’s that they get the imaging in the first place.”

That was what happened with Mrs. Weinstein.

When she started looking up her symptoms on the Internet, she decided she probably had a meniscus tear. “I was very forceful in asking for an M.R.I.,” she said.

And when the scan showed that her meniscus was torn, she went to a surgeon expecting an operation.

He X-rayed her knee and told her she had arthritis. Then, Mrs. Weinstein said, the surgeon looked at her and said, “Let me get this straight. Are you here for a knee replacement?”

She said no, of course not. She skis, she does aerobics, she was nowhere near ready for something so drastic.

Then the surgeon told her that there was no point in repairing her meniscus because that was not her problem. And if he repaired the cartilage, her arthritic bones would just grind it down again.

For now, Mrs. Weinstein says she is finished with her medical odyssey.

“I continue to live with this, whatever they call it, this arthritic knee,” she said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple experts. The story quotes Dr Jarvik but does not describe his speciality or institutional affiliation. [Note: the NYT later added this]
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Dec. 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- If colon cancer screening was as easy as taking a breath, more people might do it. Now, a small pilot study suggests such a test could be developed.

The study, of 78 people with and without colon cancer, found that those with the disease tended to have a distinct pattern of chemicals in their breath. And when researchers analyzed the study participants' breath samples, they correctly identified the colon cancer patients 76 percent of the time.

The findings, reported online Dec. 5 in the British Journal of Surgery, sound good. But if you're waiting for your doctor to offer such a test, don't hold your breath.

"It's an interesting concept, but this is in the very early stages," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate and colorectal cancers for the American Cancer Society.

"There's no way to tell if this would work in the general population," said Brooks, who was not involved in the research.

What's more, he added, there are already several good ways to catch colon cancer -- or, even better, precancerous growths called polyps, which can then be removed before a tumor develops. Yet about 40 percent of Americans who should be getting screened are not.

"Colon cancer is a highly preventable disease," Brooks said. "And I would encourage the four out of 10 people who are not taking advantage of the existing screening tools to talk with their doctor."

The idea of using a breath test to catch cancer is not new: Researchers are looking into breath tests for detecting a number of cancers, including lung and breast tumors. It's all based on studies showing that breath samples from cancer patients tend to have a distinguishing pattern of so-called volatile organic compounds (VOCs).

When it comes to colon cancer, people already have several options for screening, which for most adults should begin at age 50 -- or possibly earlier if you are at higher-than-normal risk.

The choices include a yearly stool test that looks for hidden blood, or either of two invasive tests that scope the colon: sigmoidoscopy every five years, along with stool testing every three years; or colonoscopy every 10 years.

But many people are turned off by those tests.

So Dr. Donato Altomare and colleagues at the University Aldo Moro in Bari, Italy, decided to test the feasibility of a breath test.

Analyzing breath samples from 37 patients with colon cancer and 41 healthy middle-aged adults, the researchers found 15 VOCs that seemed to differ between the two groups.

They then used a statistical model to see if certain VOC patterns separated the colon cancer patients from the healthy participants. In the end, the researchers were able to correctly identify the cancer patients 76 percent of the time.

But, Brooks pointed out, that also means the breath test was wrong about one-quarter of the time.

There's no way of knowing how well such a screening test would work in the real world -- including how many people might wrongly get a positive result and undergo needless invasive tests to follow up, Brooks said.

Another big question, he added, is whether breath analysis could pinpoint people with colon polyps.

"One of our goals in screening is to detect polyps, not cancer," Brooks said. "This study doesn't address that."

Altomare's team acknowledges that there is a lot of work left to do. It's still unclear which breath chemicals should be measured, or what statistical method is best for weeding out cases of colon cancer.

Brooks said it would be nice to have a very simple, accurate screening test -- whether that means a breath test or blood or urine tests. Yearly stool tests are simple and cheap, but people often don't want to do them.

"We're always searching for simpler things to do," Brooks said. But for now, he added, "this study raises many more questions than answers."

Learn more about colon cancer from the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An expert from the American Cancer Society provides much-needed context and perspective on this research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking extra vitamin D and calcium doesn’t seem to prevent bone-thinning in older men, according to Australian researchers.

However, exercise did boost bone mineral density, a proxy for bone strength, their report shows.

Despite the findings, people still need to get enough calcium and vitamin D to reduce the risk of osteoporosis, or bone thinning, said Dr. Mone Zaidi, an osteoporosis researcher at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, who was not involved in the study.

“It’s like the four legs of the stool: vitamin D and calcium, exercise, medications if a person is losing bone, and the fourth leg is telling people how to prevent fractures,” Zaidi said.

More than 40 million people in the US are affected by osteoporosis. It’s most common in older women, but about seven percent of white men and five percent of black men are affected, according to the American College of Physicians.

In the new study, published in the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, Robin M. Daly from the University of Melbourne, Australia and colleagues randomly assigned men aged 59 to 70 to an exercise program, drinking milk fortified with calcium and vitamin D, doing both, or doing nothing.

They measured the men’s bone density before and after the study, which took place over 18 months, but they didn’t look at fractures.

At the end of the study, men who exercised had higher bone density than those who had supplemented their diet with 1000 milligrams of calcium and 800 international units (IU) of vitamin D per day.

Adding the supplements to the exercise program provided no extra benefit, hinting that the men already had enough vitamin D and calcium in their diets to be able to boost their bone strength through exercise alone.

The recommended daily intake of vitamin D is 600 IU in adults up to age 70, and 800 IU for older people, according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH). A 6-month supply of vitamin D supplements can be bought for less than $10, and many multivitamins contain the recommended daily dose of vitamin D.

As for calcium, the NIH advises 1,000 mg per day for men ages19-70, and then 1,200 mg per day for men older than 70.

To build bone density, weight-bearing exercise is needed, such as running or weight-lifting, according to the NIH.

In animal studies, a lack of vitamin D has been linked to several diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and some types of cancer. However, there isn’t enough data to say if vitamin D can help treat or prevent these diseases, Zaidi said.

To reduce the risk of bone weakening, the NIH recommends not smoking, drinking less alcohol and exercising more.

Zaidi said that both vitamin D and calcium are extremely important for human health, so people should follow the previous vitamin D and calcium recommendations.

“You’ve got to have it to build a wall,” he said. “Adding more might not strengthen the wall, but you have to take enough to keep the wall strong. Otherwise it might fall apart.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/i4tDqs The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, online January 5, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story cites the researchers’ published findings, then turns in large part to an independent expert to evaluate the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eating More — Or Less — Of 10 Foods May Cut Risk Of Early Death

About half of all U.S. deaths from heart disease, stroke and Type 2 diabetes are linked to poor diets, according to a new study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

And eating more — or less — of just 10 types of food can help raise or lower the risk of death from these causes, the researchers found.

Scientists at Tufts University identified the foods that seem to contribute the most to the risk. At the top of the list? Salt. Consuming too much salt was associated with 9.5 percent of the deaths.

Next — and I sympathize with all of you who love to eat these — high intake of red meat and processed meats such as bacon was linked to 8 percent of the deaths. And sugary drinks were a factor in 7.4 percent of the deaths.

We know, it may be tough to cut back on foods you love. Bacon is so alluring to many that it has even been called the 'gateway' to meat for vegetarians!

But, here's the flip side: The researchers also found there's a significant risk in eating too little of certain healthy foods. So, think of it this way: You can start consuming more of the foods that are protective.

For instance, the study found that low consumption of nuts and seeds was linked to about 9 percent of deaths.

In addition, diets low in seafood, whole grains and fruits and vegetables were found to contribute to about 6-8 percent of the deaths.

"The good news is that we now understand which foods we need to target to prevent Americans from dying prematurely from cardiometabolic diseases," says lead study author Renata Micha, a public health nutritionist and epidemiologist at the Friedman School at Tufts University.

In 2012, about 700,000 Americans died from these diseases. Diet was linked to nearly 319,000 of these deaths. "This is a remarkable burden, nearly 1,000 deaths each day" linked to dietary habits, says senior study author Dariush Mozaffarian, dean of the Friedman School at Tufts.

So, changing Americans dietary habits could have a significant impact, the authors argue. "Our research suggests that nearly half of the risk can be reduced [by] eating a healthy diet," Mozaffarian says.

The new analysis is based on data from the federal survey known as NHANES, the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Researchers asked some 8,500 participants about their eating habits. In addition, Mozaffarian and his colleagues estimated associations of diet and disease from prior studies and clinical trials.

Now, the task of estimating death or disease linked to diet is tricky. Scientists use statistical methods to try to tease apart the impact of diet as part of people's overall lifestyle.

One challenge: People who have healthy diets often have other healthy habits, too — such as getting regular exercise. Dietary habits also track with socio-economic status. So, people with lower incomes are more likely to have poorer diets compared with wealthier people.

The Tufts researchers used studies that had controlled for these lifestyle factors, but it's not a perfect science.

"Relying on evidence from observational studies...carries the potential limitation of confounding bias," states an editorial that was published alongside the study. The editorial raises the possibility that the effect of confounding factors such as socioeconomic status and physical activity could be substantial. "For instance, it's possible that processed meat consumption merely reflects a Westernized dietary pattern."

Mozaffarian acknowledges the limitations. "At the end of the day, our findings might modestly over - or under-estimate the health burdens," he told us.

He says the bigger point is this: "Whether poor diet is causing 1,000 cardiovascular and diabetes deaths per day, or 500, it remains among the leading causes of preventable suffering."

Poor diets are also linked to billions of dollars in healthcare spending. For instance, diabetes costs the U.S. $245 billion a year. In the U.S., a women with diabetes incurs, on average, about $283,000 in lifetime health care costs. (Many cost studies don't separate Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes.)

If you love foods that are associated with cardiovascular risks, you don't have to give them up entirely. As most nutrition studies show, it's excessive consumption that drives up the risk.

For instance, dietary guidelines recommend limiting sugar consumption to no more than 10 percent of daily calories. This means that a single 200-calorie sugary drink may be OK for a person who typically consumes a 2,000 calorie-per-day diet.

The problem: Most Americans consume much more.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes from an accompanying editorial, which leads to some useful discussion of the limitations of observational research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two personalized cancer vaccines have been found to be safe and effective at treating people with melanoma, scientists have announced.

Cancer vaccines that are personalized to the patient—designed to help the immune system identify tumors as foreign bodies and destroy them—have been considered as a potential treatment for a number of years. But working out the unique mutations of each person’s cancer, a time-consuming and complicated process, must first be identified before a vaccine can be developed for them.

In two studies published in the journal Nature, researchers have shown promising results from Phase I clinical trials. While they are very small scale—one was on six participants, the other 13—the findings mean researchers can move ahead with the vaccines, which could potentially lead to new, more effective cancer treatments.

In the first study, scientists led by Catherine Wu developed a vaccine for people who had been treated for melanoma with surgery, but who had received no other treatment. They sequenced the DNA from the tumors then created a personalized vaccine that contained neoantigens (targets for the immune response) for predicted mutations.

Six patients were given a full series of vaccinations, including five priming injections and two booster vaccinations. Four of the six had no recurrence of the disease after 25 months.

In the other study, by Ugur Sahin and colleagues, tested a personalized vaccine based on RNA (an essential link in the production of proteins encoded by DNA). They used a similar approach to Wu and her team to identify the mutations, then tested the vaccine on 13 people who were being treated for melanoma. All participants were found to have a boosted immunity against the antigens specific to their tumors. Eight were still tumor free after 23 months.

Both vaccines were deemed safe and are expected to be taken forward for further research.

These vaccines are not necessarily the future of personalized cancer treatment. Cornelius Melief, from the Leiden University Medical Center, Netherlands, said in an accompanying News & Views article that controlled, randomized Phase II clinical trials will be needed to work out if the vaccines are effective. He added, however, that the studies confirm the potential of cancer vaccines.

Elizabeth Williams, from the School of Biomedical Sciences at Queensland University of Technology, tells Newsweek the two studies “describe tantalizing complementary and consistent results in Phase 1 trials in melanoma patients using vaccines."

"The vaccines are personalized for each individual’s tumours by harnessing technologies that enable the comprehensive analysis of the molecular fingerprint of the tumour,” she says. “The data shows that it is a safe and well tolerated strategy that stimulates relevant anti-tumor immune responses.”

However, the treatment has its downsides: “As the vaccine therapies are designed and generated specifically for each individual there is a lag time from enrollment to commencement of treatment—approximately four months—which may be too long from some patients with advanced cancer. As technologies and processes continue improve this is likely to be reduced," she continues.

“It is still unknown whether these vaccines will extend the survival of cancer patients, or whether they are more effective than other recently developed immunotherapies. Additional clinical trials will be required to determine the utility of these individualised neoepitope vaccines.”

Catherine Pickworth, science communication officer at Cancer Research UK said: “The promising results from these two small, early-stage studies show that personalized cancer vaccines designed to treat skin cancer are safe to use, and that for some patients, they can successfully harness the power of the body’s own immune system to kill cancer cells. The next step will be to test these personalized vaccines in larger clinical trials to see if they are better than existing treatments, if they improve survival, and what their long-term side effects could be.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story incorporates insights from a few independent sources. This gives readers additional information about how the findings should be interpreted. However, no information is provided about potential conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eating a high-fiber diet as a teenager, including lots of fruits and vegetables, may be another tool to help women lower their risk for later breast cancer.

A new study looking at diet and health data from more than 44,000 women found that those who reported consuming the highest amount of fiber during high school, about 28 grams a day, had a significantly lower risk of breast cancer before menopause compared with those who said they ate less than 15 grams a day.

The researchers from Harvard's T.H. Chan School of Public Health, whose study appears in the journal Pediatrics, analyzed data from a large, ongoing, national study of nurses focused on factors that influence women's health.

"The results of this study emphasize the role of an early life high-fiber diet on prevention of breast cancer in later life. High consumption of foods rich in fiber such as fruits, vegetables and whole grains in early life may help to reduce breast cancer incidence," lead author Maryam Farvid, a visiting scientist at Harvard, told CBS News.

The findings showed that breast cancer risk was 12 to 19 percent lower among women who ate more dietary fiber in their youth, depending on how much more they ate. Eating more fiber during adolescence was linked to a 16 percent lower risk of breast cancer overall, and a 24 percent lower risk of breast cancer before menopause.

Farvid said the findings show that each additional 10 grams per day increase in fiber intake during adolescence reduced the risk of breast cancer by 14 percent.

"Having the recommended 25 to 30 grams of fiber daily would decrease the risk by 30 percent and potentially even greater with higher fiber intake," Farvid said. "Women are doing themselves a huge favor in terms of breast cancer prevention if they increase the amount of dietary fiber intake earlier in life rather than later."

Eating more fruits and vegetables was especially beneficial, the researchers said.

Healthy high-fiber food choices include apples, pears, raspberries, artichokes, green peas, broccoli, split peas, lentils, beans, whole wheat pasta, whole grain bread, brown rice, bran flakes, and oatmeal.

Why would these foods have such an impact?

In an accompanying editorial, Duke University Medical Center's Dr. Kimberly Blackwell said there's longstanding evidence that dietary fiber may cut down on circulating estrogen levels through changes in the gut microbiome.

She said that recently more evidence has come to light suggesting a relationship between dietary fiber and breast cancer risk, and that eating more fiber would be a simple way to reduce risk.

One weakness she pointed out in the study is that the women were asked to recall details about their adolescent diet when they were in their 30s and 40s. Nevertheless, Blackwell said, "It is reasonable for pediatricians to encourage a high-fiber diet and include decreasing breast cancer risk as one of the potential benefits."

Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital, in New York, told CBS News, "It lends support to the fact that we need to encourage people to start healthy habits earlier on."
• Lesser-known signs of breast cancer women should watch out for

Dr. Deanna Attai, assistant clinical professor of surgery at the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California Los Angeles, said that while it's an observational study, not a clinical intervention, its larger point about diet and health is important.

"The sexy headline is eat this and you'll have a lower risk of breast cancer, but I'd shift the focus to, eat more fiber because it's better for you and you'll be a healthier person and you're less likely to be obese and have chronic inflammation and other things that will reduce your risk for heart disease and cancer along the way," said Attai.

She added, "The message is a good one as far as increasing fiber, but it also has to be put in perspective. This is just one mechanism by which we can reduce risk and it does warrant further study."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story incorporates input from multiple independent sources who provide valuable perspective on the research. We particularly liked this line from Dr. Deanna Attai. (Full disclosure: Dr. Attai is also a reviewer for HealthNewsReview.org.)
“The sexy headline is eat this and you’ll have a lower risk of breast cancer, but I’d shift the focus to, eat more fiber because it’s better for you and you’ll be a healthier person and you’re less likely to be obese and have chronic inflammation and other things that will reduce your risk for heart disease and cancer along the way,”
And while the story does not address conflicts of interest, there do not appear to be any conflicts of interest to report.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (March 21, 2018)--Advanced stage liver tumors may be safely treated through image-guided injections of an immunotherapy approved for melanoma, according to a study presented today at the Society of Interventional Radiology's Annual Scientific Meeting.

Researchers found that talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC)--a genetically modified version of the herpes virus--can be safely administered into active cancer in the liver and stimulate the immune system to destroy cancer cells throughout the body.

"Advanced stage liver tumors, including ones that have spread from other locations, have limited treatment options because the patients can be in poor health; further, the complex structure of the organ can make it difficult to target with standard approaches," said Steven S. Raman, M.D., professor of radiology, surgery and urology at the David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, and lead author of the study. "This minimally invasive treatment offers patients a novel way to directly and indirectly attack the cancer cells."

Using image-guided needle injections, researchers at centers in the United States, Switzerland and Spain, treated 14 advanced-stage cancer patients with liver metastases, including those with cirrhosis. Patients were given escalating doses of T-VEC, up to the maximum FDA-approved dose for melanoma. Injection volume was based on lesion size. Researchers found the patients tolerated the treatment well with expected side effects, including temporary flu-like symptoms.

As part of the study, researchers will follow patients for up to two years, and new trials to investigate the effectiveness of the drug in treating advanced cancer in the liver are being planned. Additional investigation is also planned to test the therapy in combination with a checkpoint inhibitor to activate a stronger immune response.

"Image-guided treatments have expanded the options available for patients with liver cancer from innovative approaches to biopsies to resections to chemo," said Raman. "This is an exciting way to look to the future, but patients living with advanced liver cancer should understand that this treatment will not be available for several years, except through clinical trials."

The authors note several limitations of the current study, including the preliminary nature of the results, as well as the number of patients tested.

Amgen, the pharmaceutical company that makes T-VEC, was a sponsor of the trial.

Abstract 375: Early safety from a phase 1, multicenter, open-label clinical trial of talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC) injected into liver tumors. S. Raman; M. Pless; A. Cubillo; A. Calvo; R. Hecht; C. Liu; E. Chan; J. Chesney; A. Prat; David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA;, Department of Oncology, Kantonsspital Winterthur, Winterthur, Switzerland; HM Universitario Sanchinarro, CIOCC, Madrid, Spain; Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain; Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA; James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY; Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. SIR Annual Scientific Meeting, March 17-22, 2018. This abstract can be found at sirmeeting.org

The Society of Interventional Radiology is a nonprofit, professional medical society representing more than 7,500 practicing interventional radiology physicians, trainees, students, scientists and clinical associates, dedicated to improving patient care through the limitless potential of image-guided therapies. SIR's members work in a variety of settings and at different professional levels--from medical students and residents to university faculty and private practice physicians. Visit sirweb.org.

The Society of Interventional Radiology is holding its Annual Scientific Meeting March 17-22, 2018 at the Los Angeles Convention Center in Los Angeles, Calif. Visit sirmeeting.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release identified Amgen, the pharmaceutical company that makes T-VEC, as a sponsor of the trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The debate over coronary bypass surgery versus stenting goes back decades.

Studies have been inconclusive, but doctors and patients have voted with their feet in favor of the less-invasive procedure — clearing clogged arteries and propping them open with tiny scaffolds called stents.

U.S. doctors do at least two stenting procedures these days for every coronary bypass operation.

Now the biggest collection of cases so far comes out in favor of surgery on the all-important question of mortality. Four years after the procedure, patients over 65 who had coronary artery bypass surgeries (called CABG or "cabbages") were almost 20 percent less likely to die.

Put another way, 21 percent of stented patients had died after four years compared with 16 percent of surgery patients.

Is that a big difference? Well, the study's lead author tells Shots that it might be enough to "tip the balance a little bit, but not overwhelmingly so."

The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, which funded the study with new "stimulus" money from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, is more bullish on the implications.

"We would hope a study as powerful as this one will inform decision-makers to rethink the direction they're going in," the NHLBI's Dr. Michael Lauer told Shots. He says it's been worrying that so many doctors have been opting for stenting over surgery.

Study author Dr. William Weintraub, chief of cardiology at Christiana Care Health System in Newark, Del., is presenting the data at the annual meeting of the American College of Cardiology in Chicago. The study also appears online in the New England Journal of Medicine.

It draws on data from more than 86,000 patients across the nation who underwent CABG operations and nearly 104,000 patients who had coronary stenting. They had blockages in either two or three coronary arteries but did not require emergency procedures.

Although the pro-surgery outcome is not a game-changer, Weintraub says it might cause some doctors and patients to consider surgery. And he says it supports those who now opt for CABGs.

"It's a very big deal to recommend coronary surgery to patients," Weintraub says. "I think doctors work very hard to weigh what's best for their patients. When doctors recommend surgery, these data suggest that that decision is a good one."

But Dr. Laura Mauri says in an accompanying editorial that the new study can't settle any debates. Only studies that randomly assign comparable patients to surgery or stenting can do that. Mauri is an interventional cardiologist – i.e., a specialist who does coronary stenting – at Brigham and Women's Hospital inBoston.

Weintraub notes it's "very difficult and expensive" to do randomized studies on this question – and to make the comparison groups truly comparable. And while such a study is being done, the technology (especially stenting technology) changes. That can call into question the ultimate relevance of the findings.

So the new data may be the best that doctors and patients in this situation can expect for the foreseeable future.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Dr. Laura Mauri, who wrote an accompanying editorial, has a few words of caution about patients switching from stents to open-heart surgery. And the story nicely points out that “Mauri is an interventional cardiologist – i.e., a specialist who does coronary stenting – at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.” That doesn’t mean that Mauri would recommend stents against the evidence, but it helps readers understand her perspective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Breast-feeding a premature infant may help reduce the risk of a serious eye problem known as retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), new research suggests.

The researchers said that when babies were exclusively fed breast milk, the risk of any-stage ROP appeared to drop by about 75 percent. And the risk of severe ROP seemed to be reduced by 90 percent, the researchers added.

"Human milk feeding potentially plays a strong role in protecting very preterm newborns from any-stage ROP and severe ROP," the international team of study authors wrote.

Retinopathy of prematurity causes blood vessels to grow in the retina, the light-sensitive tissue in the back of the eye. When the vessels grow, they can cause the retina to detach, destroying vision, according to the U.S. National Eye Institute.

For the study, researchers from China, Canada and the United Kingdom reanalyzed the results of five published studies on ROP. The studies included more than 2,200 preterm infants, comparing how often babies had been fed human milk or formula, and whether or not they developed ROP.

However, the new analysis only showed an association between breast milk and a reduced risk of ROP. It did not prove a cause-and-effect relationship due to the study's design.

Results of the study were published online Nov. 16 in Pediatrics.

Extremely preterm babies are most at risk of ROP. In the United States, 59 percent of babies born at 22 to 28 weeks have the disorder, said study researcher Dr. Chao Chen, a neonatologist at Children's Hospital of Fudan University, in Shanghai. He added that in China, a previous study showed the incidence of ROP was 50 percent in infants with a birth weight under 1,000 grams (2.2 pounds).

ROP "has become a leading cause of childhood blindness in recent time," Chen said. "In general, there are more ROP cases in developed countries, but more severe cases and higher rates of blindness in developing countries."

The greater incidence of ROP is likely due to the increasing survival rate of very preterm babies in developed countries, according to Chen. In developing countries, preterm babies are less likely to survive. When they do, the screening and treatments are not as good, Chen said, so blindness may be more likely.

Babies in the studies had a range of gestational ages, from 26 to about 30 weeks. Their weights ranged from about 1.7 pounds to about 3 pounds. No information was given about how long the breast-feeding continued.

In re-evaluating the studies, Chen's team found that breast-feeding in any amount appeared to reduce the risk of ROP. And it appeared that the more breast milk, the better. Exclusive breast-feeding seemed to drop the odds of ROP by 75 percent compared to exclusive formula use. And any breast-feeding appeared to reduce the odds of the serious eye disease by 46 percent, the research showed.

How might human milk offer protection from the eye disorder? The antioxidants in human milk may help, Chen said. Human milk also has immune-protective properties, the researchers said. Breast-feeding also seems to help prevent two conditions known as sepsis and necrotizing enterocolitis that may require oxygen therapy, which has also been linked to a higher risk of ROP, the study authors said.

Dr. Adolfo Llanos, a neonatologist at Nicklaus Children's Hospital in Miami, who was not involved with the new study, said the "quality of this analysis is very good. It's reassuring to see the benefit we see with breast milk."

He said breast milk may help by reducing inflammation in the body. "Preemies don't regulate inflammation in their bodies well," he said.

Llanos cautioned that the study looked only at a mother's own breast milk, not donor milk, which can be used when the biological mother doesn't have enough of her own breast milk.

The takeaway from this study, Llanos said, is to breast-feed as long as possible, if possible.

To learn more about breast-feeding, visit American Academy of Pediatrics.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Thumbs up here for interviewing an independent source, Dr. Adolfo Llanos. Although, we question the choice to end the article with the following quote from Dr. Llanos
The takeaway from this study, Llanos said, is to breast-feed as long as possible, if possible.
That’s slightly puzzling, since the stated conclusion in the original study is much more tentative
Based on current limited evidence, in very preterm newborns, human milk feeding potentially plays a protective role in preventing any-stage ROP and severe ROP.
The story would have probably done better to omit this source’s simplistic conclusion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS, Feb. 26, 2018 -- A lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet, which includes eggs and dairy but excludes meat and fish, and a Mediterranean diet are likely equally effective in reducing the risk of heart disease and stroke, according to new research in the American Heart Association's journal Circulation.

Previous separate studies have shown that a Mediterranean diet reduces certain risk factors for cardiovascular disease, as does a vegetarian diet; however, this was the first study to compare effects of the two distinct eating patterns

Current study authors said they wanted to evaluate whether switching to a lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet would also be heart-healthy in people who were used to eating both meat and fish. "To best evaluate this issue, we decided to compare a lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet with a Mediterranean diet in the same group of people," said Francesco Sofi, M.D., Ph.D, lead study author and professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Florence and Careggi University Hospital in Italy.

The study included 107 healthy but overweight participants, ages 18-75, who were randomly assigned to follow for three months either a low-calorie vegetarian diet, which included dairy and eggs, or a low-calorie Mediterranean diet for three months. The Mediterranean diet included poultry, fish and some red meat as well as fruits, vegetables, beans and whole grains. After three months, the participants switched diets. Most participants were able to stay on both diets.
• lost about 4 pounds of weight overall; and
• experienced about the same change in body mass index, a measure of weight in relationship to height.

Authors said they did find two differences between the diets that may be noteworthy. The vegetarian diet was more effective at reducing LDL (the "bad") cholesterol, while the Mediterranean diet resulted greater reductions in triglycerides, high levels of which increase the risk for heart attack and stroke.

Still, "the take-home message of our study is that a low-calorie lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet can help patients reduce cardiovascular risk about the same as a low-calorie Mediterranean diet," Sofi said. "People have more than one choice for a heart-healthy diet."

In an editorial accompanying the study, Cheryl A. M. Anderson, Ph.D., M.P.H., M.S., an associate professor of preventive medicine at the University of California, San Diego, in California, wrote that there were similarities between the two diets that may explain the results. Both follow "a healthy dietary pattern rich in fruits and vegetables, legumes [beans], whole grains and nuts; focusing on diet variety, nutrient density and appropriate amount of food; and limiting energy intake from saturated fats."

Anderson, who was not involved in the study, added that promoting both diets by healthcare professionals "offer a possible solution to the ongoing challenges to prevent and manage obesity and cardiovascular diseases."

Study limitations include the fact that participants were at "relatively low" risk of cardiovascular disease. Anderson said future research should compare the diets in patients at higher risk for heart disease and should also explore "whether or not healthful versions of traditional diets around the world that emphasize fresh foods and limit sugars, saturated fats, and sodium can prevent and manage obesity and cardiovascular diseases."

Co-authors are Monica Dinu, MSc.; Giuditta Pagliai, MSc.; Francesca Cesari, MSc., Ph.D.; Anna Maria Gori, MSc.; Alice Sereni, MSc.; Matteo Becatti, MSc., Ph.D.; Claudia Fiorillo, MSc., Ph.D.; Rossella Marcucci, M.D., Ph.D.; and Alessandro Casini, M.D. Author disclosures are on the manuscript.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
• Available multimedia located on the right column of the release link: https:/
• After February 26, view the manuscript and editorial online
• For updates and new science from the Circulation journal follow @CircAHA

Statements and conclusions of study authors published in American Heart Association scientific journals are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the association's policy or position. The association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations and health insurance providers are available at http://www. .

The American Heart Association is devoted to saving people from heart disease and stroke - the two leading causes of death in the world. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat these diseases. The Dallas-based association is the nation's oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke. To learn more or to get involved, call 1.800.AHA.USA1, visit heart.org or call any of our offices around the country. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release noted “this research received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.” No conflicts of interest are identified in the published study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Dec. 5, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Using gene therapy, German researchers report that they managed to "correct" a malfunctioning gene responsible for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, a rare but devastating childhood disorder that leads to prolonged bleeding from even minor hits or scrapes, and also leaves these children vulnerable to certain cancers and dangerous infections.

However, one of the 10 kids in the study developed acute T-cell leukemia, apparently as a result of the viral vector that was used to insert the healthy gene. The boy is currently on chemotherapy, the study authors noted.

"This is a very good first step, but it's a little scary and we need to move to safer vectors," said Dr. Mary Ellen Conley, director of the Program in Genetic Immunodeficiencies at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn.

"The study shows proof-of-principle that gene therapy with stem cells in a genetic disorder like this has strong potential," added Paul Sanberg, a stem cell specialist who is director of the University of South Florida Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair in Tampa.

Neither Conley nor Sanberg were involved in the study, which is scheduled to be presented Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Hematology in Orlando, Fla.

According to Conley, children (mostly boys) with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) are born with an inherited genetic defect on the X chromosome that affects the number and size of platelets and makes the children remarkably susceptible to easy bleeding and infections, including different types of cancer.

Bone marrow transplants are the main treatment for the disorder which, if they succeed, basically cure the patient.

"They grow up, go to college and they cause problems," said Conley. "But they're not an easy group of patients to transplant."

Even if a good match is found, transplant recipients can go on to have more problems with infections, such as graft-versus-host disease, in which the body basically rejects the foreign elements.

"One of the long-lasting complications is the kids couldn't do this, they couldn't do that, they see themselves as different," Conley said. "Transplants are getting better but we need better therapy, there's no question."

In this study, the researchers inserted a healthy gene capable of producing WAS protein into hematopoietic stem cells (the "granddaddy" cells that give rise to different blood cells), then transferred these stem cells back into the patient using a viral vector. A viral vector is a virus that has been modified to deliver foreign genetic material into a cell.

In fact, the experiment was largely successful, with cells now able to produce WAS protein, resulting in increased platelet counts and improvement of some immune-system cells.

"This is a first step that says you can correct the disease but I think most people would look at it and say the risk of leukemia is something, and that, let's see if we can avoid that," said Conley, whose team at St. Jude is working on a therapy involving a different type of vector. "It's a good start, but I think we have better things coming down the road."

In other news from the conference, another group of German researchers have determined that people who donate peripheral blood stem cells or bone marrow to help save a life don't face any heightened risk of cancer.

Previously there had been some concern that drugs needed to get the stem cells out of the bone marrow and into the bloodstream where they could be accessed might pose a risk of leukemia.

The study was based on questionnaires returned from more than 12,500 donors, which also showed the donors tended to be in good health and were willing to donate again.

Another study found that the drug rituximab (Rituxan), used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and forms of leukemia and lymphoma, could greatly reduce graft-versus-host disease in stem cell transplant recipients.

The National Marrow Donor Program has more on Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included interviews with two independent experts who weren’t involved with the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Playing football can improve bone development in adolescent boys, new research shows.

In a study comparing adolescent footballers to swimmers, cyclists and a control group of boys not involved in regular sport, scientists at the University of Exeter found football led to significantly better bones after one year of training.

Adolescence is the key period for bone development, and poor development at this stage is linked to reduced peak bone mass (the amount of bone mass at the end of the skeletal maturation, around age 30), increased fracture risk and osteoporosis later in life.

Though swimming and cycling have proven health benefits, the scientists said their study "raises a question" about whether they are good for bone development due to the non-weight bearing training - and they say young swimmers and cyclists could benefit from more weight-bearing exercise in training regimes.

"Our research shows that playing football can improve bone development in comparison to swimming and cycling," said first author Dimitris Vlachopoulos, of Sport and Health Sciences at the University of Exeter.

"Though we focussed on aspiring professionals who played as much as nine hours a week, playing football for three hours a week might be enough for a substantial effect.

"We already knew exercise was key for bone growth, but here we clarify what type of exercise.

"Although we didn't study other sports, it's reasonable to suppose that weight-bearing, high-impact, high-intensity exercise like tennis, badminton, basketball and handball will have similar effects to football."

The year-long study, of 116 boys aged 12-14, took a variety of measures including bone mineral content (BMC).

BMC measurements were taken at the lumbar spine (lower back) and femoral neck (upper leg) - both key sites for both fractures and osteoporosis.

The results showed footballers had higher BMC than swimmers and cyclists after one year of sport-specific training.

For example, footballers' BMC was 7% higher than that of cyclists at the lumbar spine, and 5% higher at the femoral neck.

The research was funded by the EU via a Marie-Sklodowska-Curie fellowship awarded to principal investigator Dr Luis Gracia-Marco, also of the University of Exeter.

Dr Gracia-Marco said: "The sports we studied are the three most popular in the UK, and it's important to know what effects they have in relation to bone health.

"Adolescence is the key time for bone growth. Once a person reaches puberty, the next five years are vitally important in this respect."

The athletes in the study were all playing high-level sport - the footballers in Exeter City FC's youth setup, and the swimmers and cyclists at leading clubs in the South West.

The boys in the control group, though generally active, were not involved in regular sport.

Despite the many health benefits of cycling and swimming, the study found little difference in bone development between cyclists, swimmers and the control group.

"This raises a question about whether swimming and cycling are good for bone development," Dr Gracia Marco said.

"We now need to consider how to counteract the lack of bone growth stimulus caused by cycling and swimming, possibly by encouraging swimmers and cyclists to add weight-bearing exercise in their training."

One innovative aspect of the study was the measurement of bone texture of the lumbar spine using trabecular bone score (TBS) - the first use of this technique in adolescent athletes.

The paper, entitled: "Longitudinal Adaptations of Bone Mass, Geometry and Metabolism in Adolescent Male Athletes. The PRO-BONE Study", is published in the Journal of Bone and Mineral Research.

The research is part of a larger University of Exeter study called PRO-BONE.

Note to editors: Being a UK university, when we say "football" we mean the game otherwise known as soccer.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release notes that funding for the study came from a Marie Sklodowska-Curie fellowship, provided by the European Union. The researchers do not appear to have any conflicts of interest in connection with this study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ZURICH (Reuters) - Novartis will seek regulatory approval this year for a new kind of anti-inflammatory heart drug, though some experts fear fatal infection risks and a high price may overshadow the medicine’s limited benefits.

Keenly awaited clinical trial results released on Sunday showed heart-attack survivors on one of three doses of canakinumab were 15 percent less likely to suffer another major cardiac event than those on a placebo.

Novartis had said in June that the drug met its goal in the study but details were only unveiled at European Society of Cardiology meeting in Barcelona. One leading expert described the benefit as “modest”.

Patients getting canakinumab also suffered significantly more deaths from infections than those on placebo - but, on the positive side, they appeared to be at lower risk of cancer.

There was no significant difference in the rate of deaths from all causes between the placebo group and those on canakinumab.

“The modest absolute clinical benefit of canakinumab cannot justify its routine use in patients with previous myocardial infarction until we understand more about the efficacy and safety trade-offs and unless a price restructuring and formal cost-effectiveness evaluation supports it,” wrote Dr. Robert Harrington, chair of the Stanford University School of Medicine, in an editorial in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Canakinumab had stirred considerable scientific interest because it appears to finally deliver proof that fighting inflammation offers a promising new way to counter heart disease in patients who already get cholesterol-lowering treatment.

Subsequently, some analysts boosted their revenue estimates for the Novartis medicine into the billions of dollars, while awaiting the data announced on Sunday.

Canakinumab is already approved as Ilaris for rare autoimmune conditions.

Vas Narasimhan, Novartis’s head of global drug development, said the drugmaker plans to go to regulators in the fourth quarter to seek approval for canakinumab to treat heart-attack victims with high levels of inflammation.

He downplayed critics who said the benefit was small, saying that one large subgroup in the so-called Cantos trial had shown a 27 percent reduction in cardiovascular risk.

Novartis also plans to underscore canakinumab’s potential cancer fighting properties with the European Medicines Agency and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

That’s after an analysis of Cantos data found total cancer mortality among patients getting canakinumab was significantly lower than in those receiving the placebo.

Narasimhan, who said the company now plans to start separate cancer trials for canakinumab, said the drug could be particularly suitable for smokers with risks of both lung cancer and heart problems.

With the oncology findings promising but only preliminary, the company is planning additional studies in lung cancer starting next year, he said.

Ilaris now costs about $200,000 per patient annually for treating rare immune conditions and brings in some $400 million in yearly sales for the Swiss company, though its price is likely to be slashed should it win approval in the heart setting.

Novartis initially struggled with the sluggish launch of its last heart drug, the $4,500-per-year Entresto, so it is understandably concerned about the reception for canakinumab.

While Narasimhan said it was too early to discuss pricing, he argued so-called PCSK9 cholesterol drugs that cost about $14,000 annually should not be relied on as a yardstick.

“In view of the additional oncology findings, we don’t think you should just think about this as a cardiovascular drug,” Narasimhan said. “I don’t think you can necessarily just make comparisons to existing benchmarks, such as the PCSK9s.”

Even so, Tim Anderson, a Bernstein analyst, said the “marginal” data are not compelling enough to dispel what for Novartis will remain a pricing conundrum, should canakinumab’s approval be expanded for heart patients.

“If the company cuts the price of the product in its current orphan indications, then it instantly sacrifices sales which currently total about $400 million per year with the hope that future sales in a new CV setting will more than offset this,” Anderson said in a note.

“Some have wondered whether a particularly high-risk subgroup could be identified where canakinumab’s current price can be justified,” he said. “We are not hopeful here.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This story, which is more of a “business of medicine” story, uses a drug industry analyst source to good effect, and included commentary from the study’s accompanying editorial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — The first laser treatments used to treat skin conditions such as benign vascular birthmarks and port-wine stains were developed more than 40 years ago. Since then, clinicians and dermatologists have seen a rise in demand for minimally invasive laser-based treatments, including tattoo removal. However, it is difficult for the laser light, which is held at a distance from the skin, to be perfectly and selectively absorbed by only the targeted birthmark or tattoo. Now, researchers from the University of Missouri have developed instruments that transmit laser light into the tissue through direct contact. The techniques developed by the interdisciplinary team can be used by dermatologists and will reduce safety concerns in laser dermatology by improving laser transmission through surface layers of the skin.

Laser techniques come with risks, including eye damage. Open-air transmission, in which the clinician holds the laser at a distance from the patient, is typical during normal dermatological procedures and presents a hazard to both the patients’ and doctors’ eyes. Paul J.D. Whiteside, a doctoral candidate in the MU Division of Food Systems and Bioengineering, devised a system that will not only improve the process, but will be safer for both clinicians and patients.

“The system we developed uses ultrasonic pulsation in conjunction with a clinical laser to alter the properties of skin tissues during the procedure,” Whiteside said. “We’ve named the technique ‘sonoillumination,’ and we’re hopeful that the procedure will be available widely in the near future.”

Whiteside and his team, including adviser, Heather K. Hunt, an assistant professor of bioengineering in the MU College of Engineering, tested the sonoillumination system on porcine skin tissue samples. Using various amplitudes and pulses, the instruments they developed were tested on the samples and showed great promise for the clinical setting. Whiteside presented his technique to clinicians on April 9, 2017, at the annual conference of American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery (ASLMS).

“Pork skin samples are very close to human skin samples, so the initial results we saw are promising for human applications,” Hunt said. “‘Sonoillumination’ will be extremely beneficial for clinicians and the ASLMS presentation allowed us to demonstrate the system to the people who actually will be using the technology once it’s commercialized.”

Nicholas Golda, associate professor of dermatology and director of dermatology surgery at the MU School of Medicine, echoed the merits of the sonoillumination system and the effect it will have on dermatology.

“Our goal is to provide patients with safer, more effective treatment options that potentially lower the number of treatments needed,” Golda said. “This new technology may also provide physicians with a safer, more controllable option for treating patients.”

The team co-authored the paper, “Ultrasonic modulation of tissue optical properties in ex vivo porcine skin to improve transmitted transdermal laser intensity,” which recently was accepted for publication by the society’s journal, Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. The sonoillumination research was funded in part by a 2015 Fast Track grant from the University of Missouri System.

The team is in the planning stages of developing a start-up company to commercialize the technique. Products produced by Whiteside and the team highlight the University’s impact on the state’s economic development efforts, including commercialization of research conducted at Mizzou, workforce development and job growth, quality of life improvements for residents, and attracting corporations and businesses to the state. Over the last five years, companies commercializing MU technologies have secured hundreds of millions of dollars in investments and grants to advance their commercialization efforts. In 2016, the Office of Technology Management and Industry Relations reported that Mizzou received $14.9 million in revenue from more than 40 technology licenses.

The MU bioengineering department is jointly affiliated with College of Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources (CAFNR) and the College of Engineering.

Editor’s Note: For more information on the patent application for sonoillumination, please see: https://www.google.com/patents/US20150351841
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We applaud the inclusion of a link to a patent application, which both highlights a potential benefit to the researchers and provides a great deal more detail about the device itself. The application states that the patent has been assigned to the University of Missouri, but it is reasonable to assume that commercialization of this device would benefit the careers of the researchers. The release says the research was funded by a University of Missouri program called FastTrack, which is intended to support the development and commercialization of technologies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 6, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Enduring dietary wisdom -- that polyunsaturated vegetable fats are better for your heart than saturated animal fats -- may be turned on its head by a fresh analysis of a nearly 50-year-old study.

The reasoning has been that a diet rich in omega-6 polyunsaturated fats lowers cholesterol, and is therefore good for heart health. But an updated look at the study indicates that heart disease patients who follow this advice may actually increase their risk for death.

The original "Sydney Diet Heart Study," was initially conducted between 1966 and 1973, at a time when the cholesterol-lowering benefits of all polyunsaturated vegetable acids (PUFAs) were touted with a broad brush.

But in the ensuing years, researchers have come to understand that not all PUFAs are alike, with key biochemical differences -- and perhaps varying cardiovascular impacts -- observed among multiple types of omega-3s (found in fish oils) and omega-6 linoleic acids.

"There is more than one type of polyunsaturated fatty acid," explained Dr. Christopher Ramsden, who headed the re-analysis and is a clinical investigator with the laboratory of membrane biophysics and biochemistry at the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, part of the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

"And so, we were interested in trying to evaluate just one of these compounds, linoleic acid, by looking at this old trial using modern statistical methods, and also by re-including some original data that had gone missing from the first analysis," Ramsden explained.

The findings appeared online Feb. 5 in the BMJ.

The 458 male participants in the original study had been between the ages of 30 and 59 at enrollment, and all had a history of heart disease, with most having survived a heart attack.

The men were placed into two groups. The first group was told to consume linoleic acid, in the form of safflower oil and safflower oil polyunsaturated margarine, at levels equal to 15 percent of total calorie intake. This, said Ramsden, is equivalent to roughly twice the amount that Americans currently consume.

While omega-3 consumption was not affected, the men were also asked to lower their saturated fat intake so that it made up less than 10 percent of their diets. They did so by substituting safflower oil for animal fats, common margarines and shortening oils, salad dressings, baked goods and other products, according to the study.

The second group continued their routine nutritional habits, and both groups kept food diaries and underwent regular assessments during the three-year-plus study period.

By newly crunching all the original data the NIH team found that, compared to the no-dietary-change group, the linoleic acid group faced a higher risk of death, from both heart disease specifically as well as from all causes overall.

In turn, Ramsden's investigators included their Sydney conclusions in a new review of all studies to date exploring the impact of omega-6 consumption.

Despite the fact the American Heart Association (AHA) currently recommends that 5 percent to 10 percent of all calories come from polyunsaturated fat (principally from omega-6), the NIH team found no evidence to support the notion that linoleic acid confers health benefits. The review highlighted the possibility that boosting omega-6 consumption may actually increase the risk for developing heart disease.

Ramsden acknowledged that the Sydney study had been narrowly focused on a specific group of people: middle-aged men with a history of heart disease, who were asked to consume linoleic acid in quantities far exceeding both AHA guidelines and the dietary habits of most Americans.

"So, yes, one of the limitations of this kind of study is always the question of its generalizability to other populations," he cautioned.

But he also suggested that his team's rigorous look back offered valuable insights into how nutritional science has evolved.

"What to many people had at one time seemed pretty straightforward in the 1960s has turned out to form a much less black-and-white picture," he said. "Polyunsaturates are not just involved in cholesterol-lowering. They may also be involved in inflammation, oxidation or clotting. So, it's a very complex picture. And though our goal is not to come up with diet advice, it may be that our conclusions will have important implications for nutritional guidelines."

On that score, American Heart Association spokesperson Penny Kris-Etherton, a registered dietician and professor of nutrition at Pennsylvania State University, suggested that the controversy concerning linoleic acid is not new and will continue.

"But I don't think this is going to change AHA recommendations," she said. "Because there's very robust evidence showing the cardiovascular benefit of linoleic acid. The AHA science advisory board did not just look at one study or a couple of studies. There are lots of studies that form the basis for their guidelines."

"So, I don't think anybody should get alarmed and change their diet," Kris-Etherton said. "Those who are concerned should wait for more research to come out on this topic before taking any drastic measures to change their eating habits in a way that could be harmful."

For more on AHA guidelines regarding linoleic acid, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes comments from an American Heart Association expert, who provides some common-sense advice. It is worth noting, though, that the AHA spokesperson quoted in this story did not hint at the AHA “considering re-evaluating its dietary recommendations” as did the AHA spokesperson in the competing TIME story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This website is archived for historical purposes and is no longer being maintained or updated.

Allowing more basic emergency medical service (EMS) staff to administer naloxone could reduce drug overdose deaths that involve opioids, according to a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) study, “Disparity in Naloxone Administration by Emergency Medical Service Providers and the Burden of Drug Overdose in Rural Communities,” published in the American Journal of Public Health.

In 2013, more than 16,000 deaths in the United States involved prescription opioids, and more than 8,000 others were related to heroin. Naloxone is a prescription drug that can reverse the effects of prescription opioid and heroin overdose, and can be life-saving if administered in time.

According to the study findings, advanced EMS staff were more likely than basic EMS staff to administer naloxone. A majority of states have adopted national guidelines that prohibit basic EMS staff from administering the drug as an injection. As of 2014, only 12 states allowed basic EMS staff to administer naloxone for a suspected opioid overdose; all 50 states allow advanced EMS staff to administer the overdose reversal treatment.

“Opioid overdose deaths are devastating families and communities, especially in rural areas,” said CDC Director Tom Frieden, M.D., M.P.H. “Many of these deaths can be prevented by improving prescribing practices to prevent opioid addiction, expanding the use of medication-assisted treatment, and increasing use of naloxone for suspected overdoses. Having trained EMS staff to administer naloxone in rural areas will save lives.”

To reduce opioid overdose deaths, particularly in rural areas, CDC recommends expanding training on the administration of naloxone to all emergency service staff, and helping basic EMS personnel meet the advanced certification requirements.

“Naloxone can be given nasally to a person suspected of overdose, allowing basic EMS staff to administer the drug without injection,” said CDC Senior Health Scientist Mark Faul, Ph.D., M.A. “Naloxone is non-addictive, and expanding training on how to administer the drug can help basic emergency medical service staff reverse an opioid overdose and save more lives.”

National Emergency Medicine Service Information System data for 2012 were reviewed to better understand factors associated with naloxone administration, including demographic data, 911 call information, and details about the scene of an injury or illness as reported by EMS staff.

The findings indicate naloxone was most likely to be administered to women, people between the ages of 20 and 29, and people living in suburban areas.

In general, the rate of opioid overdose death was 45 percent higher in rural areas compared with urban areas. The use of naloxone by rural EMS staff, however, was only 22.5 percent higher when compared with urban EMS naloxone use.

Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell has made addressing opioid abuse, dependence, and overdose a priority and work is underway at multiple HHS agencies on this important issue. HHS’ Health Resources Services Administration recently released a grant opportunity aimed at reducing opioid overdose deaths in rural communities through funding for communities to purchase naloxone and train health care professionals and emergency medical staff on its use.

CDC works with states, communities, and prescribers to prevent opioid misuse and overdose by tracking and monitoring the epidemic and helping states scale up effective programs. CDC also improves patient safety by equipping health care providers with data, tools, and guidance so they can make informed treatment decisions. Learn more at www.cdc.gov/DrugOverdose.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It’s clear that the release comes from the CDC, and the release links back to the CDC website, which makes it clear for anyone who might not know that the CDC is funded by the federal government (your tax dollars).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 1, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A drug widely used to treat high blood sugar in type 2 diabetics may hold some promise in the prevention of tobacco-induced lung cancer, according to extremely preliminary findings in a mouse study.

In the September issue of Cancer Prevention Research, researchers report that metformin was associated with a substantial reduction (up to 73 percent) in the number of tumors mice developed when they were given a common carcinogen found in tobacco.

Despite the fact that there have been no randomized controlled trials on whether metformin really can prevent cancer, researchers expressed excitement both over this animal study and previous epidemiological evidence pointing to this possibility.

Metformin (originally marketed as Glucophage, though it is now available as an inexpensive generic) has been in use for more than two decades and is currently prescribed to 40 million Americans.

"This is a very safe agent and has been around for a while," said Cancer Prevention Research editor-in-chief Dr. Scott Lippman, chair of thoracic head and neck medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, at a Wednesday news conference.

"The evidence in diabetic humans is very convincing and very strong," added Dr. Phillip Dennis, a senior investigator with the U.S. National Cancer Institute and senior author on the lung cancer paper. "Almost every epidemiological study I can think of found a decreased cancer incidence in diabetics taking metformin. The reduction is real and ranges from 30 to 70 percent."

The researchers thought metformin's possible cancer-lowering properties suggested the need for clinical trials to investigate whether the drug might help prevent tumors in smokers at high risk of developing cancer. Others believed that the finding might influence the choice of drugs in people with diabetes.

"All other things being equal, many diabetics face a choice of oral agents, and early evidence that metformin may have an effect on the oncology side may increasingly play a role in decision-making," said Dr. Michael Pollack, professor of medicine and oncology at McGill University in Montreal. "We can't ignore this, but we can't say we have FDA [U.S. Food and Drug Administration] approval for metformin for cancer indications."

Metformin was developed from the French lilac plant, known in the Middle Ages to control excess urination, a symptom of uncontrolled diabetes. The drug was approved by the FDA in the mid-1990s.

The study by Dennis and colleagues looked at mice that had been genetically engineered to be susceptible to lung tumors.

Mice taking metformin in their drinking water had 34 percent fewer tumors than those not taking metformin. And when the drug was administered by injection, the improvement seen was 73 percent.

Dennis stated that a likely mechanism of action resides in the liver "and specifically the hormones [including insulin] that are released." Insulin may have a relationship with cancer.

"It's most likely that metformin is working by reducing insulin and IGF1 [insulin-like growth factor] levels in the body," said Lewis Cantley, director of the Cancer Center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, and co-author of an accompanying perspective piece.

It's also possible, however, that metformin is working more directly on the tumor process, the researchers said.

A second study, this one a randomized controlled trial involving a very small number of humans (23), found that patients with an early form of colorectal cancer who were treated with metformin did see a decrease in possible cancer-related growth, compared with participants not taking the drug.

"These patients were not diabetic, so they didn't necessarily have high insulin levels to begin with but lower insulin levels," Cantley explained.

This adds credence to the idea that metformin's value is in its ability to lower overall insulin levels in the body, Cantley said.

At this point, no one knows if metformin is safe in non-diabetic populations but some clinical trials are starting to look at the issue, Lippman said.

And, pointed out Dr. Lucas Wong, associate professor of internal medicine at Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine and co-director of the Gastrointestinal Cancer Program at Scott & White in Temple, Texas, while the new research is "interesting and thought-provoking, what's proven in humans is totally another level."

The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more on metformin.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several sources interviewed – including one who appears to be independent of this research. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Strobe lighting has been shown to reduce levels of the toxic proteins seen in Alzheimer’s disease, in findings that raise the tantalising possibility of future non-invasive treatments for the disease.

The study, in mice, found that exposure to flickering light stimulated brain waves, called gamma oscillations, that are known to be disturbed in Alzheimer’s patients. Boosting this synchronous brain activity appeared to act as a cue for the brain’s immune cells, prompting them to absorb the sticky amyloid proteins that are the most visible hallmarks of the disease in the brain’s of people with Alzheimer’s.

The authors caution that a “big if” remains over whether the findings would be replicated in humans – and whether cognitive deficits as well as visible symptoms of the disease would be improved.

“If humans behave similarly to mice in response to this treatment, I would say the potential is just enormous, because it’s so non-invasive, and it’s so accessible,” said Li-Huei Tsai, director of the Picower Institute for Learning and Memory at MIT, and the paper’s senior author.

Alzheimer’s research has faced a number of major setbacks – most recently the failure of Eli Lily’s drug trial – after promising results in rodents did not translate into clinical improvements for patients.

The latest intervention, scientists predict, should be quicker and cheaper to confirm in humans than pharmaceuticals, which typically take more than a decade to develop and assess for safety before the clinical efficacy is even examined.

The study, published on Wednesday in the journal Nature, hinges on the observation that Alzheimer’s patients show a loss of synchronised brain activity, known as gamma oscillations, which is linked to attention and memory.



To restore the activity, the scientists first used mice that had been genetically engineered such that the neurons that generate gamma activity in the brain were sensitive to light. The technique, known as optogenetics, allowed the scientists to artificially cause groups of neurons to fire in unison by pulsing light into the brains of the mice.



After an hour of stimulation, the researchers found a roughly 50% reduction in the levels of beta amyloid proteins in the hippocampus, the brain’s memory centre. Closer inspection showed that the amyloid had been taken up by microglia, the brain’s immune cells.

In a healthy brain, microglia act as chemical rubbish collectors, surveying the local environment, clearing up unwanted compounds, but in Alzheimer’s these cells can lose this function and switch into an inflammatory state in which they secrete toxic compounds instead. Strengthening gamma oscillations appeared to switch the microglia back into a productive state.

Next, the scientist showed that gamma oscillations could also be stimulated non-invasively in the visual brain region simply by exposing the mice to a flickering light. At 40Hz the flicker of the light is barely discernible and would be “not offensive at all” for a person to have in the background.

After being given one hour of flickering light each day for a week, the scientists saw a 60% reduction of harmful amyloid plaques in the brains of the mice.

Ed Mann, an associate professor of neuroscience at the University of Oxford, said: “I was surprised, and it’s exciting, that such a simple stimulus can target a molecular pathway and have such an effect in an hour.”

Questions remain, however, about whether boosting gamma oscillations and sweeping amyloid plaques out of the visual brain region would help with memory, which is centred in the hippocampus, or broader cognitive abilities.

David Reynolds, chief scientific officer at Alzheimer’s Research UK, said: “It is conceivable that changing brain cell rhythms could be a future target for therapies, but researchers will need to explore how light flickering approaches could not only reduce amyloid in the visual area of the brain but in those areas more commonly affected in Alzheimer’s.”

The authors suggest that it may be possible to take a multi-sensory approach, using a combination of flashing lights and vibrating chairs. Tsai and Ed Boyden, a colleague at MIT and co-author, have started a company called Cognito Therapeutics to pursue tests in humans.

There are 850,000 people with dementia in Britain and this figure is expected to reach 1 million by 2025. Earlier this year, dementia overtook heart disease as the leading cause of death in England and Wales.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The senior author of the study is cited (and her quote came from an unattributed news release, see last criterion, below), but so are other researchers. Independent sources appear to have been consulted. The story also notes that the author has formed a company to pursue this, which is an important conflict of interest disclosure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
He said more research was needed, but for now, “I think the market is running way out in front of the science.”

Scientists agree that DHA, naturally transmitted to a fetus through the placenta in the last half of pregnancy, is important, probably to visual and brain development. Several studies indicate that babies born prematurely receive too little DHA, and some studies have found that premature babies fed DHA after birth show better cognitive performance or visual coordination later on than preemies who aren’t given DHA.

But the new study, which mainly assessed full-term babies, found no cognitive difference at 18 months whether mothers received DHA supplements or placebos. The lead researcher, Dr. Maria Makrides of the University of Adelaide in Australia, said this suggested that full-term babies already get enough DHA in the womb, and that “there’s no extra boost” from getting more.

Nonetheless, several experts said they would continue to support taking DHA in pregnancy, especially since it is safe and apparently has few downsides. They cited a smaller 2003 Norwegian study that found I.Q. increases at age 4, although no cognitive benefit was seen in infants or 7-year-olds.

That study’s lead author, Dr. Ingrid Helland of Oslo University Hospital, said that perhaps the benefit shown at age 4 existed at 7 but was difficult to identify amid other developmental factors. She said babies in her study might have received more DHA than those in this study. Dr. Oken said the new study might have shown no benefit in 18-month-olds because effects in infants might be “hard to measure” or “it may be that the benefit of DHA is not as important as when you’re 4.”

Dr. Makrides’s team plans assessments at 4 and 7. Dr. Jatinder Bhatia, a neonatologist heading the nutrition committee of the American Academy of Pediatrics, said that unless further studies showed no benefit as children got older, he would continue recommending DHA, now in many prenatal vitamins, because “I’m not convinced at this time that we should reverse course.”

Much about DHA is unknown. Its effect in supplements for children and adults is being studied, as well as whether supplements offer the same benefit as DHA-rich fish, like salmon.

Some studies, including the new report, suggest DHA supplementation in pregnancy reduces the likelihood of premature birth. And the new study showed small reductions in postpartum depression in women with histories or high risk of depression. Dr. Scott Stuart, a University of Iowa psychiatry and psychology professor, said his pregnant patients with mild to moderate depression had improved when taking DHA while seeing a counselor.

“There’s no harm that we know of at all, in contrast to many antidepressants,” he said. “And it might be of some help.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There were several independent sources quoted/cited in the story. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two new studies add substantial weight to one side of a long-running controversy over whether to give antibiotics to young children suffering from ear infections.

The "wait and see" approach has been enshrined in current guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics. It's based on a slew of studies over the past couple of decades indicating that most children with ear infections get better without antibiotics. Some researchers also worry that too many prescriptions are fueling resistance to the drugs.

But the new studies, from the United States and Finland, come down firmly on the side of early antibiotic therapy for kids under age 2 or 3. Both studies, which appear today in the New England Journal of Medicine, find these kids get over painful ear infections faster, and have less severe symptoms, if they get prompt treatment with Augmentin, an inexpensive antibiotic often used to treat respiratory infections.

But there's a big "if." Study authors and other experts say doctors should be sure the child really is suffering from an ear infection before writing that prescription.

Much of the confusion, experts say, has been caused by studies that weren't careful enough about the diagnosis. If many children in prior studies didn't really have ear infections, then it's not surprising the antibiotics didn't work for them, says Dr. Jerome Klein of Boston University, who wrote an editorial that accompanies the new studies.

But here's the rub – diagnosing ear infections in very young children, who tend to squirm, is not easy.

To do a correct diagnosis, says Dr. Alejandro Hoberman of the University of Pittsburgh, the doctor needs to be able to see the child's eardrum, which may mean cleaning out earwax first. If the eardrum is red and bulging outward, that's a strong sign of a middle-ear infection. The bulge is most likely caused by pus from a bacterial infection that needs antibiotic treatment.

"It is a two- and sometimes a three-person operation to see the eardrum," says Hoberman, who led the US study.

Dr. David Spiro of the Oregon Health Sciences University is an advocate of the wait-and-see approach to treating ear infections. He coauthored a 2006 study that supported it. But Spiro thinks "the pendulum will swing the other way" – that is, toward immediate antibiotic treatment – because of the new studies.

So what's a concerned parent to do? Hoberman says they can cut through some of the fog by asking doctors if their child has the telltale "bulging eardrum" sign that indicates a true ear infection.

And, he notes, they shouldn't be afraid to press their pediatrician. "How bulging is the eardrum? Is it really bulging this time? Or does it look like fluid in the ear? It's OK to ask the question," Hoberman said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does a great job using independent experts who provided a reasoned, thoughtful discussion of the findings. The one omission was the failure in the blog post or the radio piece to report that two of the authors on the US study had received funding from the drug company that makes the antibiotic being studied: GlaxoSmithKline. However, the drug is available as a generic product (especially the suspension used in kids) and the NIAID funded the study, so we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LA JOLLA, CA – May 29, 2017 – Scientists at The Scripps Research Institute (TSRI) have given new superpowers to a lifesaving antibiotic called vancomycin, an advance that could eliminate the threat of antibiotic-resistant infections for years to come. The researchers, led by Dale Boger, co-chair of TSRI’s Department of Chemistry, discovered a way to structurally modify vancomycin to make an already-powerful version of the antibiotic even more potent.

“Doctors could use this modified form of vancomycin without fear of resistance emerging,” said Boger, whose team announced the finding today in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

The original form of vancomycin is an ideal starting place for developing better antibiotics. The antibiotic has been prescribed by doctors for 60 years, and bacteria are only now developing resistance to it. This suggests bacteria already have a hard time overcoming vancomycin’s original “mechanism of action,” which works by disrupting how bacteria form cell walls.

Boger called vancomycin “magical” for its proven strength against infections, and previous studies by Boger and his colleagues at TSRI had shown that it is possible to add two modifications to vancomycin to make it even more potent. “With these modifications, you need less of the drug to have the same effect,” Boger said.

The new study shows that scientists can make a third modification—which interferes with a bacterium’s cell wall in a new way—with promising results. Combined with the previous modifications, this alteration gives vancomycin a 1,000-fold increase in activity, meaning doctors would need to use less of the antibiotic to fight infection.

The discovery makes this version of vancomycin the first antibiotic to have three independent mechanisms of action. “This increases the durability of this antibiotic,” said Boger. “Organisms just can’t simultaneously work to find a way around three independent mechanisms of action. Even if they found a solution to one of those, the organisms would still be killed by the other two.”

Tested against Enterococci bacteria, the new version of vancomycin killed both vancomycin-resistant Enterococci and the original forms of Enterococci.

The next step in this research is to design a way to synthesize the modified vancomycin using fewer steps in the lab, as the current method takes 30 steps. But Boger calls this the “easy part” of the project, compared with the challenge of designing the molecule in the first place.

Even if the process isn’t streamlined, Boger believes the new vancomycin’s lifesaving powers make its production valuable. “Antibiotics are total cures for bacterial infections,” said Boger. “Making this molecule is important, even by the current approach, if the failure of antibiotics continues.”

In addition to Boger, authors of the study, “Peripheral modifications of [Ψ[CH2NH]Tpg4]vancomycin with added synergistic mechanisms of action provide durable and potent antibiotics,” included first author Akinori Okano and Nicholas A. Isley, both of TSRI.

The study was supported by the National Institutes of Health (grants F32 GM114948 and CA041101).

The Scripps Research Institute (TSRI) is one of the world's largest independent, not-for-profit organizations focusing on research in the biomedical sciences. TSRI is internationally recognized for its contributions to science and health, including its role in laying the foundation for new treatments for cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, hemophilia, and other diseases. An institution that evolved from the Scripps Metabolic Clinic founded by philanthropist Ellen Browning Scripps in 1924, the institute now employs more than 2,500 people on its campuses in La Jolla, CA, and Jupiter, FL, where its renowned scientists—including two Nobel laureates and 20 members of the National Academies of Science, Engineering or Medicine—work toward their next discoveries. The institute's graduate program, which awards PhD degrees in biology and chemistry, ranks among the top ten of its kind in the nation. In October 2016, TSRI announced a strategic affiliation with the California Institute for Biomedical Research (Calibr), representing a renewed commitment to the discovery and development of new medicines to address unmet medical needs. For more information, see www.scripps.edu.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding source is clearly identified, and there does not appear to be a conflict of interest for the researchers. The release would have been stronger if it had clearly stated that there was no conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, March 27, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- When taken as a supplement, unroasted -- or green -- coffee-bean extract can help people shed pounds, according to a small preliminary study.

The research, which is being presented this week at the national meeting of the American Chemical Society in San Diego, involved just 16 overweight and obese patients who were given daily doses of green coffee extract in capsule form.

All the patients were instructed to maintain their usual dietary habits, while the study team monitored them for weight loss over a period of nearly six months.

The apparent result: Daily consumption of a small amount of green coffee extract translated into a nearly 11 percent drop in body weight, on average.

The study was conducted in India and funded by Applied Food Sciences, the American manufacturer of two green-coffee-extract products. It has not been published in a journal, and therefore has yet to undergo peer review.

Supplements of this kind, however, are not subject to the rigorous U.S. Food and Drug Administration safety and efficacy testing typically applied to all pharmaceutical medications.

"This was indeed a small study," acknowledged corresponding study author Joe Vinson, a professor of chemistry at the University of Scranton, in Pennsylvania, but he noted that prior research has been conducted in both France and Japan. "Those studies demonstrated that patients experienced somewhat mild weight loss. But here, with higher extract doses than have been used before, the patients experienced what I would call rather large weight loss."

"While this of course needs to be confirmed with follow-up, I do think the subject is absolutely worthy of further exploration," Vinson added.

Vinson said his team was not focused on the weight-loss impact of caffeine as much as that of unprocessed, unroasted coffee's primary ingredient: chlorogenic acid.

"That's the main natural compound in unroasted coffee, and roasted coffee has much, much less of it than unprocessed coffee," Vinson said. "So we're not talking about something that is interchangeable with the coffee we drink," which is produced by roasting beans at a temperature between 464 and 482 degrees Fahrenheit.

Green coffee-bean extracts are sold online at prices ranging from about $10 to $20 for 60 capsules.

The study was broken into three six-week sections. In one section, study participants, who were all between the ages of 22 and 26, consumed a capsule filled with 700 milligrams of green coffee extract. In the second section, participants took a 1,050-milligram capsule. The third section had participants taking a placebo. Each patient ultimately cycled through each section.

While maintaining their pre-study dietary and exercise regimens, the patients lost an average of 17 pounds by the study's close. On average, patients lost 10.5 percent and 16 percent of their body weight and body fat, respectively.

"Basically, there was steady weight loss, without side effects, while the active green coffee extract was being taken at either dose," Vinson said.

A follow-up study involving 60 patients is now in the planning stages.

Lona Sandon, a registered dietitian and assistant professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Texas Southwestern in Dallas, cautioned that the study is short on specifics, making it difficult to draw any conclusions.

"First of all, you need more than 16 people to have any statistical significance attached to these findings," Sandon said. "And we really have no idea how this might be working. For example, the patients were allowed to continue with their regular diet. But did this extract in any way influence their hunger and what they wanted to eat, and then what they actually ate? We don't know. What we have here is basically just a hypothesis that there's something about this compound that could be helpful."

"Just because it might cause weight loss doesn't mean it's healthy," she warned. "Because supplements are not regulated as drugs, they can be put on the market with no safety or efficacy testing. They don't even necessarily have to be tested for purity."

"That means that in the past, various weight-loss supplements have been found to contain weight-loss drugs or other drugs at higher doses than what would be allowed in a prescription dose," Sandon added. "So while people might have this perception that it's all natural since it's coming from a coffee bean, with supplements in general it's still a buyer-beware market."

For more on dietary supplements, visit the Office of Dietary Supplements of the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent expert commented on the wisdom (or lack thereof) of basing this story on a 16-person study described only in a yet-to-be-presented meeting abstract. It also mentions that the study was funded by the supplement manufacturer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People who can’t control cholesterol with diet, exercise and statin drugs could soon have a new option.

According to a new study, a medication, ancetrapib, appears to simultaneously raise the level of HDL – sometimes called “good” cholesterol- and to lower the level of LDL, or “bad” cholesterol.

HDL cholesterol is not fully understood, but essentially sucks cholesterol out of cells, to be flushed from the body through the liver.

The study was sponsored by Merck, the drug’s manufacturer. It was published in the New England Journal of Medicine and results were to be presented Wednesday at a meeting of American Heart Association in Chicago.

The so-called DEFINE trial involved 1,623 patients with coronary heart disease or at high risk for it. All were taking statins to lower LDL cholesterol. Roughly half also received ancetrapib, while half got a placebo. On average, within 24 weeks patients getting ancetrapib saw LDL levels drop by nearly 40 percent compared with the placebo group, while their HDL levels rose by 138 percent. There were no significant side effects.

If the same benefit were seen in all patients at risk of heart disease – far from a sure thing – it would translate to hundreds of thousands of fewer deaths and heart attacks over a five-year period, according to Dr. Christopher Cannon, the lead study author and a cardiologist at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

“It’s an amazing result,” said Dr. Robert Eckel of the University of Colorado, a past president of the American Heart Association. “It’s like a rocket that landed on Jupiter, rather than the moon.” Still, Eckel warned it’s too soon to say whether ancetrapib would actually prevent disease over the long run.

There’s ample reason for caution. A similar medication, torcetrapib, was considered promising four years ago, but was shelved by Pfizer after studies found it actually raised blood pressure and the risk of heart problems and death.

Dr. PK Shah, cardiologist at the Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute, said that he’s encouraged by DEFINE but that some of the details give him pause. “It appears to be safe and to not raise blood pressure,” Shah told CNN, “but it’s not a slam-dunk.” For one thing, despite improved cholesterol levels, patients did not see less inflammation in their blood vessels. Inflammation is a sign of damage from cholesterol.

To try to provide final answers, Merck is launching a study – called REVEAL – to follow 30,000 people, in several countries, over four years. The first patients will be enrolled in April, according to Dr. Rory Collins of Oxford University, where the research will be overseen.

Lee Davies, a Merck spokesman, said the company is not likely to seek FDA approval until those results are in, most likely in 2015. By then, results will also be in on a large study of a similar drug, dalcetrapib, made by Merck’s competitor, Roche.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 



This is a strong point of the story. It offers readers comments from several independent experts who highlight some of the key questions that still need to be investigated. (However, the story leaves all the caveats out of the lead paragraphs, so readers have to dig down to find the vital context.) It also points out that the trial was sponsored by the company developing this drug.
The story should have pointed out that the lead researcher has financial ties to this drug company and others, including board membership and grants.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new migraine drug that can halve the length of attacks has been hailed as “the start of real change” in how the condition is treated.

Erenumab, a laboratory-made antibody that blocks a neural brain pathway called CGRP, is the first drug in 20 years proven to prevent migraine attacks.

Phase three trial data on nearly 1,000 patients showed that it typically cut between three and four “migraine days” per month. In half the patients treated, migraine duration was reduced at least by half.

Migraines are characterised by an intense, throbbing headache, sensitivity to light and noise, nausea, vomiting, low energy, and visual disturbances. Attacks can last anything from four to 72 hours.

Each year more than 8.5 million people in the UK are thought to experience migraine – more than the number affected by asthma, diabetes and epilepsy combined.

The condition is linked to depression and sick days caused by migraine are estimated to cost the UK economy more than £2bn per year.

The trial, called Strive, compared patients taking erenumab for six months with others given a non-active placebo dummy drug. 



The research revealed that by months four to six, at least a 50% reduction in mean migraine days per month was achieved for just over 43% of patients injected under the skin with 70-mg of erenumab each month, while half of patients injected with the higher dose of 140-mg had such results. However, those given a placebo also saw benefits, with 26.6% of participants in this group experiencing such a reduction.



Lead investigator Prof Peter Goadsby, from King’s College hospital, London, said: “Strive … represents an incredibly important step forward for migraine understanding and migraine treatment.”

The findings, reported in the New England Journal of Medicine, clearly showed that blocking the CGRP pathway could reduce the impact of migraine, he said. “The results of Strive represent a real transition for migraine patients from poorly understood, re-purposed treatments, to a specific migraine-designed therapy.”

Simon Evans, chief executive of the charity Migraine Action, said: “Migraine is too often trivialised as just a headache when, in reality, it can be a debilitating, chronic condition that can destroy lives. The effects can last for hours, even days in many cases.

“An option that can prevent migraine and that is well tolerated is therefore sorely needed, and we hope that this marks the start of real change in how this condition is treated and perceived.” 



“Broadly speaking I think this is a very interesting study and I think it is a good step forward for the field and I think it is a good day for migraine sufferers,” said professor Zameel Cader, Director of the Oxford Headache Centre who was not involved in the research, pointing out that the results were on a par with currently available therapies for migraine.

“Placebo responses [in migraine studies] are quite high and I think that is partly due to the subjective nature of pain and because of the strong psychological effects that being treated have on that experience of pain and those symptoms,” he said, adding that injections generally result in an even stronger placebo effect than tablets.



Cader said that he too was looking at running trials using antibodies, and said he was excited about the approach since it might result in fewer side effects than current therapies, and would mean individuals would not have to remember to take a table every day.

“This is probably the first example of a migraine preventing drug that was rationally designed, rather than serendipitously found,” he added.

Amgen and Novartis, the codevelopers of erenumab, funded the trial, while Amgen also supplied the drug and conducted the data analyses.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Many news stories fail this test, but this one shines: Not only does the article cite an expert who wasn’t involved in the study, but it also discloses that the drugmakers of erenumab — Amgen and Novartis — funded the study, supplied the drug, and did the data analyses. (One thing the story missed, though: The first draft of the study was put together by a company-funded writer.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a finding that challenges the conventional wisdom about the risks of some hormones used in menopause, a major government study has found that years after using estrogen-only therapy, certain women had a markedly reduced risk of breast cancer and heart attack.

The research, part of the landmark Women’s Health Initiative study, is likely to surprise women and their doctors, who for years have heard frightening news about the risks of hormone therapy. But most of those fears are related to the use of a combination of two hormones, estrogen and progestin, which are prescribed to relieve hot flashes and other symptoms of menopause, and have been shown to increase a woman’s risk of breast cancer.

The new findings, reported Tuesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association, come from 10,739 women in the Women’s Health Initiative study who had previously had a hysterectomy, the surgical removal of the uterus. Nationwide, about one-third of women in their 50s have had a hysterectomy.

The Women’s Health Initiative was begun in 1991 by the National Institutes of Health as a sweeping investigation of hormone use and other health issues of postmenopausal women.



While most women in the hormone study were taking combination hormone therapy, women without a uterus took estrogen alone or a placebo for about six years and were followed for nearly 11 years. The estrogen-only group was not given progestin, which is prescribed only to protect the uterus from the harmful effects of estrogen. Although all the women in the estrogen study stopped using the treatment in 2004, the investigators have continued to monitor their health, as is typical in large clinical trials.

The most surprising new finding relates to breast cancer. The women with hysterectomies who used estrogen alone had a 23 percent lower risk for breast cancer compared with those who had taken a placebo. This is in stark contrast to the higher risk of breast cancer shown in the estrogen-progestin part of the trial.

“The decreased risk of breast cancer in this group is something we totally didn’t expect when we started the W.H.I. hormone therapy trials,” said Andrea Z. LaCroix, the study’s lead author and a professor of epidemiology at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. “This study differentiates estrogen alone from estrogen and progestin in a very big way. I hope it gets across to women, because we are not reversing ourselves.”

Indeed, the investigators emphasized that the results do not change recommendations concerning combination hormone therapy for the two-thirds of menopausal women who still have a uterus. The Women’s Health Initiative data have consistently shown that the combination of estrogen and progestin raises breast cancer risk, and that the treatment should be used only to relieve severe menopause symptoms, using the lowest dose for the shortest possible time.

But the data are reassuring for millions of middle-aged women without a uterus who take estrogen to relieve hot flashes and other menopause symptoms.

An accompanying editorial in the journal was skeptical about the results, arguing that the design of the initiative, which is skewed toward older women and stopped all forms of hormone treatment after several years of use, does not match the way doctors typically prescribe treatment to women in their 50s at the onset of menopause.

Dr. Graham Colditz, an author of the editorial and professor of surgery at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, said he thought data collected from observational studies that show a higher risk of breast cancer associated with estrogen use were more reliable than the data gathered from the Women’s Health Initiative clinical trial.

“The finding doesn’t reflect how hormones are used in the U.S. at the moment,” Dr. Colditz said.

The trial has, however, been held up for years as the gold standard for medical research, and its findings linking combination hormones to breast cancer and heart problems led to significant changes in the way doctors around the world treated menopause.

A major caveat in interpreting the new estrogen data is that the study used conjugated equine estrogens, which are estrogen compounds derived from the urine of pregnant mares and marketed by Wyeth Pharmaceuticals under the brand Premarin. The brand has fallen out of favor with many women who are choosing treatments that contain estradiol, which is chemically similar to a woman’s natural estrogen. It is not known whether the benefits of estrogen shown in the Women’s Health Initiative would be replicated using a different type of estrogen.

Nobody knows why estrogen treatment alone appeared to lower breast cancer risk in the study, but one explanation may be that in menopausal women with low levels of natural estrogen, the effects of estrogen drugs induce cell death in existing tumors. Nobody is suggesting that women start using estrogen to prevent breast cancer, but the finding opens a potentially new avenue of research in the prevention of the disease.

“We need to look closely at these findings to see if we can learn more about ways to prevent breast cancer in women,” said Dr. JoAnn Manson, a Women’s Health Initiative investigator and an author of the study who is chief of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

In the final analysis of the estrogen-only trial, use of the hormone was not associated with any significant risks or benefits pertaining to blood clots, stroke, hip fracture, colon cancer or overall death rates.

But there were surprising differences in the risks and benefits of estrogen use on heart risk when comparing the youngest and oldest women in the study. Women who were in their 50s when they first started using estrogen also had significantly fewer heart risks, including almost 50 percent fewer heart attacks, compared with those assigned to the placebo group.

The data indicate that for every 10,000 women in their 50s, those using estrogen would experience 12 fewer heart attacks, 13 fewer deaths and 18 fewer adverse events like blood clots or stroke in a given year, compared with those taking a placebo.

But the risks of estrogen use were pronounced in older women. For every 10,000 women in their 70s, using estrogen would cause 16 extra heart attacks, 19 extra deaths and 48 serious adverse events.

“The big message there is that the data look much more favorable for younger women and much riskier for older women,” said Dr. LaCroix.

Dr. Rowan Chlebowski, another author of the study and a medical oncologist at Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, said the findings underscored the fact that the risks and benefits of menopause hormones change depending on a woman’s health status, her age and the type of hormone used.

Dr. Chlebowski previously led research that showed cancer risks associated with combination hormone therapy, but he says the new data on estrogen alone show that in certain women, estrogen use to relieve menopausal symptoms is a “good choice.”

“When you look at the debate, people are saying hormones are good or not good — it’s been all or nothing. This calls attention to the fact that there are differences,” Dr. Chlebowski said. “I hope that separation will become clearer now.”

 



This article appeared in print on Wednesday, April 6, 2011 on page A1.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story benefits from direct interviews with sources holding different perspectives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Sierra Riddle stormed into the conference room at Denver’s child protective services office, the director of the agency was seated there, along with her son’s team of doctors, top administrators from the Children’s Hospital Colorado oncology department and lawyers. She recalls looking one of the physicians in the eye, defiant. “I’m done with this shit,” she remembers saying. “I’m done with you guys bullying us.”

Then, she took out a bag and dumped the contents on the table: nine months of cancer drugs prescribed to her son, Landon, who was 4 at the time. He had been diagnosed more than a year before with an aggressive form of leukemia and undergone months of grueling treatment. But his mother was now refusing to follow his doctors’ orders. “Listen: Here’s all this chemo you told CPS he cannot live without, and if I didn’t give it to him, he would relapse and die.”

But Landon, who underwent only one year of cancer treatment instead of the recommended four, was still alive—thriving, in fact—even though he’d stopped taking that massive pile of drugs prescribed for him. That’s why his mother had called this meeting. She implored the CPS director—whom by then she knew by first name—to restrain the oncologists who had threatened to take her child away and put him in foster care. Riddle believes the doctors wanted to prove she was a neglectful, abusive mother, but she knew she could convince the world that the hospital was wrong about her son’s treatment. (Due to HIPAA patient privacy laws, Children’s Hospital Colorado was unable to comment on Landon’s case for this story.)

Landon’s cancer, diagnosed in September 2012, had put Riddle in a situation that’s any parent’s worst nightmare: She had to watch him undergo lifesaving treatment that appeared to be killing him. Riddle says she was left with no choice but to defy his doctors’ orders.

RELATED: What we know about how cancer starts could all be wrong

In January 2013, nearly four months after Landon’s initial diagnosis, the two went from Utah to Colorado, where Riddle purchased an alternative treatment fraught with complicated politics and plenty of skepticism—especially when it comes to saving the life of a preschooler with a potentially fatal disease. At the time, Colorado was one of only about a dozen states in the U.S. that had legalized medical cannabis. It also allowed sick children to access the drug under professional guidance. Landon became the youngest patient in the U.S. at that time to receive a medical marijuana card. Riddle’s decision to treat her child with cannabis landed the family in the center of a contentious national debate, as well as on prime-time television with CNN’s chief medical correspondent, Sanjay Gupta. In Utah, all cannabis is illegal, so when their story went public, she and Landon had to move permanently to Colorado, so he could continue to have access to the drug. Even now, at 7, he still needs to take cannabis to cope with the long-term effects of chemotherapy and radiation, she says.

By the time of that showdown with CPS and Landon’s doctors in Denver, Riddle had stopped giving her son all of the drugs prescribed by the hospital: the chemo, opiates and benzos. The latter two—which included OxyContin, morphine and Ativan—were prescribed to help Landon cope with the side effects of cancer treatment. None of them helped, she says, or they made him feel worse. But when Landon started the cannabis oil, his health miraculously improved. She was willing to do whatever it took to keep him on cannabis.

As laws that permit medical cannabis have expanded nationwide (29 states in the country now permit some form of cannabis use for medical purposes), cancer patients increasingly use the drug to alleviate the harsh symptoms of chemotherapy, such as nausea, anxiety, loss of appetite and insomnia. But there’s also an emerging body of research that suggests marijuana might be effective as a treatment for cancer on its own, or in conjunction with standard therapies.

When Riddle made the decision to give her son cannabis, the information on its safety and efficacy was (and still is) limited to anecdotal accounts, a handful of case reports and lab studies published in obscure medical journals. Initially, her hope was that the drug would lessen the side effects. But Riddle soon heard that certain compounds in cannabis—cannabinoids—have been shown to induce cancer cell death. The theory seemed to be especially promising for leukemia, at least according to studies done on cancer cells in test tubes and on mice injected with human leukemia cells. But at that point there wasn’t any evidence it would work for humans. There still isn’t. While cannabis is legal in many U.S. states, the drug is still classified by the Drug Enforcement Administration as a Schedule 1 narcotic (along with heroin and cocaine), which make it very difficult for scientists to conduct clinical trials on people. However, that may change as other nations, such as Israel, take the lead and fund marijuana research.

The findings so far from published lab studies suggest cannabidiol (CBD), one of more than 100 cannabinoids present in the plant, targets certain pathways in leukemia. The evidence indicates that leukemia cells have a high number of cannabinoid receptors—primarily the receptor CB2. The proteins on the cell membrane (receptors) recognize the chemical compound, CBD. The shape of the receptor mirrors the shape of the compound, enabling the CBD to land and attach to the cell. “It’s like a key in the lock,” says Dr. Bonni Goldstein, medical director of Canna-Centers in Los Angeles and the medical adviser to Weedmaps.com, a resource for people seeking specialists to oversee their medical cannabis treatment. “When compounds such as cannabidiol bond to receptors, it causes the cell to die.”

Further studies are needed to verify that CBD could potentially kill leukemia, says Robert McKallip, an associate professor of immunology at Mercer University School of Medicine, who conducted some of the earliest research on the anti-leukemia properties of compounds found in cannabis. McKallip suggests cannabis could be used along with other treatments for leukemia. “Combined with other targeted therapies, which again, specifically target the leukemia, you give it a one-two punch and hopefully reduce side effects and improve efficacy of treatment,” he says.

Riddle isn’t a doctor, but she theorizes that while the chemo initially cleared Landon’s cancer, it’s the cannabis that has kept his disease from coming back. Oncologists who treat pediatric patients often tell families that when the five-year mark passes, their child is in the clear. It’s been nearly five years since Riddle sat in that conference room meeting; Landon is still cancer-free. Riddle says that once he hits the five-year mark this fall, he’ll set a precedent for pediatric leukemia patients in the U.S., and maybe even worldwide.

Riddle, a single mother, was willing to do whatever it would take to rid Landon of the cancer in his blood that had spread to his brain and formed a tumor in his chest the size of a large grapefruit. She desperately wanted to trust the doctors at the Huntsman Cancer Institute in Salt Lake City, where her son was diagnosed at age 2, and who admitted to her that they weren’t sure they could save his life.

She knew the leukemia treatment protocols are backed by decades of research. But they are infamously rough for a child and drag on for years. First, there would be several months of aggressive inpatient chemo and other therapies for what’s known as “remission reduction.” After that, even when blood work showed the disease had entered remission, Landon would need years of chemo and monitoring—called “consolidation”—to make sure his body wasn’t harboring leukemia cells.

This aggressive approach is one of the main reasons pediatric leukemia, depending on its more specific classification, has at least an 80 to 90 percent survival rate. The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society estimates that nearly 5,000 kids will be diagnosed in the U.S. with some form of leukemia in 2017. For most of the kids who go through the entire course of treatment, the illness turns out to be a mere blip on the screen of childhood. Riddle hoped the same would be true for her son. But Landon appeared to be among a small percentage of children with leukemia for whom the treatment was unbearable, excruciating. The chemo caused him to vomit up to 50 times a day, which made it difficult for him to speak because his esophagus was burned and closed up. The chemo had compromised his immune system so severely that he caught every bug in the hospital, just about every strain of stomach viruses, influenza and the common cold. He eventually developed numbness, tingling, pain and weakness (neuropathy) in his feet and ankles, and was no longer able to walk.

Within the first 90 days of treatment, Landon lost half his body weight. He stopped eating for more than a month. He needed blood and platelet transfusions. Doctors kept adding prescription after prescription to alleviate the side effects of treatment—narcotics, anti-depressants, anti-anxiety drugs, prescriptions for pain. “The sad thing is they didn’t seem to help Landon,” she says. “At this point, they kept telling us we have to keep going. I said, ‘He’s dying. It’s very apparent that he’s dying.’”

Landon began to refuse chemotherapy and turn into a “little psychopath,” says Riddle. He kicked and screamed when nurses forced pills into his mouth, so eventually everything needed to be administered with an IV. “The chemo actually has healed a lot of kids, but it almost killed me,” he says.

Most children with leukemia go into remission within the first 30 days of treatment, which was why Landon’s doctors insisted on several more years of chemotherapy, says Riddle. By the time Landon was nearing the end of his first stage of treatment, Riddle says her son was on the brink of death. The doctors told her to bring him home for a two-week break from chemo, adding that they would arrange to send a hospice nurse—an ominous hint that Landon was about to die.

A plea for help posted on Facebook by Riddle’s mother, Wendy, led the family to a group of brothers in Denver, the Stanleys, who were cultivating cannabis for medicinal purposes and had made the news for a strain they called Charlotte’s Web. Riddle and her mother had seen the story about Charlotte Figi, a 6-year-old girl with Dravet syndrome, a rare type of epilepsy that was unresponsive to standard treatment. She had up to 300 seizures per day. But the seizures stopped when she began taking CBD oil supplied by the brothers.

The Stanleys visited the Riddles in Utah to educate them about Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)—the psychoactive chemical in the plant—and CBD. She decided to start Landon on cannabis. But to do that, the family would need to leave Utah, where all cannabis is illegal. So Riddle and Landon moved in with the brothers for about a year, says Joel Stanley, the CEO of the company that is now known as CW Hemp. “It was just so sad to see someone that young and that small going through such harsh treatment,” Stanley says of Landon. “He also had elements of what I know a lot of folks would call ‘chemo brain.’ He would get very frustrated and very angry, all normal because his little body was just being invaded by this intense medication and rounds of chemotherapy treatment.” Throughout that year, Riddle and her son traveled back and forth from Colorado to Utah, so he could continue chemo, but this time with the aid of cannabis, to make treatment more bearable. That meant Riddle had the drug on hand, and Landon was under its influence while in Utah, which made mother and son both felons.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There are quotes from multiple experts. Those who are proponents of cannabis oil treatment are identified as working for marijuana businesses.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Of the many embarrassing health statistics in this country, the huge number of unwanted pregnancies is perhaps the easiest to rectify. Nearly half the pregnancies among American women are unintended — unwanted now or within the next two years. And among sexually active teenagers and young adults, the rate of unplanned pregnancy is even higher.

Fully 43 percent of these pregnancies follow incorrect or inconsistent uses of contraception. Of course, some couples fail to use any contraception, but others rely on contraceptive methods that have significant failure rates even when properly used.

These facts prompted a committee of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists this month to urge its members to introduce women of all ages to the most effective and underused methods of reversible contraception: IUDs and hormonal implants. Once inserted, these long-acting methods remove the risk of patient error when a sexually active woman wishes to avoid pregnancy. Their effectiveness rivals that of sterilization.

In a 2012 study of 7,486 women aged 14 to 45, long-acting reversible contraceptives, or LARCs, were shown to be 20 times as effective in preventing pregnancy than the pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring. The risk of an unwanted pregnancy with these other methods was especially high among women under 21, whose rate of unintended pregnancy was nearly double that among older women.

Yet fewer than 10 percent of sexually active women currently rely on long-acting reversible contraception, and a major reason is doctors’ reluctance to recommend them. Only about half of obstetrician-gynecologists offer the implant, the committee said, and many physicians use “overly restrictive criteria” when deciding whether to recommend an IUD, especially for adolescents and women who have not yet been pregnant.

Greater LARC use can reduce birthrates among adolescents and, for women of all ages, a reliance upon abortion to prevent unwanted births, the experts wrote in the October issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

Furthermore, the higher upfront costs of LARC methods are no longer an impediment for women with insurance obtained through the Affordable Care Act. Megan L. Kavanaugh, a senior research scientist at the Guttmacher Institute, which studies reproductive health, said in an interview that “all new insurance plans obtained through the act’s exchanges fully cover all contraceptive methods without any co-payments or other out-of-pocket costs.” Title X family planning clinics and Planned Parenthood clinics are more likely than other sources to offer LARC methods, she said.

In a paper published two years ago, European experts predicted that “after decades of dominance by ‘the Pill,’ it is likely that in the future, long-acting reversible contraceptives will become the first-line contraceptive option, owing to their superior contraceptive effectiveness in real-life use, cost effectiveness as well as their established safety profile.”

Here is a summary of the advantages of LARCs, listed by the committee:

■ They are independent of the sex act and do not depend on the user’s motivation and reliability.

■ Compared with other reversible methods, they are more effective and have higher rates of continued use and user satisfaction.

■ There is no need to get frequent supplies and no additional costs once they are inserted, making them highly cost effective.

■ There are few contraindications for their use, and fertility returns quickly after removal.

Furthermore, the committee stated, “almost all women are appropriate candidates” for the LARC methods currently available. They are an implant that slowly releases the hormone etonogestrel over a period of three years, and four IUDs: the copper T that can be used for up to 10 years, and three IUDs containing the hormone levonorgestrel (two approved for use up to three years, and one approved for up to five years).

In real-world use, these methods are associated with a one-year pregnancy rate of less than one per 100 women. In contrast, women using the pill, patch or vaginal ring face an annual pregnancy risk of 9 percent; the diaphragm is associated with a 12 percent pregnancy rate, and with condoms, cervical caps and sponges, the rate is 18 percent.

“While there is no one best contraceptive method for every woman or every couple, women should have access to all methods and should know how effective the LARCs are,” Dr. Kavanaugh said.

The etonogestrel implant is a small plastic rod resembling a matchstick that is inserted under the skin in the upper arm. The hormone, a form of progesterone, prevents ovulation and thickens the cervical mucus, making it harder for sperm to reach and fertilize an egg. Though the implant can remain in place and effective for three years, it can also be removed sooner if, for example, a woman decides she wants to become pregnant. Typically with the implant, menstrual bleeding diminishes, and after a year, one woman in three stops having periods. However, some women develop longer, heavier periods, and some have increased spotting between periods.

Likewise with the hormonal IUDs. Levonorgestrel, also a progesterone, changes the cervical mucus, blocking the transport of sperm and fertilization of an egg. It also suppresses growth of the uterine lining and thus reduces cramping and heavy menstrual bleeding. Women using it report a significant reduction in menstrual blood loss.

The copper IUD does not contain hormones. Rather, the copper is toxic to sperm, preventing them from fertilizing an egg. Because it also prevents a fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus, the copper IUD can serve as emergency contraception for up to five days following unprotected intercourse.

Both the implant and IUD can be used by women who are breast-feeding, as well as those who cannot take estrogen. There are few contraindications; nearly all women are eligible for an implant or IUD, according to guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Unlike early IUDs no longer in use, “modern IUDs do not carry an increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease after the first 20 days following insertion,” Dr. Brooke Winner and her colleagues wrote in The New England Journal of Medicine. With both implants and IUDs, fertility returns quickly as soon as the devices are removed.

Common side effects include irregular bleeding during the first few months following the insertion of an implant or IUD. The latter is also associated with some cramping at the time of insertion.
• The More We Learn on Nutrition, the More We Ignore
• Ask Well: Catching Up on Lost Sleep

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes one expert, Megan Kavanaugh, who is one of the authors of one of the studies referenced in the article. Kavanaugh works for the Guttmacher Institute, and has declared no conflicts in other publications on contraception. It would have been nice to hear from someone who is totally independent of the studies and report covered in the column, but we think Dr. Kavanaugh qualifies as sufficient for a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Maryland medical group has started treating autistic children in South Florida with shots of a drug used for chemical castration, a therapy widely panned by mainstream experts.

The group gives children the cancer drug Lupron to stop their bodies from making testosterone, saying the drug helps expel toxic mercury and quells aggressive or sexually explicit behavior by kids with excessive levels of the male hormone.

A Boca Raton mother who just put her 18-year-old son on the drug said it seems to help.

But numerous physicians, researchers and therapists insist there's no proof mercury causes autism, that Lupron removes mercury or that autistic kids have excessive testosterone. What's more, the drug carries a risk of bone damage, stunted growth and heart trouble, and can render children impotent.

These experts contend that Lupron, costing about $5,000 a month but seldom covered by insurance, is one of many treatments that cash in on the desperation of parents trying to cope with an incurable condition for which medicine has few good answers outside of painstaking behavioral therapy.

"Not only is there no scientific backing whatsoever for Lupron treatments, there are several major concerns for the children's health," said neurologist BethAnn McLaughlin, an adviser to the Dan Marino Foundation autism group in Weston and the mother of two developmentally disabled children.

"These people are preying on the fears of parents. We cannot be using these children who are so vulnerable as guinea pigs in a medical experiment."

Untested autism treatments have flourished while science struggles to explain the disorder, which disrupts the abilities to speak, concentrate, connect with people and control impulses.

For unknown reasons, autism has been on the rise for the past few decades, with an estimated 675,000 children – about one in 100 – now having mild to severe symptoms. Scientists believe it stems from genetic defects that may only cause problems after an environmental trigger.

A vocal subset of parents and activists blame vaccines, especially those with the mercury-based preservative thimerosal, which has been banned from virtually all as a precaution. Numerous studies have found no connection between autism and vaccines or thimerosal.

Lupron therapy grew from the mercury camp. Baltimore researcher Dr. Mark Geier started using the drug in 2005 on the theory – disputed by mainsteam doctors – that testosterone binds mercury in the body and that many autistic kids have high levels of the hormone.

Lupron halts production of the female hormone estrogen, which the body uses to make testosterone. The drug mainly is used to treat endometrial cancer in women and prostate cancer in men, and sometimes to chemically castrate sex offenders.

Geier's promotional materials said he has treated hundreds of children with Lupron and has launched nine ASD Centers in eight states. In his latest, he teams with Dr. David Clayman, a Boca Raton radiologist who has an autistic teen son and is opening an ASD office beside his MRI center in Tamarac.

Clayman said he would not comment until he treats patients with Lupron therapy for a year. Geier could not be reached for comment despite several attempts by phone. He told one parent he did not plan to comment for this story.

The medical group began recruiting Florida patients in March when Geier spoke at a Fort Lauderdale conference for parents of children with autism.

Teresa Badillo was at the meeting. Her family has searched in vain for a way to help their autistic son, Marco, 18. Badillo said he has little speech or interaction with others, but is doing OK in high school. Lately, though, Marco has grown more aggressive, physical and rebellious.

"We were basically under seige in this house," Badillo said. "This kind of behavior is more scary at 18 [than] at 3. I had choices to make. If you see there is another option out there that can help your child, most parents are going to choose that option."

Also, Marco had discovered sex and sometimes touched himself inappropriately in public, a common problem among those with autism.

"The kids don't understand. They have impulses. It's what happens when you have high testosterone," Badillo said.

The family put Marco on Lupron about six weeks ago. He gets two injections a month at a dosage larger than used on adult cancer patients, plus a small daily shot.

"The therapy immediately stopped the aggression," Badillo said. "This is not castrating a kid. It's just lowering the [testosterone] levels enough to normal range so the kid is not aggressive."

She said Geier plans to continue the Lupron for several months to see if it helps Marco's other autistic behavior. She said she knows the drug has risks but believes Lupron critics do not fully grasp the hard realities of life with an autistic child.

Lupron critics said autism parents may not understand the dangers.

The drug is not approved for children – except a rare few with premature puberty – because it can impair bone development crucial to growth, said Dr. Gary Berkovitz, chief of pediatric endocrinology at the University of Miami medical school.

It's not recommended for people with heart disease, kidney disease, asthma, depression or seizures because it can worsen those conditions. Autistic children are prone to seizures.

"It has not been tested so there's no way to know if it has adverse effects in the long run," Berkovitz said.

Said neurologist McLaughlin: "We have very significant concerns about irreversible damage to sexual function and the brain and sex organs of these children."

In addition, the Food and Drug Administration is investigating complaints that Lupron causes diabetes in adults.

Geier published a 2006 study contending that 11 autistic children taking Lupron did better on tests of awareness, sociability and behavior. He has since issued other studies finding that mercury leads to excess testosterone and that autistic children have excessive levels of the hormone.

Other doctors said Geier's studies were small, were not scientifically sound and were published in journals that do not follow the standard practice of having experts review the methods.

The area's largest autism treatment center jointly run by the University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University, as well as another at Florida Atlantic University, frown on Lupron and other untested therapies, officials at the centers said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent expert sources were quoted. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - National guidelines help doctors decide how to treat high blood pressure. But tailoring those guidelines to better fit individuals could prevent many more heart attacks and strokes, say developers of a computer model that makes those calculations.

Their study, published Monday in the Annals of Internal Medicine, estimated the effects of using “individualized guidelines” to make decisions on treating high blood pressure.

It found that the tailored approach could prevent 43 percent more heart attacks and strokes than the simpler, general recommendations used now.

Currently, U.S. guidelines recommend treatment if blood pressure rises above 140/90 mm Hg, or above 130/80 mm Hg if a person has diabetes or chronic kidney disease.

Doctors generally add their own judgment to that decision as well. If, for instance, a person has slightly elevated blood pressure but is otherwise at low risk for heart problems, then lifestyle changes might be enough.

But the new study looked at a more sophisticated way of estimating individual patients’ needs. Researchers used a computer-based “risk calculator” that took into account a person’s age, cholesterol levels, family history of heart disease and any diabetes diagnosis.

It also factored in what’s known about different types of patients’ responses to various blood pressure medications.

The researchers then used data from a long-term study of 15,800 Americans to estimate the effects of applying the individualized guidelines.

Overall, they found, the tailored method could prevent 43 percent more heart attacks and strokes than national guidelines, if healthcare costs were kept the same.

If, on the other hand, the number of heart attacks and strokes prevented were kept the same, the individualized guidelines would accomplish that result at a 67 percent cost savings versus the national guidelines.

The goal of using the risk calculator “is the same as the physician’s desire to take into account the ‘whole patient’ when discussing treatment options with patients,” said lead researcher Dr. David M. Eddy.

The problem with the old-fashioned way, he told Reuters Health in an email, is that there are many pieces of information about a patient to consider.

“It is impossible for the human brain to digest it all and estimate accurately the patient’s risks or how they would benefit from treatments,” he said.

According to Eddy, risk calculators like the one in the study could, eventually, help doctors give patients real numbers. A doctor might tell you, for example, what your risk is of developing diabetes in the next 20 years, and how much you could cut that risk if you lose a certain amount of weight (and keep it off).

Eddy is a founder of Archimedes, Inc., a San Francisco-based company that has developed a computer-based mathematical model to aid in healthcare decisions. The calculator used in this study is a simplified version of that model.

Eddy said that the calculator, or others like it, could be integrated into electronic health records. A patient’s information could be automatically fed to the calculator, and the results would then be displayed on a computer for the doctor and patient to discuss.

A researcher not involved in the work said it was a “nice study” that is a first step toward showing that tailored guidelines could have benefits.

“This shows that there might be better ways for physicians to choose who gets treated and who does not,” said Dr. Douglas K. Owens of the VA Palo Alto Health Care System in California, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

General guidelines, like those for treating high blood pressure, are kept fairly simple so they are easy to remember, Owens told Reuters Health in an interview. Doctors, ideally, then adapt those guidelines to individual patients’ situations.

However, Owens said, “it’s hard to do all of that in your head. This gives them a tool.”

Now the looming questions are how to implement risk calculators in doctors’ practices — and, Owens said, whether that benefits patients’ health in the real world.

“The general theme is that we can do better, and we may have an opportunity to improve patients’ health outcomes,” Owens said. “That’s the hope.”

He said he thinks electronic health records will be key to putting individualized guidelines into practice.

And right now, there is a way to go before most doctors will have those systems in place.

A recent government survey found that the percentage of U.S. doctors using electronic health records is on the rise, but still fairly low.

About one-quarter of surveyed doctors said they had “basic” electronic medical record systems in their offices. Only about 10 percent had a “fully functional” system that included extensive information on patients’ medical history.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The comments from the author of the editorial that accompanied the journal article were helpful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
David Longnecker lay on a table in the cardiac catheterization lab of George Washington University Hospital, steeling himself for a procedure that would reveal the cause of the bout of crushing chest pain that had triggered the ambulance trip from his Dupont Circle office. Doctors had ruled out a heart attack and ordered an angiogram to check for blockages in his coronary arteries. If one was found, he would undergo angioplasty, which involves placement of a metal stent to prop open the artery.

Shortly before the procedure, Ramesh Mazhari, the interventional cardiologist assigned to Longnecker's case, asked an unexpected question. Instead of the usual approach, in which a catheter is inserted in the groin and threaded up the large femoral artery, would Longnecker agree to Mazhari's preferred method: accessing the heart through the smaller radial artery on the underside of the wrist?

"I said, 'If you're confident doing it, fine,' " recalled Longnecker, 70, former chairman of anesthesiology and critical care at the University of Pennsylvania. A member of the Institute of Medicine and a director of the Association of American Medical Colleges, Longnecker said he had never seen catheterization performed in this manner, and few of his physician friends who are not cardiologists had heard of it.

That is likely to change. A small but growing cadre of cardiac specialists, among them Mazhari, are embracing the newer approach, convinced it is more comfortable and safer for many patients than femoral access, the standard for more than three decades. Some recent studies have found the approach has a lower rate of complications, including severe bleeding, than femoral procedures.

Only 1 percent of the 1.2 million cardiac catheterizations performed annually in the United States are done through the wrist; the newer approach is often preferred for patients who are extremely obese or have poor leg circulation. But in Europe, Canada and Japan, about 50 percent of catheterizations are performed using the technique devised in the early 1990s. The approach allows patients to sit up immediately afterward and even walk, an impossibility in femoral procedures, which require that they lie flat on their backs for several hours to prevent severe bleeding.

Because patients tend to recover faster, Mazhari said, she discharges some patients the same day, avoiding an expensive overnight hospital stay.

Questions about the best method of performing cardiac catheterizations, one of the most common procedures in medicine and among the most profitable for hospitals -- Medicare reimburses GWU about $10,600 for an angioplasty involving one stent -- reflect some of the issues in the roiling health-care debate. Is the radial approach, which has a steep learning curve, actually superior or largely a fad? Can it cut costs by reducing hospital stays? And if patients are given a choice of catheterization sites, what factors should they consider?

"I think there is a reluctance among physicians who are used to doing procedures a certain way" to change, said Mazhari, who learned to do the procedure last year and uses it about 80 percent of the time. She and others say they know of no other physician in the Washington area who favors the radial approach.

In Boston, a city brimming with teaching hospitals and interventional cardiologists -- heart specialists with advanced training who perform procedures -- only a handful of physicians specialize in radial catheterization, said Pinak B. Shah, director of interventional cardiology training at Brigham and Women's Hospital.

"There's no data out there to suggest it is worse and growing evidence that it may be better," said Shah, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, who performs 60 to 70 percent of procedures through the wrist.

Shah said he believes a combination of financial self-interest, the relative paucity of medical devices designed for radial access, resistance by older physicians and the general tendency of doctors to regard patient discomfort as secondary have contributed to under-use of the approach.

Some senior interventional cardiologists say they worry that the method may be hyped.

"I think it's a good procedure in the right hands for the right reasons," said Bryan Raybuck, director of the cardiac catheterization lab at the Inova Heart and Vascular Institute in Fairfax. Raybuck, who learned to perform the procedure in Quebec 12 years ago, estimates he uses it fewer than two dozen times annually, and only when circumstances require it.

"There's a lot of buzz about this right now," he said of radial procedures, which account for about 150 of the 8,000 cardiac catheterizations done at his hospital annually. "I don't think it's worth going across the river to do it. It's not that good."

William O. Suddath, an interventional cardiologist at Washington Hospital Center, home to the area's busiest cardiac catheterization lab, said doctors there also prefer the femoral approach, which has benefited from improvements in devices used to stop bleeding. "There's an inherent conservatism in medicine for many reasons," he said.

Suddath said he is concerned about the "tremendous amount of competition going on in centers around the country." And he worries that radial procedures are being used as a "marketing ploy" by some hospitals "to lure patients to particular cath labs."

Shah is familiar with such skepticism. "I think the people who pooh-pooh it don't spend the time learning how to do it," said Shah, who has performed more than 250 radial procedures in the two years since he trained to do them in Canada.

In the cath lab, he noted, "time is money" and radial procedures are "among the most challenging things we do." Until doctors achieve proficiency, they can be agonizingly slow; the fee remains the same, whether a case takes 30 minutes or five hours. Shah said it took him 50 cases "before a lot of the butterflies in my stomach had flown away." Some doctors say it takes 100 cases to achieve true proficiency.

One reason for the greater difficulty is anatomical. The femoral artery, approximately the width of a pinkie, presents a direct route to the heart; to a physician, it's a straight stretch of freeway that can be navigated easily. The radial artery is thinner and offers a much more circuitous path, more like driving on a two-lane mountain road with frequent switchbacks.

"You have to be very patient and very meticulous," Mazhari said.

Severe bleeding is a feared complication in femoral procedures; the risk of a major complication is 1 to 3 percent. Arterial spasms top the list of radial complications. They are most common, Shah said, in "little old ladies," who tend to have small arteries that can clamp shut. "There are some horror stories about that," he said.

Shah and Mazhari say that their patients, many of whom have undergone both kinds of catheterizations, much prefer the wrist approach.

"We've got a lot of repeat customers, unfortunately," Shah said. Lying flat and motionless for two to six hours while recovering, he said, can be hard for patients with bad backs, and many older men find it difficult to urinate in this position.

William Sanford, who underwent angioplasty in April, was thrilled not to be among them.

"I could get right up and go to the bathroom," said Sanford, 64, who lives in Silver Spring and was taken by ambulance to GWU after suffering chest pain while working the night shift as a maintenance supervisor in the Capitol. "I was so surprised at how easy it was and how comfortable it was."

Two recent studies that compared the approaches found a lower rate of serious complications among patients undergoing radial procedures.

A report in the August 2008 Journal of the American College of Cardiology: Cardiovascular Interventions compared outcome data for more than 593,000 procedures -- 7,800 of them radial -- performed between 2004 and 2007 at 606 hospitals.

Led by Sunil V. Rao at the Duke Clinical Research Institute, the authors found that outcomes were similar but that bleeding complications were 58 percent lower in the wrist group. The reduction was most pronounced among high-risk patients, including women and those over 75.

"These data support the efficiency and safety [of radial surgery] . . . and suggest that wider application of the radial approach may enhance the safety of coronary intervention," the researchers concluded.

In the January issue of American Heart Journal, a meta-analysis of 28 years of studies, some of them conducted in Europe and Canada, found a 73 percent reduction in bleeding and shorter hospitals stay among radial patients.

Longnecker, who lives in Annapolis, said that for him, the benefit is clear.

Four years ago he underwent a spinal procedure that was performed through the femoral artery. "Afterward I had to lie flat for eight hours with five- or six-pound sandbags on the site" to prevent bleeding, he recalled. His groin was black and blue for two weeks.

After his radial angioplasty, he was allowed to sit up immediately and walk. A clear wristband equipped with a small inflatable balloon was affixed to his wrist to close the artery. It was removed after about eight hours and replaced by a simple bandage.

"It was remarkably more comfortable and less constraining," Longnecker said. "All that remained the next day was a little red dot. My wrist felt fine. I could have played tennis.

"If somebody offered me the option of having a procedure radially or femorally," Longnecker said, "I would make the decision before their sentence was finished."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included interview material from clinicians who utilize this technique only rarely as well as those who rely on it extensively.  In addition, there were several patient quotes that presented the view from the other side of the table.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philadelphia, PA, August 14, 2017 - Stanford University scientists have described a new type of test that can detect genetic mutations in minute amounts of DNA released from cancer cells into the blood. The test, which is called single color digital PCR, requires only a fraction of a tube of blood and can detect as few as three mutation-bearing molecules in a single reaction. According to the report in The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics, this highly sensitive test has the potential to be personalized to recognize mutations unique to any individual cancer.

"For monitoring patient tumors, only a handful of blood tests are available which are limited to only several types of cancers. Nearly all cancer patients require monitoring by whole body imaging, which can be costly, complex, and time-consuming. In contrast, molecular tests like the one we have developed will enable patients to be monitored at every visit, and thus have the potential for quickly tracking cancer growth and spread. Moreover, the test's rapid turnaround and relatively low cost, especially compared to next-generation DNA sequencing, provide a potential opportunity for universal monitoring of more patients than is currently done," explained lead investigator Hanlee P. Ji, MD, Associate Professor in the Department of Medicine at Stanford University and Senior Associate Director of the Stanford Genome Technology Center.

The report describes the use of the test to analyze samples from six patients. Five patients were previously diagnosed with colorectal cancer and one with cholangiocarcinoma.

After generation of customized mutation detection assays, the researchers were able to identify tumor-derived circulating DNA from three out of six patients. In one patient, the assay was able to show the presence of three different mutations. The three patients, whose samples did not show elevated cancer DNA, were undergoing active treatment at the time of collection.

The single-color digital PCR test offers several advantages over other methods of circulating tumor DNA analysis, compared to next-generation targeted sequencing and fluorescent probe-based digital PCR assays. The main advantage is that the new technique does not rely on pre-amplification, which can introduce errors and biases.

"This test is simple enough to set up and analyze without extensive training, and therefore, it can be implemented by anyone, making it highly accessible to any laboratory. It has been truly motivating to work with a technology that will help transform the way that we monitor and treat individuals with cancer. I am excited to share our findings with the cancer research community," noted lead author and researcher Christina Wood Bouwens, of the Stanford Genome Technology Center and the Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funders are noted in the sidebar where this release is hosted on EurekAlert! but not in the release itself. We encourage news release writers to include funders in the body of the release. There is no mention of conflicts of interest in the release, nor in the study itself.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, July 9, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A daily drink combining several nutrients appears to help people with early Alzheimer's disease improve their memory, a new study suggests.

As Alzheimer's progresses, patients lose their memory as synapses (connections between brain cells) deteriorate, according to background information included in the study. The new drink, called Souvenaid, may actually stimulate the growth of new synapses, said the drink's inventor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist Dr. Richard Wurtman.

But more research is needed before the drink could be made available to the public. And, even then, consumers should exercise caution, said William Thies, vice president for medical and scientific affairs at the Alzheimer's Association.

Nutricia, a division of Dannon, sponsored the study. MIT has a patent on Souvenaid, and Nutricia has the exclusive license on the patent.

"Existing data now suggests that it may be possible to receive something that will sustain cognition in people with Alzheimer's disease with a limited concern about side effects," Wurtman said.

Previous experiments in animals showed that giving them the three compounds included in the drink increased the production of synapses improving brain function, he said.

For the new study, nearly 260 early Alzheimer's patients in Europe drank either Souvenaid or a placebo for six months.

During the first three months of the study, patients in both groups showed improved memory. After that, however, patients taking the placebo had a decline in memory. In contrast, patients taking Souvenaid continued to show improved memory on tests used to assess Alzheimer's patients.

Whether Souvenaid will slow the progression of Alzheimer's isn't known. There is, however, a longer trial going on that might answer that question, Wurtman said. "I don't think it has any effect on the fundamental diseases process, but we'll see," he said.

The report was published in the July 10 online edition of the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease.

The drink combines three ingredients: choline, uridine and omega-3 fatty acids.

Choline is a B vitamin found in meats, nuts and eggs, and omega-3 fatty acids are found in fish, eggs, flaxseed and meat from grass-fed animals. Uridine, which is produced by the liver and kidneys, is also found in some foods as a part of RNA, which helps make protein in the body.

These nutrients, along with other proteins, are essential for making brain-cell membranes that form synapses. To be effective, all three compounds must be given together, the researchers said.

Nearly all patients drank the nutrient cocktail consistently throughout the study, and there were no serious side effects, the researchers reported.

To show the drink's effect on the brain, patients underwent electroencephalography (EEG) throughout the trial. During the study, the brains of those taking the drink shifted from patterns of dementia to more normal ones, the researchers found.

Since EEG patterns reflect the activity of synapses, this result suggests that synaptic function increased with treatment, the researchers said.

An earlier study found that patients with more advanced Alzheimer's did not benefit from Souvenaid, most likely because brains cells had already been lost so new synapses couldn't develop, Wurtman said.

There are as yet no plans to market Souvenaid, so the cost hasn't been established, company spokesman William Green said.

"Souvenaid is a test product in development, which is still undergoing clinical trials," Green said. "No plans for the introduction of Souvenaid to the market -- either in Europe or the U.S. -- have been confirmed. It is probable that any introduction would take place first in Europe."

An ongoing study will evaluate the product over two years. If it appears to have a positive effect, then it may be something that could benefit patients even before definitive symptoms of Alzheimer's appear, Wurtman said.

Thies, of the Alzheimer's Association, is very cautious about the benefits of Souvenaid.

"Medical foods do not have a requirement for FDA premarket approval, but they do have a requirement for having a scientific foundation and some evidence of efficacy," he said. "But they don't have the kind of data we would find for a medication."

That makes it difficult to make a clear-cut statement about the value of the product, he said.

"There isn't a clear diet that prevents you from getting Alzheimer's disease or improves your memory," Thies said.

In addition, medical foods for Alzheimer's most likely won't be covered by insurance, he said.

"You are making a judgment without the protections you have when dealing with a medication," Thies said. "You're going to be making a decision using your own funds and we would advise anybody to make sure they understand what the product offers and make sure they understand what it's going to cost."

For more about Alzheimer's disease, visit the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The Alzheimer’s Association spokesman added some needed perspective. Manufacturer support for the study, and MIT’s patent on the product, were disclosed. It would have been better to additionally have a scientist who studies nutrition and neurodegenerative disease comment on the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors-in-training face long, stressful hours, sleepless nights and a high risk of depression and suicidal thoughts, but often are too stoic and time-starved to seek help. A study suggests online self-help behavior therapy could be a solution.

Suicidal thoughts were much less common in new doctors who had four half-hour online sessions before starting their first year of training, compared with those who got no therapy.

The research involved about 200 medical interns — residents in their first post-graduate year, which is often one of the most intense periods of doctor training. It often involves 80-hour weeks and overnight hospital shifts dealing with multiple medical crises.

An earlier study of 740 interns found that suicidal thoughts increased almost four-fold during the first three months of residency, said Dr. Constance Guille of the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston. Her research group led both studies.

Sarah Dalechek, a first-year psychiatry resident at that university, said her program requires two month-long rotations of 16-hour overnight shifts in an emergency room. She said she became very depressed but had little time to seek help.

"It's very stressful because you're sleep-deprived, you're not eating right ... you're working back-to-back shifts and you're trying to catch up on sleep but you can't," Dalechek said. She was not involved in the study.

Dalechek said she looked into seeing a therapist but would have preferred a web-based program since it's confidential and requires no appointment. Luckily, her depression subsided when that rotation ended.

Guille said offering web-based therapy routinely to medical residents could be beneficial, if her research results are confirmed in a broader study.

The results were published Wednesday in the journal JAMA Psychiatry.

The study involved interns at Yale University and the University of Southern California. It used a free online program developed at the National Institute for Mental Health Research at the Australian National University in Canberra. Interns who got the sessions were 40 percent less likely to have suicidal thoughts during that first year compared to those who received four weekly emails with information about depressions and where to seek help.

The online program included sessions about how to put feelings of stress or despair into perspective. For example, a poor test grade or bad performance evaluation might lead to feelings of "I'm not good enough," but the lessons encourage more positive thinking about "how many exams have you passed, to put this failure in a more accurate light," Guille said.

The training also encourages seeking out activities or thoughts that bring pleasure, especially when feeling down.

Previous research has shown benefits from similar web-based therapy in other settings.

Guille said medical students and residents tend to be high-achieving perfectionists, but that they need to learn "you can't always be perfect in medicine, you have to figure out how to deal with failure."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story provides comments from a psychiatry resident not affiliated with the study who offers an important view from the inside.With that being said, we wish the story had included the views of an expert in the field, commenting specifically on the intervention that’s the basis for the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Update| Anyone who’s ever dieted knows that sorting through the deluge of research can be overwhelming. Paleo has a devout following who swear by its protein-heavy meals, while intermittent fasters believe that forgoing food for hours on end (which varies, but can include skipping meals for an entire day), provides the best results. For those who just can’t give up grains (or regular eating), a new study indicates that being less restrictive is actually better for your waistline.

Related: How to Lose Weight and Keep it Off? Eternal Dieting Vigilance

Researchers from The University of Tasmania in Australia found that breaking up with your diet for two weeks could lead to more weight loss—and help you keep it off, too.

For the small study just published in the International Journal of Obesity, the team enlisted 51 obese men from the ages of 25 to 54 years old. All participants had maintained their current weight for six months leading up to the study and did not exercise regularly. One group of men followed the diet, which reduced calorie consumption by about one-third of their individual needs, for 16 weeks straight. The experimental group stuck to the eating plan for two weeks, before ditching the diet for two weeks. They repeated the cycle until they had also dieted for 16 weeks; however, in their case, each bout of restriction was followed by a period of eating enough calories for weight maintenance.

At the end of the study, the men following the intermittent diet plan lost 47 percent more weight than the control group. And while it’s common to regain a few pounds after returning to previous eating habits, the two-week dieters kept the pounds off, maintaining a nearly 18-pound loss six months after the study.

Krista Varady, an outside researcher who studies intermittent fasting (not the same as intermittent dieting) and weight loss at the University of Illinois, believes the results were significant.

"I was really impressed that they still saw almost a two kilogram weight loss during that last period at the end of the four months," she tells Newsweek. "At that point we see almost zero weight loss," she explains of her own research. "Somehow they’re kind of keeping the body on its toes."

This trick may help combat the dreaded weight loss plateau that plagues dieters looking to lose those last five pounds. As we cut calories and lose weight, our resting metabolic rate eventually slows and our bodies become less efficient at shedding mass in a process known as adaptive thermogenesis. While frustrating, it’s one of our natural survival mechanisms to prevent potential starvation.

Related: Obesity Crisis: Two Billion People Now Overweight and U.S. is One of the Fattest Nations on Earth

Another benefit from intermittent dieting? People who have a difficult time staying motivated may find relief by the two-week breaks. However, it’s important not to think of them as cheat days. The dieters ate enough calories to maintain their weight during the off period. But, Varady believes it’s probably safe to enjoy a slice of cake or bowl of ice cream during the break.

"It seemed like they probably had a couple of cheat days here and there," she says of the data. "Diets tend to work if you have a couple of cheat days during the month. Just as long as it doesn’t psychologically derail people."

This story was updated to include analysis from weight loss researcher Krista Varady, PhD, a nutrition professor at the University of Illinois, Chicago.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article included an “outside researcher” who has some bona fides in the study of intermittent fasting, albeit not dieting, and quotes her essentially saying that the findings were significant and made sense to someone who studies dieting challenges.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
N-acetylcysteine reduced PTSD symptoms, cravings, and depression in veterans with PTSD and substance use disorder in a randomized controlled pilot trial conducted at the Medical University of South Carolina and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center

N-acetylcysteine, when combined with group cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), reduced symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), cravings, and depression significantly more than CBT alone in veterans with co-occurring PTSD and substance use disorder, a particularly difficult-to-treat population, according to the findings of a randomized controlled pilot trial conducted by researchers at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center.

This trial is the first to use NAC as a pharmacotherapy for PTSD and a broad range of SUDs. The results were published online ahead of print on October 11, 2016 by the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.

The National Center for PTSD estimates that seven to eight percent of Americans will have PTSD at some point in their life. The numbers are even worse for veterans: it is estimated, for example, that 30 percent of Vietnam veterans will have experienced PTSD at some point in their life. Approximately 40 to 50 percent of veterans with PTSD also have a substance use disorder (SUD).

"Addiction goes along with virtually every psychiatric disorder at a higher percentage than it does in the general population" said Peter W. Kalivas, Ph.D. the senior author on the article and chair of the Department of Neuroscience at MUSC. "People who are prone to psychiatric disorders are also prone to addiction."

Currently, there are no well-explored pharmacological treatments for patients with co-occurring PTSD/SUD. Although selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have been approved by the FDA for treatment of PTSD, pharmacological treatments for co-occurring PTSD/SUD have yielded suboptimal results.

Groundbreaking basic science research by Kalivas has shown that levels of glutamate transporters are decreased in SUDs and that administration of the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine can help restore those levels and guard against relapse in animal models of SUD. Because evidence suggests that SUDs and PTSD share overlapping neurobiological pathways, Sudie E. Back, Ph.D., lead author on the article, hypothesized that NAC treatment with CBT would be a novel approach to treat co-occurring PTSD and SUD. Back is a professor in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at MUSC and a staff psychologist at the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center.

In the eight-week randomized controlled trial led by Back and Kalivas, 35 veterans with PTSD and SUD, all of whom were receiving cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for their SUD, were randomized to either 2400 mg/day of NAC or placebo. The average age of the veterans was 49 years and many were veterans of the Vietnam War. To be included, veterans had to have abstained from substance use for at least seven days. Of the veterans enrolled in the trial, 83% completed it, a very high rate for this difficult-to-treat population.

Veterans in the NAC-treated group showed a 46% reduction in PTSD symptoms, compared with a 25% reduction in the placebo group on the Clinical-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), which assesses trauma history and symptom severity. The threshold CAPS score for diagnosis of PTSD is 50.

"As a group, the NAC-treated veterans were below diagnostic level for PTSD at the end of treatment," said Back. "For PTSD, these are some of the best outcomes we have seen in the literature for a medication."

Craving and depression were also reduced in the NAC-treated group. The amount of craving was reduced by 81% and the frequency of craving by 71% in the NAC group, compared with 32% and 29% in the placebo group. "Craving is a key component of substance use in relapse," said Back. "If you have a medication that can really reduce craving, that will go a long way to helping people stay clean and sober." Depression, gauged using the Beck Depression Inventory, was reduced 48% in the NAC group vs. 15% in the placebo group.

Veterans in the study had low rates of substance use during the trial, and the study found little effect of medication on use, perhaps due to the fact that all participants were receiving SUD treatment and exhibiting low levels of use. This finding could also be due to the relatively limited number of participants or to the chronic nature of the participants' PTSD. "This is a tough patient population with SUD to work with." said Kalivas. "We have Vietnam vets that have had PTSD for 15 to 20 years. This is not an easy-to-turn-around population."

Although these early, promising findings show that NAC reduced PTSD symptoms, craving, and depression, NAC should not be used as a monotherapy or substitute for evidence-based behavioral treatment, but instead be seen as an adjunct therapy that enhances it.

"We would not advocate using it instead of therapy," said Back. "But this could be something to help prevent relapse when used alongside a behavioral treatment."

NAC is available over the counter and does not cause side effects at the doses used in the study, but it degrades quickly when stored, is contraindicated in patients with asthma, and can cause nausea at higher doses and so should always be obtained and administered under a physician's supervision.

The next steps in Back's research are to run a longer-term trial of NAC in veterans with PTSD and SUD and to use MRS magnetic spectroscopy to better explore the effect of NAC on glutamate levels in patients with PTSD and SUD.

Founded in 1824 in Charleston, The Medical University of South Carolina is the oldest medical school in the South. Today, MUSC continues the tradition of excellence in education, research, and patient care. MUSC educates and trains more than 3,000 students and residents in six colleges (Dental Medicine, Graduate Studies, Health Professions, Medicine, Nursing, and Pharmacy), and has nearly 13,000 employees, including approximately 1,500 faculty members. As the largest non-federal employer in Charleston, the university and its affiliates have collective annual budgets in excess of $2.2 billion, with an annual economic impact of more than $3.8 billion and annual research funding in excess of $250 million. MUSC operates a 700-bed medical center, which includes a nationally recognized children's hospital, the Ashley River Tower (cardiovascular, digestive disease, and surgical oncology), Hollings Cancer Center (a National Cancer Institute-designated center), Level I Trauma Center, Institute of Psychiatry, and the state's only transplant center. In 2016, U.S. News & World Report named MUSC Health the number one hospital in South Carolina. For more information on academic programs or clinical services, visit musc.edu. For more information on hospital patient services, visit muschealth.org.

Located in historic downtown Charleston, South Carolina, the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center is a tertiary care teaching hospital providing the highest level quality care from cardiology to neurology to primary and mental health care for 70,000 Veterans along the South Carolina and Georgia coast. The Ralph H. Johnson VA achieved a 5-Star rating according to VA's Strategic Analytics for Improvement and Learning Value (SAIL) model. The SAIL rating ranks the Charleston VA in the top 10 percent of VA medical centers nationwide for quality of care and efficiency. The Charleston VA is also ranked in the top 10th percentile according to the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). HEDIS is an independent review that measures performance of 90 percent of America's health plans and facilities in both the public and private sector on dimensions of care and service. The Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center is a center of excellence for robotic surgery and orthopedics, and is the first VA National Tele-Mental Health Hub providing care for Veterans across the U.S. The 149-bed hospital includes six community based outpatient clinics, a 20-bed nursing home, women's health, and the full range of inpatient and outpatient care, including medical and surgical intensive care. The VAMC provides more than 875,000 outpatient visits and approximately 4,400 in-patient stays annually. With more than 2,500 employees, Charleston VA has an annual budget of $458 million, research funding of more than $21 million, and more than 100 principal investigators participating in approximately 300 research studies. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states the funding sources and it would be very unlikely that these researchers would have a financial interest in the product under study since it is off-patent and generically available without a prescription.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, April 12, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Eating apples every day may be good for your cardiovascular health, new research suggests.

Women who ate dried apples every day for a year lowered their total cholesterol by 14 percent and their levels of "bad" LDL cholesterol by 23 percent.

"I never expected apple consumption to reduce bad cholesterol to this extent while increasing HDL cholesterol or good cholesterol by about 4 percent," Bahram Arjmandi, chair of the department of nutrition, food and exercise sciences at Florida State University in Tallahassee, said in a statement.

Arjmandi was to present the findings Tuesday at the Experimental Biology meeting in Washington D.C. The U.S. Department of Agriculture provided partial funding for the study.

Many foods can have an effect on cholesterol levels, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Foods containing saturated fats, trans fats and dietary cholesterol can raise your cholesterol levels, while foods with healthier fats such as olive oil can lower your cholesterol. Foods with fiber, such as fruits, vegetables and whole grains, can reduce cholesterol levels, while carbohydrates that are low in fiber tend to raise triglyceride levels and lower "good" HDL cholesterol levels.

In the current study, the researchers wanted to assess the long-term effect that apple consumption might have on cardiovascular health.

They recruited 160 women between the ages of 45 and 65. The women were randomly assigned to one of two dietary intervention groups. One group was given 75 grams of dried apples every day for a year, while the other group was given dried prunes daily for a year.

The daily serving of dried apples contained about 240 calories, according to the study. An apple contains about 5 grams of fiber, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

The researchers found that women eating dried apples lowered their total cholesterol by 14 percent. LDL cholesterol dropped by 23 percent. Daily apple consumption also significantly lowered levels of C-reactive protein and lipid hydroperoxide, two substances that may indicate an increased risk of heart disease. What effects, if any, the prunes had on cholesterol levels were not mentioned in the study abstract.

The researchers theorized that the nutrients in apples may reduce inflammation in the body.

Despite the addition of several hundred calories a day to their diet, the apple-eating women didn't gain weight over the course of the study. In fact, they lost an average of 3.3 pounds.

Registered dietician Jessica Shapiro said she wasn't surprised that the women didn't gain weight. The addition of apples to the diet probably kept the women feeling fuller because of the fiber content in the apples, she explained.

"Apples really are an amazing fruit for many reasons," said Shapiro, who is a clinical nutritionist who counsels cardiac patients at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City. "A large reason apples are so good is the fiber. Apples have both soluble and insoluble fiber. Insoluble is found more in the skin, and the pulp is more soluble fiber."

"The pulp of an apple gets to be a very viscous gel-like substance that grabs cholesterol and pulls it out of the body. It's kind of like nature's toothbrush, and it's brushing the bad stuff out," she explained.

"Another good thing in apples is pectin. It's a substance that's used to make jellies or jams, and pectin contributes to the viscosity of what's going through the body, and bulks it up to help remove it. Apples also have tons of antioxidants and other natural components," she said.

Shapiro said she would recommend fresh apples over dried apples, because some nutrients are probably lost in the drying process.

But Shapiro stressed that making healthy changes to what you eat can only do so much.

"Changing your diet can make a big difference, but eating a healthy diet is only part of it. Once your cholesterol is high, diet may not be enough," she said. "Some people are predisposed because of their genes to having high cholesterol, and a healthy diet may not be enough."

Shapiro also advised against making any changes to your medications, including cholesterol-lowering drugs, without talking to your doctor first.

Also, she cautioned, when increasing the fiber in your diet, do it slowly. This will help prevent bloating and gas that may occur if you increase your fiber intake too quickly. She said that 25 to 30 grams of fiber daily is the recommended intake, and she suggested increasing your current intake by about 5 grams daily each week to give your body a chance to get used to the increased fiber.

Learn more about the importance of fruits and vegetables from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story credit for seeking the input from an independent clinical nutritionist, although she apparently only had a news release and/or an abstract to comment on – which is incomplete basis for comment much less a story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
America's favorite dietary supplements, multivitamins, modestly lowered the risk for cancer in healthy male doctors who took them for more than a decade, the first large study to test these pills has found.

The result is a surprise because many studies of individual vitamins have found they don't help prevent chronic diseases and some have even caused problems.

In the new study, multivitamins cut the chance of developing cancer by 8%. That is less effective than a good diet, exercise and not smoking, each of which can lower cancer risk by 20% to 30%, cancer experts say.

Multivitamins also may have different results in women, younger men or people less healthy than those in this study.

"It's a very mild effect and personally I'm not sure it's significant enough to recommend to anyone" although it is promising, said Dr. Ernest Hawk, vice president of cancer prevention at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and formerly of the National Cancer Institute.

"At least this doesn't suggest a harm" as some previous studies on single vitamins have, he said.

Hawk reviewed the study for the American Association for Cancer Research, which is meeting in Anaheim, Calif., where the study was to be presented on Wednesday. It also was published online in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

About one-third of U.S. adults and as many as half of those over 50 take them. They are marketed as a kind of insurance policy against bad eating. Yet no government agency recommends their routine use "regardless of the quality of a person's diet," says a fact sheet from the federal Office of Dietary Supplements.

Some fads, such as the antioxidant craze over vitamins A and E and beta-carotene, backfired when studies found more health risk with those supplements, not less. Many of those were single vitamins in larger doses than the "100% of daily value" amounts that multivitamins typically contain.

Science on vitamins has been skimpy. Most studies have been observational — they look at groups of people who do and do not use vitamins, a method that can't give firm conclusions.

Dr. J. Michael Gaziano, of Brigham and Women's Hospital and VA Boston, led a stronger test. Nearly 15,000 male doctors who were 50 or older and free of cancer when the study started were given monthly packets of Centrum Silver or fake multivitamins without knowing which type they received.

After about 11 years, there were 2,669 new cancers, and some people had cancer more than once. For every 1,000 men per year in the study, there were 17 cancers among multivitamin users and more than 18 among those taking the placebo pills. That worked out to an 8% lower risk of developing cancer in the vitamin group.

Multivitamins made no difference in the risk of developing prostate cancer, which accounted for half of all cases. They lowered the risk of other cancers collectively by about 12%. There also was a trend toward fewer cancer deaths among multivitamin users, but the difference was so small it could have occurred by chance alone.

Side effects were fairly similar except for more rashes among vitamin users. The National Institutes of Health paid for most of the study. Pfizer Inc. supplied the pills and other companies supplied the packaging.

The main reason to take a multivitamin is to correct or prevent a deficiency, "but there may be a modest benefit in reducing the risk of cancer in older men," Gaziano said.

Cancer experts said the results need to be confirmed by another study before recommending multivitamins to the public. These participants were healthier — only 4% smoked, for example.

For people who do want to take multivitamins, doctors suggest:

— Be aware that they are dietary supplements, which do not get the strict testing required of prescription medicines.

— Ask your doctor before taking any. Vitamin K can interfere with common heart medicines and blood thinners, and vitamins C and E can lower the effectiveness of some types of chemotherapy. For people having surgery, some vitamins affect bleeding and response to anesthesia.

— Current and former smokers should avoid multivitamins with lots of beta-carotene or vitamin A; two studies have tied them to increased risk of lung cancer.

Copyright 2012 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We hear from an expert who wan’t involved with the study, and we receive a complete description of the study’s funding sources. The story notes that while NIH paid for most of the study, Pfizer supplied the pills. That’s a detail we didn’t hear about in the competing Reuters piece.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers at Johns Hopkins Medicine have identified in live human brains new radioactive "tracer" molecules that bind to and "light up" tau tangles, a protein associated with a number of neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease and other related dementias. Two studies will be published back-to-back in the December issue of Journal of Nuclear Medicine--one as featured article of the month--describing testing of three candidate molecules in patients with Alzheimer's disease, as well as the use of one molecule to measure the accumulation of tau proteins.

"One of the greatest public health challenges is Alzheimer's disease, for which there currently is no cure and no definitive diagnostic until autopsy," says Dean Wong, M.D., Ph.D., professor of radiology and radiological sciences, psychiatry and behavioral sciences, neurology and neuroscience, and director of the Section of High Resolution Brain PET Imaging, Division of Nuclear Medicine at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. "We have been working hard to identify new radiopharmaceuticals that can help speed the discoveries of diagnostics and treatments for these devastating neurodegenerative disorders."

Alzheimer's disease is characterized in the brain by the appearance of two abnormal protein structures: amyloid plaques and tangled fibers made up of a protein called tau. One of the biggest challenges in studying Alzheimer's disease thus far, according to Wong, is the inability to watch these so-called neurofibrillary tangles develop in real time.

As part of a longer term project funded by F. Hoffman-La Roche, the team previously tested a collection of approximately 550 potential tracer molecules and identified six promising tracers, eventually narrowing them down to three to be made and tested as candidate Tau PET radiopharmaceuticals. These three most promising tracers were previously tested in nonhuman primates, and the results looked promising enough to test in people.

The researchers recruited a total of 12 patients with Alzheimer's disease, seven younger healthy controls (ages 25-38 years old) and five older healthy controls (age 50 or older) for brain-only PET scans. An additional six older healthy controls were recruited for full-body scanning. The study was divided into three parts. In the first part, each person was injected with two of the three randomly designated tracers (on separate visits) prior to receiving a brain PET scan with subsequent evaluation to determine which molecule performed best. In the second part of the study, researchers tested the optimal tracer, called F-18 RO948, with additional brain imaging in five patients with Alzheimer's and five older controls, with follow-up of previously seen patients to evaluate the potential progression of tau protein tangling after an average span of approximately 16 months.

The third part of the study examined six older controls undergoing whole-body scanning. In total, the researchers looked at 80 different regions in the brain to evaluate how well the tracers were taken up by the brain, how well they penetrated through the tissue and how specifically they bound to the tau protein rather than just sticking indiscriminately to anything. Regions of the brain that typically contain accumulated tau protein include the temporal lobe, parietal lobe and occipital lobe, among others; grey matter in the cerebellum is thought to contain low or no tau in patients with Alzheimer's. They found that healthy brains retained little to no tracer, whereas the brains of those with Alzheimer's showed tau to be in regions of the brain consistent with previously reported postmortem data on filamentous tangles.

In the second paper, the team examined the detailed quantification of tau binding via F-18 RO948 in 11 patients with Alzheimer's disease, five young cognitively normal controls and five older cognitively normal controls. They verified that detailed quantification of the tested and retested tracer in those five patients with Alzheimer's and five older controls generated good and reproducible results. According to Wong, this body of work reveals that, as compared with the currently used Tau tracer, F-18 AV1451, the new tracer, F-18 RO948, does not bind randomly to other tissue, offering greater clarity into quantification of potential tau burden within the human brain.

"It really takes a village to make progress in biomedical research, and this project was no exception, with the involvement of the PET team at Hopkins, a CRO who helped recruit healthy subjects, colleagues in psychiatry and behavioral sciences, colleagues at the National Institute of Aging and neuroscience imaging experts at Roche," says Wong. "This is a true example of cross-disciplinary collaboration, and I'm honored to have such great collaborators."

This study was made available online in May 2018 ahead of peer-review and publication. It was published in the December 2018 issue of the journal.

Authors of the first Journal of Nuclear Medicine featured paper "Characterization of 3 Novel Tau Radiopharmaceuticals, 11C-RO-963, 11C-RO-643, and 18F-RO-948, in Healthy Controls and in Alzheimer Subjects" include Dean F. Wong, Hiroto Kuwabara, Paul B. Rosenberg, Esther Oh , Constantine G. Lyketsos, Noble George, Lorena Gapasin, Kelly Kitzmiller, Josh Roberts, Ayon Nandi, James Brasic, Chakradhar Mishra, Abhay Moghekar, Anil Mathur, Marilyn Albert and Robert F. Dannals of The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; Robert A. Comley, Susanne Ostrowitzki, Cristina Vozzi, Frank Boess, Michael Honer, Luca Gobbi, Gregory Klein, Jeff Sevigny and Edilio Borroni, Pharma Research and Early Development, Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland; and Susan M. Resnick and Madhav Thambisetty, Lab of Behavior and Neuroscience, NIH's National Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, Maryland.

This study was funded by an F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. contract to The Johns Hopkins University. Susan Resnick and Madhav Thambisetty are employees of the NIH, National Institute on Aging.

The authors report no other relevant potential conflict of interest.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes the funding source for the research and addresses conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Older people who use olive oil in their cooking and on their salads may have a lower risk of suffering a stroke, researchers reported Wednesday.

In a study that followed older French adults for five years, researchers found that those who regularly used olive oil were 41 percent less likely to have a stroke than those who never used the oil.

The findings, reported in the journal Neurology, hint that the well-known connection between olive oil and heart disease might extend to stroke as well. Olive oil is a key ingredient in the so-called Mediterranean diet. And some clinical trials have suggested that the diet helps control risk factors for heart disease, like high blood pressure, abdominal obesity and elevated levels of “bad” LDL cholesterol.

High olive oil intake is also linked to a lower risk of heart attack, and a longer lifespan among heart attack survivors. These latest findings support the general advice that people replace dubious dietary fats — namely, saturated fats and “trans” fats — with olive oil and other unsaturated fats, according to an expert not involved in the study. But he also stressed that the study does not prove that olive oil, per se, helps prevent strokes.

“We need to remember that this is an observational study,” said Dr. Nikolaos Scarmeas, a neurologist at Columbia University Medical Center in New York who wrote an editorial published with the study.

The study found a correlation between people’s olive oil use and their stroke risk, he told Reuters Health — but that doesn’t necessarily translate into cause-and-effect.

“People who use a lot of olive oil may be very different from people who don’t,” Scarmeas said.

Olive oil users may, for example, have higher incomes, eat better overall or exercise more often than people who never use the oil. The researchers on the new study, led by Cécilia Samieri of the French national research institute INSERM, tried to account for those differences. And after they did, olive oil was still linked to a lower stroke risk.

But it’s impossible to fully account for all those variables, Scarmeas noted. What’s needed, he said, are clinical trials where people are randomly assigned to use olive oil or not, then followed over time to see who suffers a stroke. Such clinical trials are considered the “gold standard” of medical evidence.

The current study included 7,625 French adults age 65 and older who reported on their diets and other lifestyle factors. People who said they used olive oil for both cooking and as a dressing were considered “intensive users.”

Over the next five to six years, those intensive users suffered strokes at a rate of 0.3 percent per year. That compared with just over 0.5 percent among non-users, and 0.4 percent among moderate users.

When the researchers factored in other diet habits, exercise levels and major risk factors for stroke — like high blood pressure and diabetes — heavy olive oil use was tied to 41 percent reduction in the odds of stroke.

Samieri’s team also took blood samples from another 1,245 older adults, measuring their levels of oleic acid — a monounsaturated fat that accounts for most of the fatty acids in olive oil. The one-third of participants with the highest oleic acid levels were 73 percent less likely to suffer a stroke than the one-third with the lowest levels.

The findings, according to Scarmeas, argue for more research into olive oil’s potential benefits against not only heart disease, but stroke and other neurological diseases as well.

For now, he suggested that people choose olive oil and other unsaturated fats over saturated fats (found largely in meat and dairy) and trans fats (found in some processed foods, like crackers, cookies and chips).

“It’s better to rely on this type of fat for your overall health,” Scarmeas said.

That said, no single food is consumed in isolation, he points out in his editorial. Olive oil is one part of the Mediterranean diet that has been tied to heart benefits. The diet also boasts plenty of fruits and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, fish and moderate amounts of red wine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included strong input from a researcher who wrote in an editorial on the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
One day, MRI brain scans may help predict whether older people will develop dementia, new research suggests.

In a small study, MRI brain scans predicted with 89 percent accuracy who would go on to develop dementia within three years, according to research at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis and the University of California San Francisco.

The findings, presented Sunday, Nov. 25 at the Radiological Society of North America meeting in Chicago, suggest that doctors may one day be able to use widely available tests to tell people their risk of developing dementia before symptoms arise.

"Right now it's hard to say whether an older person with normal cognition or mild cognitive impairment is likely to develop dementia," said lead author Cyrus A. Raji, MD, PhD, an assistant professor of radiology at Washington University's Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology. "We showed that a single MRI scan can predict dementia on average 2.6 years before memory loss is clinically detectable, which could help doctors advise and care for their patients."

Alzheimer's disease is a progressive, irreversible brain disorder that destroys memory and thinking skills. The disease affects 5.5 million Americans, according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

Neurologists can get a ballpark estimate of a patient's risk of Alzheimer's dementia using the Mini-Mental State Examination questionnaire, or by testing for the high-risk form of the gene ApoE, which increases a person's risk of Alzheimer's by up to 12-fold. Both tests were about 70 to 80 percent accurate in this study. Other assessments, such as PET scans for plaques of Alzheimer's proteins in the brain, are good at detecting early signs of Alzheimer's disease, but available to few patients. PET scans cost thousands of dollars and require radioactive materials not found in a typical hospital.

MRI brain scans are widely available and give doctors a glimpse into what's going on inside a person's brain. Raji and colleagues at the School of Medicine including Tammie Benzinger, MD, PhD, a professor of radiology, Parinaz Massoumzadeh, PhD, and Adedamola Adedokun, as well as radiologist Pratik Mukherjee, MD, PhD, of the University of California San Francisco, analyzed MRI scans for physical signs of impending cognitive decline.

They used a technique called diffusion tensor imaging to assess the health of the brain's white matter, which encompasses the cables that enable different parts of the brain to talk to one another.

"Diffusion tensor imaging is a way of measuring the movement of water molecules along white matter tracts," Raji said. "If water molecules are not moving normally it suggests underlying damage to white tracts that can underlie problems with cognition."

Using information from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative - a multisite collaboration that pools data, funding and expertise to improve clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease - Raji and colleagues identified 10 people whose cognitive skills declined over a two-year period and matched them by age and sex with 10 people whose thinking skills held steady. The average age of people in both groups was 73. Then, the researchers analyzed diffusion tensor MRI scans taken just before the two-year period for all 20 people.

The researchers found that people who went on to experience cognitive decline had significantly more signs of damage to their white matter. The researchers repeated their analysis in a separate sample of 61 people, using a more refined measure of white matter integrity. With this new analysis, they were able to predict cognitive decline with 89 percent accuracy when looking at the whole brain. When the researchers focused on specific parts of the brain most likely to show damage, the accuracy rose to 95 percent.

"We could tell that the individuals who went on to develop dementia have these differences on diffusion MRI, compared with scans of cognitively normal people whose memory and thinking skills remained intact," Raji said. "What we need now, before we can bring it into the clinic, is to get more control subjects and develop computerized tools that can more reliably compare individual patients' scans to a baseline normal standard. With that, doctors might soon be able to tell people whether they are likely to have Alzheimer's develop in the next few years."

Although there are no drugs available yet to prevent or delay the onset of Alzheimer's disease, identifying those at high risk of developing dementia within the next few years could still be beneficial, the researchers said. People could make decisions on their financial and living arrangements while they are still in full control of their faculties.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funder — the Boerger Research Fund for Alzheimer’s Disease and Neurocognitive Disorders from the Foundation of the American Society of Neuroradiology — is noted on the sidebar of the release hosting site, EurekAlert! We encourage news release writers to include funders in the body of the news release text as well.
We didn’t observe any conflicts of interest among the researchers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Sometimes, Ellis Glover would be forced to leave her friends and sit at a lunch table where no one was eating peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.

"I wanted to sit with my good, good friends, but I couldn't," the 10-year-old said. "If you're a kid and you have a food allergy, it's harder on you. You're missing out on a lot of stuff other children can have. I always want to try peanut stuff."

Mom Monica Glover said the family discovered Ellis' peanut allergy when she was about 3. The tipoff: a skin reaction around her mouth after she was given food with a small amount of peanuts in it. "We were lucky to have discovered it that way. That was a mild reaction," Glover said, and a doctor confirmed the allergy through tests.

The discovery was "distressing," Glover said. Accidental exposure to peanuts has happened, resulting in "severe stomach cramps and vomiting," she said. "Essentially, we have to live in fear all the time of Ellis being inadvertently exposed to peanuts and having a reaction that is potentially life-threatening."

Glover seized the opportunity to participate in a study on the safety and effectiveness of an experimental treatment that could give her daughter protection against accidental exposure to peanuts. Despite the risk, it was "a gift," she said, adding that her family hoped their efforts might help "lots of other children."

The risk paid off: Two-thirds of the kids in the study were able to eat the equivalent of two peanuts without any symptoms after following the months-long experimental treatment regimen, the researchers found.

Ellis is one of the majority of children for whom the treatment works. "It's been a huge success," her mother said.

"It does not make the allergy to go away," Vickery said. "The purpose is not to get them to be no longer peanut allergic and allow them to eat whatever they want."

"I'm telling patients when I see them that my hope is that patients will have access by late next summer, something like that," Vickery said. He added that although the study proved the treatment's effectiveness and safety only in children, adults would probably benefit in the same way.

To test the experimental therapy, 66 research centers in 10 countries recruited 551 participants who ranged in age from 4 to 55 and who all had a peanut allergy. Most -- 499 participants -- were between the ages of 4 and 17.

"We were extremely well-informed about the entire process," Glover said. "You start at a super low dose and work your way up. You take it at the hospital under observation. Then, you take it at home every day. "

Three-quarters of the study participants were given the treatment in increasing amounts every two weeks until reaching maintenance, when they received the equivalent of one peanut daily. The remainder of the participants were given a placebo. At the conclusion of the study after a year, all of the participants faced an "exit food challenge": They ate, under a doctor's supervision, the equivalent of two peanuts.

Two-thirds of the treatment participants were able to tolerate this exit dose without a severe reaction. Half tolerated even twice that amount: a four-peanut dose.

Overall, participants experienced fewer side effects during the study than the researchers had anticipated. "It's intuitive that that process would trigger some allergic symptoms in many patients," Vickery said. A third completed the study with no more than mild side effects, such as stomachache.

Ellis experienced stomach cramps and vomiting multiple times during the study, usually on days when her dose was increased to raise her tolerance. "Having stomach cramps did not feel very good," she said. Still, she usually vomited, and the cramps passed quickly.

Once, she felt her throat constrict, and "it was harder for me to breathe," she said. She'd gone into anaphylaxis, a severe allergic reaction. The hospital staff reacted immediately and gave her a shot of epinephrine. "I felt safe with all the doctors and nurses around me. They can help you get through it," she said.

A little more than 11% of the children dropped out of the study due to severe side effects. Among children receiving the treatment, 10% required rescue epinephrine during the exit challenge, compared with 53% in the placebo group.

"These treatments really have the potential to transform people's lives," Vickery said, "and I have seen it happen firsthand: the sense of relief [families] get when a child becomes desensitized."

Trying to be 'bite safe'

"It's what a lot of families call trying to be 'bite safe.' it's not that you're curing the allergy; it's not that you're going to be able to eat peanut butter sandwiches," said Sicherer, who was not involved in the study. "It's really just to have a better threshold so that if you accidentally ate something that had a little bit of peanut in it, maybe you wouldn't have a reaction or the reaction wouldn't be so bad."

Though the immunotherapy treatment is simply a matter of gradually increasing your tolerance to peanuts, you could have a severe reaction at home. "This is not something to try at home," Sicherer said.

Aimmune has made peanut into a "pharmaceutical-grade" product, he said. "Most people think of it as medicinalized food." Doctors and patients both know exactly how much you're getting, he said, "and that's important because if you're reactive to, say, a 50th of a peanut, you don't want to have a mistake where you're suddenly getting a 10th of peanut."

Assuming the treatment wins FDA approval, Sicherer said, the conversation between doctors and patients will be, "Is it better to just avoid the food and ask a lot of questions at restaurants and be real careful, or do something like this and still don't eat the food and ask the questions in the restaurant, but at least know you have a bit of a safety valve?"

There are more than a few caveats when it comes to the treatment regimen. For one, it's "a commitment," he said. You cannot take a dose before exercising, and you can't skip doses, or you might have a severe reaction when you pick it up again.

Glover noted, "It's somewhat disruptive. You have to do it every day. Generally, we would take it after dinner." After giving the medicine, she added, parents must carefully monitor their children, preventing them from becoming too active or too hot.

Sicherer said, "The family that does this really, really, really has to be a rule follower. It's not easy." It would still be worth it to many, he said.

If this ends up being the first approved treatment, if it is covered by insurance and if details of whom it works for best were all worked out and the risks and benefits were clear, "that would be so amazing, because we haven't really had anything like that before," he said.

"It's not everything we would hope for, but it's still fantastic to be able to raise someone's threshold from a teeny tiny amount of peanut to a couple of peanuts or more," said Sicherer, who believes that other allergy products will be developed in time: "I can tell my patients that this might be the right thing for them, but if not, we're looking at things that might be easier and better down the road."

Glover acknowledges that "it's not a perfect solution. I would say it's been some work to go through this study, just in terms of a time commitment." Still, if it had taken twice the amount of time, she would have done it: "It's peace of mind."

Even though she dislikes the medicine's taste, Ellis also believes it is worth it. "It's definitely better," she would say to another kid with peanut allergy: "You know you can be around your friends when they have peanut butter on them."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes several expert sources, including a doctor who was not involved in the study and who does not appear to be funded by potential treatment-makers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Study published in the Journal of the American Osteopathic Association finds OMT plus antibiotics reduces risk of death for the most severely ill patients

CHICAGO--August 29, 2016-- An analysis of multicenter randomized controlled clinical trial found osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) for pneumonia reduced length of hospital stay in adults 50 to 74 years old and lowered in-hospital mortality rates for patients 75 and older. The study results published in The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association.

The study analyzed 375 patients ages 50 or older who were randomly assigned to three groups, either receiving OMT, a light touch or conventional care only. Differences between treatment groups were evaluated for subgroups of participants based on their age, Pneumonia Severity Index and type of pneumonia. The data were analyzed by intention-to-treat analysis of all participants and by per-protocol analysis of participants who finished the study without missing any protocol treatments.

Key findings by per-protocol analysis of the younger subgroup found that OMT decreased hospital stay by 1.1 days compared to those who received conventional care only. By intention-to-treat analysis of the older subgroup, in-hospital mortality rates were 11 percent lower to the conventional-care only group. OMT also reduced the in-hospital mortality rates of those with the highest severity of illness.

"Osteopathic manipulative therapy was developed in the pre-antibiotic era specifically for the management of pneumonia. While antibiotic therapy is the current standard of care, the emergence of resistant bacteria is a global threat and provides an incentive to explore adjunct treatments that can improve their efficacy," said James Bailey, DO, assistant professor in physical medicine and rehabilitation at Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine. "This study should encourage physicians to use their osteopathic techniques when treating older patients with pneumonia."

Pneumonia is a leading cause of death for elderly patients, with over 90 percent of pneumonia-related deaths among those 65 and older. Previous studies have also shown that OMT can improve the efficacy of antibiotics in pneumonia patients.

Osteopathic manipulative techniques can help treat structural and tissue abnormalities, relieve joint restriction and misalignment, restore muscle and tissue balance and promote the overall movement blood flow throughout the body. When appropriate, it can complement, and in some cases replace, medications or surgery.

Disclosures: The basis for this analysis, The Multicenter Osteopathic Pneumonia Study in the Elderly (MOPSE) clinical trial, was funded by a consortium of foundations including the Foundation for Osteopathic Health Services. Please see the study for full details.

About the Journal of the American Osteopathic Association

The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association (JAOA) is the official scientific publication of the American Osteopathic Association. Edited by Robert Orenstein, DO, it is the premier scholarly peer-reviewed publication of the osteopathic medical profession. The JAOA's mission is to advance medicine through the publication of peer-reviewed osteopathic research.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We gave this a pass for barely meeting the criteria. The release notes that the trial was funded by a consortium of foundations including the Foundation for Osteopathic Health Services. It doesn’t specifically disclose potential conflicts of interest but directs readers to the study for “full details.”
When we looked at the disclosures, it was clear that the researchers were aligned with or officially affiliated with osteopathic institutions and foundations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The report estimates the percentage of cancers caused by CT scans -- currently 0.4 percent -- will increase to as much as 2 percent in a few decades because the number of scans has increased so dramatically, reports CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook.

"Our concern is there are so many CT scans being done right now that we should really be starting to think: Do we need to all of these CT scans?" says Dr. David Brenner of the Center for Radiological Research at Columbia University.

Some experts say that estimate is overly alarming. But they agree with the need to curb these tests particularly in children, who are more susceptible to radiation and more likely to develop cancer from it.

"There are some serious concerns about the methodology used," but the authors "have brought to attention some real serious potential public health issues," said Dr. Arl Van Moore, head of the American College of Radiology's board of chancellors.

The radiation and risk from one CT scan is low, but it carries a dose 50 to 100 times greater than a traditional X-ray, reports LaPook.

"We are very concerned about the built-up public health risk over a long period of time," said Eric J. Hall, who wrote the report with fellow Columbia University medical physicist David J. Brenner.

So what's a patient to do? Make sure your doctor explains why you need a CT scan and gives you the lowest possible dose, reports LaPook. It's also a good idea to keep a diary of X-ray exposure, especially for children.

The study was published in Thursday's New England Journal of Medicine and paid for by federal grants.

The average American's total radiation exposure has nearly doubled since 1980, largely because of CT, or computed tomography, scans. Medical radiation now accounts for more than half of the population's total exposure; it used to be just one-sixth, and the top source was the normal background rate in the environment, from things like radon in soil and cosmic energy from the sun.

A previous study by the same scientists in 2001 led the federal Food and Drug Administration to recommend ways to limit scans and risks in children.

But CT use continued to soar. About 62 million scans were done in the U.S. last year, up from 3 million in 1980. More than 4 million were in children.

Since previous studies suggest that a third of all diagnostic tests are unnecessary, that means that 20 million adults and more than 1 million children getting CT scans are needlessly being put at risk, Brenner and Hall write.

Ultrasound and MRI, or magnetic resonance imaging, scans often are safer options that do not expose people to radiation, they contend.

CT scans became popular because they offer a quick, relatively cheap and painless way to get 3D pictures so detailed they give an almost surgical view into the body. Doctors use them to evaluate trauma, belly pain, seizures, chronic headaches, kidney stones and other woes, especially in busy emergency rooms. In kids, they are used to diagnose or rule out appendicitis.

"The CT scan is a wonderful tool for examining internal organs, organs that are below the depth of where a poking finger or a listening stethoscope can hear, and yet don't show up on routine X-rays," Dr. Michael Brant-Zawadzki, a clinical professor of radiology at Stanford University tells CBS News.

But they put out a lot of radiation. A CT scan of the chest involves 10 to 15 millisieverts (a measure of dose) versus 0.01 to 0.15 for a regular chest X-ray, 3 for a mammogram and a mere 0.005 for a dental X-ray.

The dose depends on the type of machine and the person - obese people require more radiation than slim ones - and the risk accumulates over a lifetime.

"Medical care in this country is naturally so fragmented. Any one doctor is not going to be aware of the fact that a particular patient has had three or four CT scans at some point in the past," said Dr. Michael Lauer, prevention chief at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

People with chronic problems like kidney stones are likely to get too many scans, said Dr. Fred Mettler, radiology chief in the New Mexico Veterans Administration health care system.

"I've seen people who are 30 years old who have had at least 18 scans done," he said.

That puts them at risk of developing radiation-induced cancer, Brenner and Hall said. They base this on studies of thousands of Japanese atomic bomb survivors who had excess cancer risk after exposures of 50 to 150 millisieverts - the equivalent of several big CT scans.

"That's very controversial. There's a large portion of the medical physics community that would disagree with that" comparison, said Richard Morin, a medical physicist at the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Fla.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The reporter interviewed two sources in the story.  One was the first author of the article being reported on.  One appeared not to be involved in the study reported on.  It would have been helpful to clearly identify the doctors beyond their names to explain why they were interviewed. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A couple of extra minutes attached to the umbilical cord at birth may translate into a small boost in neurodevelopment several years later, a study suggests.

Children whose cords were cut more than three minutes after birth had slightly higher social skills and fine motor skills than those whose cords were cut within 10 seconds. The results showed no differences in IQ.

"There is growing evidence from a number of studies that all infants, those born at term and those born early, benefit from receiving extra blood from the placenta at birth," said Dr. Heike Rabe, a neonatologist at Brighton & Sussex Medical School in the United Kingdom. Rabe's editorial accompanied the study published Tuesday in the journal JAMA Pediatrics.

Delaying the clamping of the cord allows more blood to transfer from the placenta to the infant, sometimes increasing the infant's blood volume by up to a third. The iron in the blood increases infants' iron storage, and iron is essential for healthy brain development.

"The extra blood at birth helps the baby to cope better with the transition from life in the womb, where everything is provided for them by the placenta and the mother, to the outside world," Rabe said. "Their lungs get more blood so that the exchange of oxygen into the blood can take place smoothly."

Past studies have shown higher levels of iron and other positive effects later in infancy among babies whose cords were clamped after several minutes, but few studies have looked at results past infancy.

In this study, researchers randomly assigned half of 263 healthy Swedish full-term newborns to have their cords clamped more than three minutes after birth. The other half were clamped less than 10 seconds after birth.

Four years later, the children underwent a series of assessments for IQ, motor skills, social skills, problem-solving, communication skills and behavior. Those with delayed cord clamping showed modestly higher scores in social skills and fine motor skills. When separated by sex, only the boys showed statistically significant improvement.

"We don't know exactly why, but speculate that girls receive extra protection through higher estrogen levels whilst being in the womb," Rabe said. "The results in term infants are consistent with those of follow-up in preterm infants."

Delayed cord clamping has garnered more attention in the past few years for its potential benefits to the newborn. Until recently, clinicians believed early clamping reduced the risk of hemorrhaging in the mother, but research hasn't borne that out.

Much of the research has focused on preterm infants, who appear to benefit most from delayed cord clamping, Rabe said. Preemies who have delayed cord clamping tend to have better blood pressure in the days immediately after birth, need fewer drugs to support blood pressure, need fewer blood transfusions, have less bleeding into the brain and have a lower risk of necrotizing enterocolitis, a life-threatening bowel injury, she said.

This study is among the few looking at healthy, full-term infants in a country high in resources, as opposed to developing countries where iron deficiency may be more likely.

The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has not yet endorsed the practice, citing insufficient evidence for full-term infants. The World Health Organization recommends delayed cord clamping of not less than one minute.

It is unclear whether the practice could harm infants' health. Some studies have found a higher risk of jaundice, a buildup of bilirubin in the blood from the breakdown of red blood cells. Jaundice is treated with blue light therapy and rarely has serious complications.

Another potential risk is a condition called polycythemia, a very high red blood cell count, said Dr. Scott Lorch, an associate professor of pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine and director of the Center for Perinatal and Pediatric Health Disparities Research at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

"Polycythemia can have medical consequences for the infant, including blood clots, respiratory distress and even strokes in the worst-case scenario," Lorch said. Some studies have found higher levels of red blood cells in babies with delayed cord clamping, but there were no complications.

Lorch also pointed out that this study involved a mostly homogenous population in a country outside the U.S.

"We should see whether similar effects are seen in higher-risk populations, such as the low socioeconomic population, racial and ethnic minorities and those at higher risk for neurodevelopmental delay," Lorch said.

So far, studies on delayed cord clamping have excluded infants born in distress, such as those with breathing difficulties or other problems. But Rabe said these infants may actually benefit most from the practice.

These babies often need more blood volume to help with blood pressure, breathing and circulation problems, Rabe said. "Also, the placental blood is rich with stem cells, which could help to repair any brain damage the baby might have suffered during a difficult birth," she added. "Milking of the cord would be the easiest way to get the extra blood into the baby quickly in an emergency situation."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story made very good use of independent sources beyond the study authors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a step toward developing a blood test that would detect eight common cancers, possibly even before symptoms appear.

As they report Thursday in the journal Science, they're hoping their idea would eventually lead to a $500 test that can screen for cancer and identify people with the disease when it's in its earliest stages and more treatable.

But they have a long way to go.

There have been many attempts over the decades to develop blood tests to screen for cancers. Some look for proteins in the blood that appear with cancer. Others more recently have focused on DNA from tumors. But these methods alone don't give reliable results.

So Nickolas Papadopoulos, a professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, collaborated with many colleagues at the medical school to develop a new approach. It combines two methods into one test.

Their experimental test, dubbed CancerSEEK, focuses on eight major cancers: lung, breast, colon, pancreas, liver, stomach, ovary and esophagus.

"We selected those eight cancers based on how frequent they are, also [because] a lot of them do not have any screening modality right now," Papadopoulos says.

The researchers looked at 1,005 people who had been diagnosed with these cancers. The blood test found signs of cancer in about 70 percent of them.

They also looked at 812 people without cancer diagnoses and found just seven of them — less than 1 percent — apparently had a false reading that found cancer. A low false-positive rate is critical for any test that could be used widely to screen people for cancer.

Of course, the ultimate goal of this test is to find cancer in people who haven't already been diagnosed. And that percentage could well be lower than the 70 percent average. For example, the test was successful only about 40 percent of the time in the patients the researchers studied with the earliest stage 1 cancers.

Though 40 percent success would be far from ideal, "we still think this is a very important milestone in detecting cancers in asymptomatic people," Papadopoulos says. "That could save their life."

"I am incredibly excited by this new paper," says Joshua Schiffman, an oncologist and cancer researcher at the Huntsman Cancer Center at the University of Utah who was not involved in the study. "This is the paper that's going to set the field in motion."

But Schiffman points out that there are many issues to work out – even assuming the test proves reliable among people who have not been previously diagnosed with cancer. For instance, if the success rate is around 40 percent at detecting cancer, that means it misses cancers more often than it finds it.

"The thing we worry about quite often is ... if we have a test result that is negative we don't want to give false reassurance to the patient," he says. He is concerned that patients will think to themselves, "Even though I have this weird stomach pain that won't go away, I know it's not cancer. I'm not going to go to the doctor because the CancerSEEK test told me it was negative," Schiffman says. "And that would be a terrible thing."

Another problem is that the test results find signs of cancer, but often fail to pinpoint which part of the body is affected. "That's a tremendous problem that has to be overcome," he says.

"We've come about one step in a thousand-mile journey," says Vinay Prasad, an oncologist and cancer researcher at the Oregon Health and Science University who was not involved in the study.

First, he notes, the Hopkins team will need to demonstrate that the test will be useful in patients without symptoms. Then the researchers will need to show that the rate of false alarms remains very low, otherwise people will be sent on needless and expensive medical odysseys.

And for the test to be useful, "you've got to find cancer that's going to otherwise be lethal, and not cancer that would otherwise be destined to do nothing," Prasad says.

That's been a huge problem with previous cancer screening tests, especially for prostate cancer and breast cancer, and has led to pointless and potentially dangerous treatments, he says.

An effective screening test would hold lots of potential for cancer patients, Prasad says.

"We want this to be true, we hope that this is true, but we have learned through 30, 40, 50 years of cancer screening that we have to do the right studies at the outset to know that it's true," Prasad says.

The scientists at Hopkins have already launched their next study, which could involve tens of thousands of apparently healthy volunteers who are enrolled in the Geisinger Health Plan in Pennsylvania. Their experience will help answer the next big question, which is whether CancerSEEK will pick up cancer in people who don't have symptoms.

If that multiyear experiment succeeds, the researchers will still have to demonstrate that the test improves and extends the lives of cancer patients.

Papadopoulos is less concerned that the test could detect cancers that might not in fact benefit from treatment.

"In a personal level, I do want to know," he says. "That doesn't mean I have to go and have a surgery. However, I still think this is very useful information, knowing that something is happening and follow it up."

As for the cost of the test, Papadopoulos says the research team has tried hard to make it affordable. They're hoping to make it economical, so that each test could cost about $500. But he says Johns Hopkins holds the patent and has not licensed it as yet to a company that would ultimately set the price.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The two independent sources cited provide important context for understanding the strengths, limitations, and clinical context of the screening test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The first germs to colonize a newborn delivered vaginally come almost exclusively from its mother. But the first to reach an infant born by cesarean section come mostly from the environment — particularly bacteria from inaccessible or less-scrubbed areas like lamps and walls, and skin cells from everyone else in the delivery room.

That difference, some experts believe, could influence a child’s lifelong health. Now, in the first study of its kind, researchers on Monday confirmed that a mother’s beneficial microbes can be transferred, at least partially, from her vagina to her baby after a C-section.

The small proof-of-principle study suggests a new way to inoculate babies, said Dr. Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello, an associate professor of medicine at New York University and lead author of the report, published on Monday in Nature Medicine.

“The study is extremely important,” said Dr. Jack Gilbert, a microbial ecologist at Argonne National Laboratory who did not take part in the work. “Just understanding that it’s possible is exciting.”

But it will take further studies following C-section babies for many years to know to what degree, if any, the method protects them from immune and metabolic problems, he said.

Some epidemiological studies have suggested that C-section babies may have an elevated risk for developing immune and metabolic disorders, including Type 1 diabetes, allergies, asthma and obesity.

Scientists have theorized that these children may be missing key bacteria known to play a large role in shaping the immune system from the moment of birth onward. To replace these microbes, some parents have turned to a novel procedure called vaginal microbial transfer.

A mother’s vaginal fluids — loaded with one such essential bacterium, lactobacillus, that helps digest human milk — are collected before surgery and swabbed all over the infant a minute or two after birth.

An infant’s first exposure to microbes may educate the early immune system to recognize friend from foe, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

Friendly bacteria, like lactobacilli, are tolerated as being like oneself. Those from hospital ventilation vents or the like may be perceived as enemies and be attacked.

These early microbial interactions may help set up an immune system that recognizes “self” from “non-self” for the rest of a person’s life, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

In the United States, about one in three babies are delivered by C-section, a rate that has risen dramatically in recent decades. Some hospitals perform the surgery on nearly seven in ten women delivering babies.

An ideal C-section rate for low-risk births should be no more than 15 percent, according to the World Health Organization.

Dr. Dominguez-Bello’s study involved 18 babies born at the University of Puerto Rico hospital in San Juan, where she recently worked. Seven were born vaginally and 11 by elective C-section. Of the latter, four were swabbed with the mother’s vaginal microbes and seven were not.

Microbes were collected on a folded sterile piece of gauze that was dipped in a saline solution and inserted into each mother’s vagina for one hour before surgery. As the operations began, the gauze was pulled out and placed in a sterile collector.

One to two minutes after the babies were delivered and put under a neonatal lamp, researchers swabbed each infant’s lips, face, chest, arms, legs, back, genitals and anal region with the damp gauze. The procedure took 15 seconds.

Dr. Dominguez-Bello and her colleagues then tracked the composition of microbes by taking more than 1,500 oral, skin and anal samples from the newborns, as well as vaginal samples from the mothers, over the first month after birth.

For the first few days, ambient skin bacteria from the delivery room predominated in the mouths and on the skin of C-section babies who were not swabbed, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

But in terms of their bacterial colonies, the infants swabbed with the microbes closely resembled vaginally delivered babies, she found, especially in the first week of life. They were all covered with lactobacilli.

Gut bacteria in both C-section groups, however, were less abundant than that found in the vaginally delivered babies.

Anal samples from the swabbed group, oddly, contained the highest abundance of bacteria usually found in the mouth.

The results show the complexity of labor, said Dr. Alexander Khoruts, a microbial expert and associate professor of medicine at the University of Minnesota. “It cannot be simplified to a neat, effortless passage of the infant through the birth canal,” he said.

As the month progressed, the oral and skin microbes of all infants began to resemble normal adult patterns, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. But fecal bacteria did not, probably because of breast or formula feeding and the absence of solid foods.

The transfer fell short of full vaginal birth-like colonization for two reasons, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. Compared to infants who spent time squeezed inside the birth canal, those who were swabbed got less exposure to their mother’s microbes.

And all infants delivered by C-section were exposed to antibiotics, which also may have reduced the number and variety of bacteria colonizing them.

A larger study of vaginal microbial transfer is underway at N.Y.U., Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. Eighty-four mothers have participated so far.

Infants delivered both by C-section and vaginally will be followed for one year to look for differences in the treated and untreated groups and to look for complications. Thus far the swabbing has proved entirely safe.

The procedure is not yet recommended by professional medical societies, said Dr. Sara Brubaker, a specialist in maternal and fetal medicine at N.Y.U. Until more is known, physicians are hesitant to participate.

“But it has hit the lay press,” she said. “Patients come in and ask for it. They are doing it themselves.”

Dr. Brubaker is one of them. When her daughter was born three and a half months ago, she arranged to have her baby swabbed.
• Let Me Tell You About My Big Baby

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article quotes several outside sources with the comments of Drs. Gilbert and Khoruts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Dec. 7, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Hot flashes, a common curse in menopause, can be especially bothersome after breast cancer. But a new study suggests an existing medication may help.

The drug is oxybutynin (Ditropan XL), long used to treat urinary incontinence.

The study found that women taking the medicine had an average of five fewer hot flashes a week, compared with three fewer among women taking a placebo.

"Oxybutynin is an option that can control these symptoms and improve quality of life," said lead researcher Dr. Roberto Leon-Ferre, an assistant professor of oncology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

There are a couple of reasons for severe hot flashes after breast cancer. Chemotherapy may induce early menopause, and drugs that reduce estrogen levels may make hot flashes worse, the research team noted.

Hormone replacement therapy, which is often recommended for menopausal symptoms, is generally not advised for breast cancer survivors. That's left women who can't take hormones at a disadvantage.

Oxybutynin blocks a substance in the brain, and one of its side effects is decreased sweating, Leon-Ferre noted.

"Because of this, we can take advantage of the 'side effect' and decrease involuntary sweating associated with hot flashes, and decrease the hot flashes as well," he explained.

The drug could be game-changing for certain women, said Dr. Alice Police, regional director of breast surgery at Northwell Health Cancer Institute in Sleepy Hollow, N.Y.

"This is a really important advance in survivorship and compassionate cancer care," added Police, who wasn't involved in the study.

Because oxybutynin is already available for other conditions, Leon-Ferre said doctors could prescribe it off-label.

However, he cautioned that its long-term effects aren't known. Drugs in this class -- called anticholinergics -- have been linked with mental decline, he said.

For example, the drugs may raise the risk for problems with short-term memory, reasoning and confusion, and may also hike the risk for dementia among older patients, studies indicate.

For the new study, Leon-Ferre and his colleagues randomly assigned 150 women who experienced at least 28 hot flashes a week to oxybutynin or a placebo.

Almost two-thirds were also taking drugs to prevent a return of breast cancer, either tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor.

The women were randomly assigned to one of three groups: low-dose oxybutynin twice a day for six weeks; low-dose oxybutynin for one week followed by an increased dose; or a placebo.

Both doses appeared to reduce hot flashes better than the placebo.

And oxybutynin doesn't interfere with the metabolism of tamoxifen, Leon-Ferre said, calling that an important consideration for breast cancer survivors.

Most insurance covers oxybutynin, and a month's supply can range from $21 to $42. With insurance, copays would be less, he added.

Side effects included constipation, mild diarrhea, dry mouth, dry eyes, episodes of confusion and difficulty urinating, the researchers found.

Women taking oxybutynin also reported improvement in work, social activities, leisure activities, sleep and overall quality of life.

These are vital issues, Police said. "I will never forget the first time a patient said, 'Thank you for curing my breast cancer, but you ruined my life,' " she said.

The patient said endocrine therapy had caused hot flashes so severe that she could not sleep. As a result, she was having trouble at work and in all other aspects of her life, Police recalled.

"Her intimate relationship was also suffering, as nighttime had become a battleground between her and her internal temperature control," Police said.

The patient said she was willing to stop her hormone therapy and risk the return of breast cancer rather than live with her current symptoms, she said.

"This study makes me hopeful that these patients may have a way out of their dilemma," Police said. "Instead of just telling them they should be happy to be alive, we may be able to offer a reliable treatment for some of the debilitating side effects of our treatments for breast cancer."

The research was scheduled to be presented Friday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas. Studies presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until peer-reviewed for publication in a medical journal.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about hot flashes and cancer survivors.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article quotes Dr. Alice Police, regional director of breast surgery at the Northwell Health Cancer Institute in Sleepy Hollow, NY, who was not affiliated with the study. We did not detect any conflicts of interest that should have been disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DURHAM, N.C. -- Swimmers and divers who are prone to a sudden and potentially life-threatening form of pulmonary edema in cold water could benefit from a simple and readily available dose of sildenafil, according to findings from a small study by Duke Health researchers.

The drug -- best known as Viagra™ -- is normally used for treatment of male impotence, but also for pulmonary arterial hypertension. It dilates blood vessels, giving it the potential to ease an abrupt cold water-induced constriction of blood vessels in the arms and legs that can lead to blood pooling in the heart and lungs.

Athletes and others with this condition -- called swimming-induced pulmonary edema, or SIPE -- cough up blood, labor to breathe and have low blood-oxygen typically brought on by swimming or scuba diving, usually in cold water. Often the symptoms dissipate over 24 hours, but the condition can be serious and even fatal and medical attention is recommended. Many don't know they are prone to the problem until they are in the water and quickly develop symptoms.

"During immersion in water, particularly cold water, susceptible people have an exaggerated degree of the normal redistribution of blood from the extremities to the chest area, causing increased pressure in the blood vessels of the lungs and leakage of fluid into the lungs," said Richard Moon, M.D., an anesthesiologist and medical director of the Duke Center for Hyperbaric Medicine & Environmental Physiology.

"Some cases of SIPE appear to have been the result of cardiac problems," said Moon, who was lead author of the study published online February 16 in Circulation: Journal of the American Heart Association.

Moon and colleagues studied these responses in 10 athletes who had experienced the condition while exercising or competing in triathlons. During a carefully monitored test in Duke's hyperbaric center, the researchers had the participants exercise under water in a dive pool that recreated the conditions of a swim that could trigger the SIPE response.

They compared those participants with 20 others who did not have a history of SIPE. None of the participants in either group had heart abnormalities, but the SIPE-susceptible athletes had higher pulmonary arterial pressure and pulmonary artery wedge pressure during the underwater exercise, confirming that SIPE is a form of pulmonary edema caused by high pressure in the blood vessels within the lungs.

When the SIPE participants were given sildenafil and then performed the same underwater exercise, the pressures were no longer as elevated.

"This is a small study, but also very intensive with direct, accurate pressure measurements," Moon said. "It appears that the drug, which dilates the blood vessels, could be creating more capacity in the blood vessels in the arms and legs, reducing the tendency for blood to redistribute to the thorax, and therefore reducing the high pressure in the pulmonary vessels."

One study participant, triathlete Katherine Calder-Becker, said her bouts with SIPE threatened to end her competitive career. She said she would have no problems during training in swimming pools, but then experienced debilitating shortness of breath and distress during the swim portions of competitions in colder open water. She coughed up blood and was once hospitalized.

Triathlete Calder-Becker, 51, was diagnosed with SIPE and enrolled in studies at Duke in 2011. Afterward, she consulted her cardiologist and was prescribed a low dose of sildenafil that she takes shortly before competitions.

"I have successfully raced in 20 triathlons since I started taking sildenafil, including five ultra events that require 10-kilometer swims," Calder-Becker said. "I have not had an incident since then. I didn't want to give up racing -- this is something my husband and I do together, and we travel together to competitions -- so it has meant everything to me to continue."

Moon said larger studies are needed to replicate the results and learn more about possible adverse side effects of the drug. He also said research is ongoing to further illuminate the causes of SIPE and potential ways of diagnosing it early.

In addition to Moon, study authors include Stefanie D. Martina, Dionne F. Peacher, Jennifer F. Potter, Tracy E. Wester, Anne D. Cherry, Michael J. Natoli, Claire E. Otteni, Dawn N. Kernagis, William D. White, and John J. Freiberger.

This study received funding from the Divers Alert Network and U.S. Naval Sea Systems Command Contracts (N61331-03-C-0015, N0463A-07-C-0002).
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funders are mentioned, although the release makes no effort to clarify possible conflicts of interest. The study on which this news release is based states that the principle investigators have no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, April 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- For men who believe size matters -- and that their penises don't measure up -- success can be found in certain non-surgical penile lengthening treatments, a new study analysis by Italian researchers contends.

Concerned that patients were seeking out unproven and potentially dangerous ways of lengthening the penis, the researchers examined the medical literature to see whether popular non-surgical methods had any scientific basis.

In a review of five evidence-based surgical studies of 121 men and six non-surgical studies of 109 men published between 2000 and 2009, the researchers found that penile extenders -- which stretch the organ over a period of months through traction -- were the most effective among non-invasive methods.

But one expert cautioned that men are playing with fire if they tinker with their penis size simply for vanity's sake. Dr. Elizabeth Kavaler, a urologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, said functional issues resulting from conditions such as birth defects or prostate cancer surgery may warrant penile surgery, but such cases are unusual.

"It's a very fragile organ to begin with," Kavaler said, "and if you start to do all these things to it you can disfigure it... They should leave it alone."

Study co-author Dr. Paolo Gontero said urologists are constantly approached by men concerned about their penis size, despite the fact that the majority are average, with a flaccid length of 1 to 4 inches.

"However, most men complaining of inadequate penile size do have associated sexual problems even if their penile dimensions fall within the normal range -- so-called dysmorphophobic penis," said Gontero, an associate professor of urology at the University of Turin. "No study has, however, specifically addressed the extent and type of sexual bother in this patient category."

Dysmorphophobia "is a condition consisting of an imaginary flaw in the physical appearance," the study noted.

Writing in the April issue of the British Journal of Urology International, Gontero and his colleagues found that penile extenders work better than techniques such as vacuum devices, exercises and Botox injections, and that psychological satisfaction is equally as important as any physical changes.

A review of surgical techniques showed they increased phallus size an average of about a half-inch to 1 inch, but Gontero cautioned that the safest surgery -- which cuts the suspensory ligament of the penis to lengthen it -- often yields poor results.

"On the contrary, more complex lengthening procedures are to be considered experimental and potentially dangerous," he said.

"All procedures aimed to increase the penile girth should be considered unsafe, leading to potentially poor cosmetic and functional results," Gontero added. "I have come across such cases that I had to re-operate in order to remove additive substances injected around the penis."

The men studied ranged in age from 24 to 56 and were followed between three and 16 months.

More than 70 of them used penile extenders, with six experiencing minor problems such as bruising, pain and itching. These devices yielded average flaccid length increases of between 0.2 inches and 1 inch, Gontero said, and men achieving better results noted their satisfaction.

"Application of progressive and constant traction forces is a very old-fashioned technique used by the ancestors and currently by some tribal populations to elongate the penis or the neck," he said.

Gontero noted that cognitive behavioral therapy might help build confidence in some men.

Long-term vacuum treatments did not appear effective, producing no significant physical changes after six months, Gontero said, but did provide a degree of psychological satisfaction.

He and his colleagues found no scientific evidence to support penile-lengthening exercises.

Dr. E. Douglas Whitehead, director of New York Phalloplasty and associate clinical professor of urology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City, said suspensory ligament surgery to increase penis length can be more effective when combined with stretching techniques.

"The human body, even bone, can be stretched," he said. "So stretching the penis, when done long enough, will work. If anything, libido and desire are even better because you look better and feel better about yourself."

For more about penis size, visit Psychology Today.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story uses independent sources, and we applaud that. We wish that the second independent source quoted had not been a penile enhancement practitioner. The story did not, however, note that the co-author of the study has conducted research for a European company that produces a penile traction device and is a member of the company’s medical advisers (http://www.andromedical.com/medical-committee/committee-members/). This was not included in the conflict of interest statement that was published with the study, but this is a reminder that reporters should perform basic background checks when covering research and quoting experts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among the less convinced is Dr. John H. Glick, director of the Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Glick tells his patients about the new data but does not suggest they skip chemotherapy. After all, he notes, the national guidelines were based on results from large randomized clinical trials. And the recent data indicating that some women can skip chemotherapy are based on an after-the-fact analysis of selected clinical trials.

"We're in an era where evidence-based medicine should govern practice," Dr. Glick said.

For women with breast cancer, of course, the uncertainty is excruciating. Faced with a disease that already causes indecision and anxiety, they are now confronted with incomplete data, differing opinions from different doctors and a choice that can seem almost impossible: Should they give up a taxing treatment when all the answers are not in and they have what may be a fatal disease?

"If the medical profession is not even close to being of one mind, how is the woman to know?" said Donald A. Berry, a statistician at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, the lead author of a recent paper questioning chemotherapy's benefits in many women.

Barbara Brenner, who has had breast cancer and is executive director of the advocacy group Breast Cancer Action, said, "There's a real problem," and added, "We finally tell people at the end of the day: 'You're going to get a lot of information. Trust your gut. Nobody has the answers.' "

"I'm really glad I was diagnosed 13 years ago," Ms. Brenner said, "when there were fewer choices."

Doctors worry, too. It took two years before the National Cancer Institute and its researchers could even agree on a design for the large new American study that will test the idea that many women might safely forgo chemotherapy.

The study, which starts enrolling patients at the end of this month, will involve women whose cancers are fueled by estrogen and have not spread beyond the breast. They will be randomly assigned to have the standard treatment — chemotherapy followed by a drug like tamoxifen that starves tumors of estrogen — or to skip chemotherapy and have treatment only with a drug like tamoxifen.

Unlike the American study, the one now planned in Europe will also include women whose cancer has spread beyond their breasts into nearby lymph nodes. The American study may eventually add such women, said Sheila E. Taube, who directs the cancer diagnosis program at the National Cancer Institute.

Dr. Taube said the debate reminded her of one a few decades ago, when the question was whether all women with cancer needed mastectomies or whether many could have a lumpectomy instead. "To me, the situations are analogous," she said.

The chemotherapy question starts with American and European guidelines that say almost every woman with breast cancer that has gone beyond its earliest stages, when it is confined to the milk duct, should have the treatment. And for good reason, many cancer researchers say: a series of large studies has shown that chemotherapy saves lives and that newer and more aggressive regimens are improvements over older ones.

That has led doctors to feel most at ease giving very aggressive treatments to almost everyone.

"Part of it is that this area of medicine we're practicing in is kind of a high wire act," said Dr. Michael Lee, an oncologist in private practice in Norfolk, Va. "It is more comfortable to adopt things that are aggressive."

But most of those studies were done at a time when doctors did not distinguish between the 70 percent of women with breast cancers fueled by estrogen and the 30 percent whose cancers were not.

Now Dr. Berry, the M. D. Anderson statistician, and a group of leading cancer researchers have found that the chemotherapy benefits in those clinical trials were concentrated almost exclusively in women whose cancers were impervious to estrogen. For the others, with estrogen-sensitive tumors, the lifesaving benefit came from hormonal therapy. The results of the analysis, published recently in The Journal of the American Medical Association, were the same even if the cancer had spread to the lymph nodes.

The drawback of that study, Dr. Glick notes, is that it was not a large prospective randomized clinical trial, the gold standard in medicine.

There is also another issue. What if some women with estrogen-fed tumors do benefit from chemotherapy? How can they be identified?

One possibility is new genetic tests, which are part of the two studies that are about to begin. The cancer institute is using the Oncotype DX test, which includes genes associated with response to chemotherapy, among them genes involved with a cell's response to estrogen.

The study is ethical, said Dr. Larry Norton of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, because the only women whose treatment will be decided at random are those in a kind of gray area, not women for whom chemotherapy would be a clear benefit or clearly unnecessary.

"I think the clinical trial is really a superb one," Dr. Norton said. "I would like to see it go so we have definitive data."

In the meantime, some physicians, like Dr. Winer, are taking their own best shot at figuring out who really benefits from chemotherapy. He asks how sensitive the tumor is to estrogen, how aggressive a pathologist believes it is, how big it is, how much has spread to the lymph nodes and whether its surface has a type of protein, HER2, that is associated with a better response to chemotherapy. After talking through the decision with his patients, he says, he is comfortable omitting chemotherapy in some who would have had it not long ago.

Others, like Dr. Francisco J. Esteva of M. D. Anderson, use a computer program to calculate a woman's risks of recurrence and give the option of no chemotherapy only to women with low-risk cancers confined to their breasts.

Still others, like Dr. Glick, are starting to tell women with estrogen-fed cancers that although they still need chemotherapy, they may not need the most intense treatment.

And while some, including Dr. Winer, predict that the use of chemotherapy will almost certainly decline in the years ahead, for now most doctors are sticking with the current guidelines, waiting for expert advice from national panels on what to do.

"I don't know that many doctors who are comfortable giving women an option about chemotherapy," said Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, an advocacy group. "A lot of physicians talk about the data, but then they say, 'But, to be on the safe side. ...' "

Still, doctors say it is not simply that they are urging more and more chemotherapy on patients. In many cases, it is patients who want the most aggressive treatment.

"A cancer diagnosis is earth-shattering," said Dr. Lee, who has had cancer himself. "You stay up at night. You wonder. Even when you're doing well, you don't know whether to trust it."

And so, he said, "a lot of people will take a treatment even if there is a very low statistical chance that they will benefit."

That was what happened a few months ago, when Dr. Esteva told Janice Baty of Sulphur, La., a 40-year-old mother of two, that she might not need chemotherapy. After a long discussion with Ms. Baty and her husband, Dr. Esteva left them so they could decide what to do.

"My husband said, 'Look, we have two little kids,' " Ms. Baty recalled. "I called the doctor back in and said, 'We're doing the chemo.' "

Women who say they want the most aggressive treatment may not fully realize what they are asking for, said Mary Peelen, 45, of San Francisco. Ms. Peelen learned in January 2005 that she had cancer. It was small, was fed by estrogen and had spread to just two of her lymph nodes. Her oncologist was adamant: chemotherapy was her only option.

"I felt frightened and very coerced," she said. She had an aggressive regimen, suffered terribly and was left with painful nerve damage in her arms and hands that prevents movements like opening jars or using scissors and frequently makes her drop things.

Ms. Peelen feels that in a way, she just missed the revolution, perhaps one of the last women with her type of cancer who will have to suffer so much.

For now, the answers as to who should have chemotherapy are far from clear.

"I think practice should change, but it's very dicey," said Dr. Berry, of M. D. Anderson.

His colleague Dr. Esteva says it is one thing for a statistician like Dr. Berry to look at retrospective data, and another for a physician, like himself, to sit down with a patient who has to make what may be a life-or-death decision.

"It's not a perfect science," Dr. Esteva said. "A statistically small reduction in risk may be very important to some women, while for others chemotherapy is not worth it."

And so, Dr. Esteva said, he is left asking many women with early-stage breast cancer to decide what can seem like the undecidable: whether they want "to take something potentially toxic when you have a 90 percent chance of being cured without it."

"My experience ," he said, "is that more want to get chemo than not."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Many sources of information are cited and these are from trusted organizations of cancer research and information (e.g. National Cancer Institute, American Cancer Society). Dr. Berry, the lead author of the main study discussed, receives funding from several pharmaceutical companies, including Eli Lilly, Novartis and Bristol-Myers, however, the study was not funded by these companies. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study from The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston has revealed that a treatment taken daily by people who have had organ transplants to prevent organ rejection protects against Alzheimer's disease. An early online version of this paper detailing the findings has been published and is scheduled for publication in the July 7 issue of the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common age-associated neurodegenerative disorder that has no cure. Compelling evidence shows that toxic protein aggregates called Aβ oligomers selectively target and disrupt the points of communication between brain cells, impairing memory in people suffering from the disease. Because of this, there is a large consensus that preventing this kind of toxicity would be an effective treatment strategy.

Calcineurin is an enzyme that regulates communication between brain cells and memory formation. The UTMB research team and others have shown previously that this enzyme plays a central role in the harmful effects of the Aβ oligomers and that elevated calcineurin is found in the nervous system of Alzheimer's patients.

Using a mouse model of Alzheimer's, the researchers earlier showed that blocking calcineurin restored memory function. However, the question of whether such a strategy would prevent the onset and progression of Alzheimer's in people is challenging because treatment with a calcineurin-blocking agent suppresses the immune system.

To bypass this issue, the UTMB team analyzed data from the medical records of 2,644 patients who received organ transplants and must take calcineurin inhibitor-based medications, such as Tacrolimus or cyclosporine, for the rest of their lives to prevent rejection of the transplanted organ. As part of the medical care for transplant recipients, any evidence of memory impairment or dementia is immediately noted and monitored, as it can limit treatment compliance among these patients.

The participants were separated into groups by age at the time of last visit or death, gender and ethnicity. Eight participants showed evidence of dementia - two were younger than 65, five were in the 65-74 years old group and one was in the 75-84 years old group.

The UTMB study data was compared with national data obtained from the 2014 Alzheimer's Association Facts and Figures dataset on age-matched patients to compare the prevalence of Alzheimer's.

"These data clearly show that the prevalence of dementia and Alzheimer's in our transplant patient group is significantly lower, in fact almost absent, when compared to national data from the general population," said senior author Luca Cicalese, professor in the department of surgery. "In patients over 65 years, 11 percent of the general population had dementia compared with 1.02 percent of the study subjects. In Americans over 75 years, 15.3 percent of the population had dementia compared with 0.6 percent of the study subjects. Among Americans over 85 years, 32 percent had dementia, although we did not have any patients in this age group with dementia."

Since the people involved in the study mostly come from Texas, the researchers further compared their over 65 years old group with the prevalence of Alzheimer's in the general population of the state and got similar results.

"Taken together, our findings from these people confirm the data obtained with animal models and support, for the first time in human subjects, our notion that calcineurin inhibition has a protective effect on the development and possible progression and even reversal of Alzheimer's disease," said senior author Giulio Taglialatela, Professor and Vice Chair for Research in the department of neurology and director of UTMB's Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases. "Therefore, we are currently working on devising treatment strategies to obtain the same beneficial effects in AD humans using low doses of calcineurin inhibitors that result in minimal or no immunosuppression, thus limiting possible undesired side effects."

UTMB's Cristiana Rastellini, Professor in the departments of Surgery and Microbiology & Immunology also was an author on this paper.

This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health and the Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funding sources are clearly identified.  The authors disclosed no conflicts of interest in the paper, a fact which the news release could also have shared with readers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
They say they boosted the effectiveness in melanoma patients by carefully selecting and cloning T cells from patients' blood.

The approach outlined in the new study by researchers from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle identifies several ways to make it better, said Dr. Cassian Yee, the study's senior author. The key is to identify specific cancer-fighting cells already circulating in the blood of patients and make thousands of copies of them in the lab.

Immunotherapy is one of medicine's most promising — and most problematic — approaches to cancer treatment. It aims to charge up the patient's immune system to attack cancer cells and halt their out-of-control growth.

The study, published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academies of Science, contributes to hopes that a tumor-fighting strategy called immunotherapy can slow, halt or even reverse the growth of a range of cancers — and do so with fewer dangerous side effects.

In a bid to make cancer immunotherapy more effective, researchers report they have succeeded in halting the progress of aggressive melanoma in its tracks — at least briefly — in seven patients treated with an army of cloned cancer-fighting immune cells. In one of those patients, the treatment resulted in complete remission of his metastatic melanoma and evidence that his immune system stands ready to fight any return of the cancer after three years.

This type of "adoptive immunotherapy" could be effective against a wide range of cancers, Yee said. His research group is making plans to try the technique on patients with advanced ovarian cancer and sarcomas — rare tumors that arise from connective tissue in bones and muscle.

Several independent researchers said the study results were promising. But they also noted that the trial involved only 11 patients and said the therapy was less effective than in other published trials.

"Someday, cell-based therapy will be mainstream in cancer therapy," said Dr. Jeff Miller of the University of Minnesota's cell therapy core laboratory. "Each article that shows clinical activity is giving us a piece of the puzzle" that will make it safer and more effective, he said.

Immunotherapy usually starts with clinicians harvesting immune system cells called T cells that have attached themselves to a tumor in an effort to attack. They then coax the cells to multiply, either in the lab or in the body, and let them loose in the bloodstream so they can attack cancer wherever they find it.

Yee's team tried to do this more precisely. The researchers hoped that by choosing T cells more selectively and cloning only those judged most likely to vanquish their foe, the treatment would be more effective. Sorting through the body's vast and diverse population of T cells to select just the right ones is a painstaking process. But Yee bet that the extra effort would pay off with better results and fewer side effects.

Researchers drew blood from patients and scoured it to find the rare type of immune cell — a melanoma-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte cell — that specifically homes in on proteins expressed by the cancer. Then they put their harvest — as few as a few hundred cells — into a test tube and cloned them, creating millions. The last step was to infuse the resulting army of cancer-fighting clones back into the patient.

In six of the 11 patients in the trial, the melanoma stopped progressing for 12 to 19 weeks. Another patient was declared in remission because his cancer ceased to spread and, after several months, disappeared altogether. Three years later, researchers continue to detect the presence of the cloned cells they infused into the patient, 61-year-old high school history teacher Gardiner Vinnedge of North Bend, Wash.

For six years, Vinnedge endured painful rounds of chemotherapy, only to have his melanoma return. The immunotherapy allowed him to return to work three weeks after treatments began. The only side effect, he said, was a raging rash that lasted for three days.

"My back, my legs were just covered with a hot red rash," Vinnedge said. "It meant the treatment was working — the war was on between my T cells and the melanin in my skin." Now he says he is optimistic he may live to see retirement age, though he's not sure he'll ever stop teaching.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent sources were quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A SIMPLE eye test could help solve the biggest global cause of irreversible blindness, glaucoma.

In clinical trials, the pioneering diagnostic -- developed by researchers at University College London (UCL) and the Western Eye Hospital -- allowed doctors to see individual nerve cell death in the back of the eye.

Glaucoma affects 60 million people in the world, with 1 in 10 suffering total sight loss in both eyes.

Early detection means doctors can start treatments before sight loss begins. The test also has potential for early diagnosis of other degenerative neurological conditions, including Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and multiple sclerosis.

Results of first clinical trials with glaucoma patients are published today (28/04/17) in the journal BRAIN.

Professor Francesca Cordeiro at UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, who led the research, said: "Detecting glaucoma early is vital as symptoms are not always obvious. Although detection has been improving, most patients have lost a third of vision by the time they are diagnosed. Now, for the first time, we have been able to show individual cell death and detect the earliest signs of glaucoma. While we cannot cure the disease, our test means treatment can start before symptoms begin. In the future, the test could also be used to diagnose other neurodegenerative diseases."

Loss of sight in patients with glaucoma is caused by the death of cells in the retina at the back of the eye. This cell death is called apoptosis.

As with other neurodegenerative conditions, more and more nerve cells are lost as the disease progresses.

Professor Philip Bloom, Chief Investigator at Western Eye Hospital, part of Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, added: "Treatment is much more successful when it is begun in early stages of the disease, when sight loss is minimal. Our developments mean we could diagnose patients 10 years earlier than was previously possible."

The technique developed is called DARC, which stands for detection of apoptosing retinal cells. It uses a specially developed fluorescent marker which attaches to cell proteins when injected into patients. Sick cells appear as white fluorescent spots during eye examination. UCL Business, the commercialisation company of UCL, holds the patents for the technology.

The examination uses equipment used during routine hospital eye examinations. Researchers hope that eventually it may be possible for opticians to do the tests, enabling even earlier detection of the disease.

The research is funded by Wellcome Trust.

Bethan Hughes, from Wellcome's Innovation team said: "This innovation has the potential to transform lives for those who suffer loss of sight through glaucoma, and offers hope of a breakthrough in early diagnosis of other neurodegenerative diseases. Loss of sight as you age is an incredibly difficult disability, impacting quality of life and independence."

Initial clinical trials were carried out on a small number of glaucoma patients and compared with tests on healthy people. The initial clinical trials established the safety of the test for patients.

Further studies will now be carried out to into DARC and how it can be used not only to diagnose and treat glaucoma patients but also for other neurodegenerative conditions.
• Link to paper: The following link will go live at the time the embargo lifts: https:/
• For embargoed copies of the BRAIN paper and for media enquiries please contact Maggie Stratton: m.stratton@wellcome.ac.uk +44 (0)20 7611 8609/ +44 (0)787 211 2656
• For further information about DARC technology please contact Emma Alam: e.alam@uclb.com +44 (0)207 679 9000/ +44 (0)7896 058667

UCL Business PLC (UCLB) is a leading technology transfer company that supports and commercialises research and innovations arising from UCL, one of the UK's top research-led universities. UCLB has a successful track record and a strong reputation for identifying and protecting promising new technologies and innovations from UCL academics. UCLB has a strong track record in commercialising medical technologies and provides technology transfer services to UCL's associated hospitals; University College London Hospitals, Moorfields Eye Hospital, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children and the Royal Free London Hospital. It invests directly in development projects to maximise the potential of the research and manages the commercialisation process of technologies from laboratory to market. For further information, please visit: http://www. Twitter: @UCL_Business

UCL was founded in 1826. We were the first English university established after Oxford and Cambridge, the first to open up university education to those previously excluded from it, and the first to provide systematic teaching of law, architecture and medicine. We are among the world's top universities, as reflected by performance in a range of international rankings and tables. UCL currently has over 38,000 students from 150 countries and over 12,000 staff. Our annual income is more than £1 billion. http://www. | Follow us on Twitter @uclnews | Watch our YouTube channel YouTube.com/UCLTV

Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust is one of the largest hospital Trust's in England, providing acute and specialist healthcare for a population of nearly two million people. The Trust has five hospitals - Charing Cross, Hammersmith, Queen Charlotte's & Chelsea, St Mary's and The Western Eye -- as well as community services.

The Western Eye Hospital is a specialist eye hospital in West London with a 24/7 accident and emergency department. The hospital's facilities also include outpatients, inpatients, day case and inpatient surgery.

The equipment used in the study was funded by a grant from Imperial Health Charity. Imperial Health Charity (formerly Imperial College Healthcare Charity) raises funds for five London hospitals within Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust: Charing Cross, Hammersmith, Queen Charlotte's & Chelsea, St Mary's and Western Eye hospitals. It has awarded more than £12million to 300 healthcare projects to date, and in the autumn of 2015 committed a further £20million to the hospitals of Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust over the next three years for a series of major projects.

Wellcome exists to improve health for everyone by helping great ideas to thrive. We're a global charitable foundation, both politically and financially independent. We support scientists and researchers, take on big problems, fuel imaginations and spark debate.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The funder is named and we are told that “UCL Business, the commercialisation company of UCL, holds the patents for the technology.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Ransohoff and other screening experts say patients should continue to have the test, because it is still highly effective. But they also recommend that patients seek the best colonoscopists by, for example, asking pointed questions about how many polyps they find and remove. They also say patients should be scrupulous in the unpleasant bowel cleansing that precedes the test, and promptly report symptoms like bleeding even if they occur soon after a colonoscopy.

The American Cancer Society says that even if the test is less effective than many had believed, it has no plans to change its recommended intervals between screenings — the test still prevents most cancers, but the expense and risk of the test argue against doing it more often.

The cancer society and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also are focusing on developing measurements of quality so that doctors who do colonoscopies can assess themselves and improve.

But gastroenterologists say that, if nothing else, the study points up the paucity of evidence for the common suggestion that anyone who had a clean bill of health from a colonoscopy is almost totally protected for at least a decade.

“We have to not overpromise,” said Dr. Ransohoff, who wrote an editorial accompanying the colonoscopy paper. “We need to look at the evidence, and we shouldn’t go beyond it.”

The new study matched each of 10,292 people who died of colon cancer to five people who lived in the same area and were of the same age, sex and socioeconomic status. The researchers asked how many patients and control subjects had had colonoscopies and whether the doctors had removed polyps. Then the researchers compared the groups and asked how much the colon cancer death rate had declined in people who had had the screening test.

The results were “a shock,” said Dr. Nancy N. Baxter, the lead author of the paper and a colorectal surgeon at the University of Toronto. When she saw them, she said, “I asked my analyst to rerun the data.”

Now, researchers say, the challenge is to find out why the test missed so many cancers, in particular, those on the right side of the colon, and whether the problem can be fixed.

About 148,000 people will learn they have colon cancer this year, the American Cancer Society reports, and nearly 50,000 will die of it.

It might be that Canadian doctors were not sufficiently skilled. About a third of the colonoscopies were done by general internists and family practitioners who might not have had the experience to do the test well.

But, said Dr. Douglas K. Rex, director of endoscopy and professor of medicine at Indiana University, that cannot be the entire explanation because at least one study, as yet unpublished, involving California Medi-Cal patients also found the test missed many cancers on the right side of the colon.

That leaves several other possibilities.

Perhaps patients did not sufficiently cleanse their bowels of fecal material, a particular problem for the right side of the colon.

“After the prep has been completed, mucus and intestinal secretions start rolling out of the small intestine and colon,” Dr. Rex explained. The secretions, he added, pour from the base of the appendix into the right side of the colon and are “very sticky” and can obscure polyps.

One solution, supported by six studies, is to be sure there is just a short time between when patients finish taking the strong laxative that cleanses their bowel and the colonoscopy, Dr. Rex said. That usually means taking half of the laxative the night before the screening test and the rest in the morning, something that often is not done, he added, but that he and others recommend.

Cancer may also be different in the right colon, researchers said.

Flat and indented polyps tend to cluster in the right colon. And so do another kind, serrated lesions, which, some studies indicate, might turn into cancer much more quickly than typical polyps.

“It’s possible that we will never get as good a result” in the right colon, said Robert Smith, director of screening for the American Cancer Society.

Still, he said, that does not mean that patients should have more frequent colonoscopies. The tests are “hugely expensive,” he said, and insurers may not pay for more frequent colonoscopies. The test also carries a small risk of perforating the bowel. Even if colonoscopies miss some cancers, colon cancer remains a rare disease and, after a colonoscopy, “the likelihood that you have cancer is very, very low,” Dr. Smith said.

Dr. Harold C. Sox, editor of the Annals of Internal Medicine, is choosing another option. He is having a stool test, the fecal occult blood test, between colonoscopies. It looks for blood in the stool, which can arise from colon cancer.

Dr. Smith does not advocate that strategy, saying that the stool test can have false positives from things like red meat or broccoli that have nothing to do with colon cancer. He worries that frequent stool tests will lead to frequent false alarms and frequent colonoscopies without making much of a dent in the colon cancer death rate.

CT colonoscopies, so-called virtual colonoscopies, are not a solution, some screening experts said.

“The issues are prep quality, flat lesions, serrated lesions and people not being careful enough in the inspection process,” Dr. Rex said. There is no evidence, he added, that a virtual colonoscopy will help with the inspection process. And, he said, “it almost certainly is not as effective a technology as colonoscopy for flat and serrated lesions.”

Instead, patients should be compulsive about their bowel prep and be sure the test is done by one of the best colonoscopists in their area, gastroenterologists said. Doctors should find polyps in at least 25 percent of men and 15 percent of women. They should take at least eight minutes to withdraw an endoscope from the colon. And they should do a high volume of screening. Dr. Smith said a high volume was at least three or four colonoscopies a day.

After the test, patients can ask whether the doctor got to the right side of the colon and how that was documented.

Colon cancer experts said people should realize that even if colonoscopies prevent just 60 percent of colon cancer deaths, that still is a lot. Mammograms, for example, prevent 25 percent of breast cancer deaths, and the PSA test for men has not been shown to prevent prostate cancer deaths.

“If I was to provide one main message, it would be that colonoscopies are the way that colon cancer mortality gets reduced,” Dr. Ransohoff said. “Colonoscopy is a good test, but it isn’t completely effective. And you know what? We ought to be happy with that.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple experts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- If you've just had your first heart attack, doctors may one day be able to reverse the damage done with stem cell therapy.

An intravenous method of injecting stem cells into patients who had experienced heart attacks within the previous 10 days suggested that this method works to repair -- not just manage -- heart damage, a recent study found.

The study is a step forward in a field in which a lot of approaches have been tried in animals and preliminary human trials, but none has been approved for widespread clinical use for heart patients.

The new results are a milestone in stem cell research, and for patients, said Jeffrey Karp, a researcher at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts, who runs a stem cell biology lab at Harvard University. He was not involved in the study.

Most current clinical approaches are focused on managing problems, not addressing the root of the damage, he said.

"Many patients who have a heart attack will go on to suffer heart failure," he said. "It's imperative to try and fix the root of the problem as quickly as possible."

The research, published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, were part of a phase I study that set out to show safety. The trial has moved on to phase II, which is taking place in 50 hospitals in the United States, said Dr. Joshua Hare, director of the Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute at the University of Miami's Miller School of Medicine and lead author of the study.

"We're looking on the time frame here of five years, in the best-case scenario, to have approved cardiac stem cell therapies," Hare said.

Coronary heart disease, which causes heart attacks and angina -- chest pain resulting from the heart not getting enough blood -- is the leading cause of death in the United States, with nearly 450,000 in 2005, according to the American Heart Association. About 1.1 million people have attacks occur in the United States each year, according to the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute.

The particular kind of cells used in this research are called mesenchymal stem cells, and come from adults, not embryos.

The researchers are using a mesenchymal stem cell therapy that is marketed by Osiris Therapeutics Inc. under the name Prochymal. The drug, which consists of stem cells from donor bone marrow, gets injected into the vein. The cells then travel through the bloodstream and take up residence in the heart.

Mesenchymal stem cells have some natural homing capability, and injury serves as a homing beacon for them, Karp said.

The stem cells reduce the amount of scar tissue and increase the pumping strength of the heart in heart attack patients, Hare said. To a limited extent, they also grow new heart muscle.

The phase I results from 53 patients are not definitive proof that the treatment is effective, but do suggest so, Hare said. In accordance with clinical trial regulations set by the Food and Drug Administration, phase I is meant to show safety, while phase II and phase III trials are done on a larger group of subjects and evaluate how well the drug works.

In this trial, patients' doses ranged from 35 million cells to 350 million cells. There was no change or increase in side effects in treatments getting higher doses of cells, but it seemed that the treatment was more effective -- at least in terms of reducing electrical problems -- in the high dose group, he said.

In separate trials, researchers are looking at how the technique works in patients who have had heart attacks many month or years in the past, Hare said.

The study shows the results of a six-month follow-up with patients in 2007, and researchers are presently working with data from the two-year follow-up.

More broadly, besides bone marrow transplantations, there have not been any major successes in the stem cell field in terms of helping large numbers of patients, Karp said.

"Mesenchymal stem cells are poised to really be the next major success in cell therapy that could be used to treat tens of thousands of patients," he said.

There are several advantages to using mesenchymal stem cells for heart therapy. First, they are adult stem cells, so there are no ethical issues that surround research on embryonic stem cells. Secondly, at least from a safety perspective, mesenchymal stem cells do not require matching -- any donor can give cells to any other donor, and no immunosuppresant drugs are necessary, he said.

Still, millions of cells are required in order for enough stem cells to reach the heart and have a therapeutic benefit, and it's costly to get the required numbers of cells for each patient, Karp said. An area of improvement would be making the stem cell treatment more efficient, he said.

"If we could increase the number of cells that could reach the heart, that would have significant advantages to this approach," Karp said.

This method of intravenous injection means that the procedure theoretically could be performed in a doctor's office or clinic, increasing the accesibility to patients, Karp said.

A more invasive stem cell delivery technique has been showing positive results in other clinical trials, involving injecting patients' own stem cells directly into heart muscle.

The largest national stem cell study for heart disease, sponsored by Baxter Inc., uses this surgical method, and recently announced success in a 12-month phase II trial for patients with severe angina. Researchers found that participants had less pain and an improved ability to walk.

Because stem cells are delivered through a catheter in this method, there is a risk of perforation of about 1 percent, Dr. Douglas Losordo, cardiologist at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, Illinois, told CNN earlier this year. The drug, GCSF, which mobilizes stem cells, also carries a small risk of blood clotting.

For the Osiris trials, further research is ongoing determine whether patients would benefit more from more infusions of the stem cells, or if it's better for the stem cells to come from their own bodies instead of from a donor, Hare said.

While there's less chance of a person's body rejecting his or her own stem cells than from a donor, there is a time delay, he said. Taking bone marrow and amplifying the stem cells in it could take up to five weeks, whereas donor cells could be made readily available, he said. On the other hand, it is unclear whether a donor could potentially transmit a disease to the recipient in the process.

If you are interested in enrolling in a clinical trial, you can find one at clinicaltrials.gov. The Orisis trial is still recruiting participants.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story uses two sources: One stem cell expert who is not involved with the research, and the lead author of the published paper. 
While that’s thin sourcing for a story of this length, it’s sufficient to earn a satisfactory rating. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 1, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Multiple sclerosis patients may eventually benefit from a novel treatment that takes aim at the abnormal behavior of a specific type of immune cell, preliminary research suggests.

The errant behavior of the cells in question -- known as "B cells" -- is viewed as key to the development of this chronic and disabling nervous system disease, commonly called MS.

The new therapy's potential is only in the early stages of exploration, cautions an international study team comprised of researchers from the United States, Canada, Switzerland and the Netherlands, in the report published in the Nov. 1 online edition of The Lancet.

But initial indications suggest that the new antibody drug, called ocrelizumab, successfully targets these renegade cells with hopeful results: a significant reduction in disease-related inflammatory brain lesions.

"Our findings show that ocrelizumab rapidly suppresses inflammatory activity," noted the study authors, led by Dr. Ludwig Kappos from the University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, in a journal news release.

Describing the targeting of B cells as an "innovative therapeutic approach," Kappos and his colleagues reported that in testing among 218 patients, the drug's impact on lesions was "rapid and pronounced." What's more, to date the treatment appears to be safe.

The study authors noted that MS is a progressively debilitating disease that attacks an individual's central nervous system, disrupting the normal brain, spinal cord and optic nerve function.

A classic characteristic of the disease is inflammation, which takes the form of brain lesions.

The immune system's T cells have long been implicated in disease progression, but the notion that B cells may also play a major role is relatively new.

With this new potential target in mind, researchers configured ocrelizumab to specifically focus on a protein (CD20) found on the surface of certain B cells.

To test the drug, Kappos and his team recruited patients aged 18 to 55 seeking MS treatment in 79 centers in 20 countries.

The patients were divided into four groups, treated with: a low dose of ocrelizumab (600 milligrams); a high dose of ocrelizumab (2,000 mg); a well-known MS inflammation treatment known as "intramuscular interferon beta-1a"; or a sugar pill (placebo). After 24 weeks, some of the doses were adjusted.

The result: at week 24, all of the patients receiving either dose of ocrelizumab fared better in terms of lesion count than either the placebo or standard treatment groups.

The number of active lesions had dropped 89 percent more among the 600-mg group compared with those getting a placebo. Similarly, those in the 2,000-mg group experienced a 96 percent bigger drop in lesions. What's more, relapse rates were much lower among those taking the new drug, in contrast to those taking a placebo.

The investigators further noted that even eight months after treatment launch, no serious adverse effects were directly attributable to the new drug.

That said, Dr. Moses Rodriguez, a professor of neurology and immunology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., disputed the premise that ocrelizumab is shaping up as anything new and innovative.

"In fact, there's nothing novel about this at all," he said. "There is another drug, called rituximab, that's been in early trials for MS for years. And all this new drug is attempting to do is replicate the same that rituximab already does. And I see no major advantage of this drug versus that older drug. It's not better or worse. It's the same," Rodriguez noted.

"So bottom-line, I would not sell this as a major breakthrough in MS," cautioned Rodriguez. "It's not."

Funding for the study was provided by F. Hoffmann-La Roche and Biogen Idec. Inc.

For more on multiple sclerosis, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The Mayo expert’s input was the one saving grace of the story.
The story also disclosed that two drug companies funded the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“What we found is that where patients were applying Latisse, especially in areas where the hair was thinner and wispier and less pigmented, the hair grew thicker, stronger and healthier,” he said.

Though some users of Latisse have experienced skin discoloration, Dr. Bauman said he had never seen any such reaction on the scalp of his patients.

Certainly, Mr. Paduda, who used Latisse daily from November through February, is a happy customer. By the third week, he said, both he and friends he asked for reactions were seeing results. “I even busted out the old ‘before’ and ‘after’ pictures,” he said. “It was a noticeable difference.”

But Latisse does not appear to be a silver bullet for hair loss. Instead, it appears to work in much the same way as Rogaine or Propecia: All three can strengthen and darken hair that grows from a dying follicle, but none can bring a dead one back to life. The result is an enhanced, refortified hairline rather than a brand new head of hair.

Aside from hair transplants, which can cost about $10,000 each and do not always look natural, the only current hope for complete replacement is hair cloning, the act of producing entirely new hair from the DNA of an existing one, which researchers have been attempting, unsuccessfully, for years.

A pair of researchers last year claimed to grow new hair by combining plucked hair with a wound-healing powder made by ACell, a regenerative-medicine company in Columbia, Md. Though the claim was met with some skepticism by other clinicians, the idea that ACell’s powder, which has been approved by the government, could facilitate new hair growth has breathed new life into the race to clone hair.

Dr. Robert M. Bernstein, clinical professor of dermatology at Columbia University, is now one of several researchers experimenting with the product.

“It’s just a question of time now” before hair cloning becomes a reality, Dr. Bernstein said. “We keep on moving back that time, but I think there’s absolutely no doubt that it’s going to be done.”

He believes hair cloning will be commercially available within 10 years. This may sound like a long time to wait, but “it’s important to remember that baldness is unlike other conditions where you can progress past the point of being helped,” Dr. Bernstein said. “Once we have a cure for hair loss, everyone will be able to benefit.”

It has been been 14 years since the F.D.A. approved a new hair-loss remedy (Propecia, in 1997), so it is understandable that anticipation for a new one might be running high. One advantage of Latisse is that it needs to be applied only once a day (Rogaine needs to be applied twice; Propecia is taken once daily), and does not seem to cause reactions in people who are allergic to minoxidil.

It is, however, expensive: a month’s supply of Latisse can cost up to $150, and that is in amounts appropriate for use merely on the eyelashes. Rogaine, which is also available over the counter now, costs about $25 a month, and a month’s supply of Propecia runs about $75. (Even Mr. Paduda has now switched to Propecia, citing cost.)

The potential for Latisse is not lost on Allergan. The company initiated a Phase 1 clinical study in August to determine whether bimatoprost can be used as a treatment in men and women suffering from hair loss (alopecia).

“There is a great deal of interest in developing other uses of bimatoprost,” Heather Katt, a spokeswoman for Allergan, wrote in an e-mail message, “and Allergan is exploring ways to pursue that pathway through the F.D.A. approval process.”

For those too impatient to wait, there is also the bold and fashionable solution of shaving one’s head.

But the fact is that many men — and women — simply do not accept baldness easily.

“Hair has been an evolutionary sign of health and sexuality and youth, and that doesn’t change,” Dr. Bernstein said. “Shaved heads look cool, but not everyone wants one, and not everyone looks good with one.”

“I have really dark eyebrows,” he said. “I would look like a psycho if I shaved my head.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We think this one is a wobbler. The story did quote two hair loss specialists. We wish it had gone a little broader in scope and talked with someone who is not currently prescribing Latisse and could speak to the safety and efficacy of an uNPRoven product like this.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
* Anorexia among most common psychiatric disorders in girls

LONDON, March 7 (Reuters) - Scientists have for the first time reported successful use of a brain-stimulating implant to help patients with severe anorexia whose condition had not improved with other treatments.

Doctors implanted a device similar to a pacemaker in the brains of six severe anorexics and found at least half put on weight and showed improvements in mood. Under previous therapies, none had shown progress.

This success, in a small study designed as a pilot to test the safety of the technique, suggests larger trials will confirm the effectiveness of the deep brain stimulation (DBS) device, the researchers wrote in the medical journal The Lancet.

Anorexia has one of the highest mortality rates of any psychiatric disorder and is among the most common psychiatric disorders in girls aged between 15 and 19 years. Symptoms include deliberate weight loss induced and sustained by the patient, and a need to control calorie intake and output.

Treatment usually focuses on changing behaviour, but experts say up to 20 percent of patients get no benefit from such treatments and are at risk of dying prematurely.

Commenting on the results of this small trial, Janet Treasure and Ulrike Schmidt of King’s College London’s Institute of Psychiatry said the technique looked promising and would give hope to patients with especially pernicious forms of anorexia.

“The fact that the procedure was associated ... with improvements in affective and obsessional symptoms is of key importance,” they said.

“(This) will go some way towards reassuring patients that DBS is not just another treatment designed to fatten them up without making them feel better.”

DBS is used to treat several neurological illnesses including Parkinson’s disease and chronic pain. Scientists are also investigating its use in depression and epilepsy, but this was the first time it had been used in patients with anorexia.

Implanting the DBS device requires minimally invasive surgery which can be completely reversed if problems occur, the researchers said.

For their study, a team at the Krembil Neuroscience Centre and University Health Network in Canada identified an area of the brain known to be important when using DBS in depression.

They implanted electrodes into the area and connected them to a pulse generator under the skin. The devices were activated 10 days later and researchers measured changes in the patients’ mood and anxiety to help find the correct level of stimulation.

The patients, all women, were aged between 24 and 57 and had had anorexia for between four and 37 years.

Initially all six lost weight, but researchers said this was expected since studies of DBS in patients with depression also found a delay of a few months before treatment starts to work.

Three months after treatment, the weight loss began to reverse in some patients, and after nine months, three patients weighed more than before treatment - the longest period of sustained weight increase since they had become ill. Around half also had better moods and less obsessive-compulsive behaviour.

Andres Lozano, who led the study, said the results were encouraging because they pointed to a genuine therapeutic effect, rather than a placebo or hunger-increasing effect.

He also said the improvements in mood and anxiety even in patients who were still underweight were “especially striking” given that severely anorexic patients did not respond well to conventional medicines or psychotherapies. (Editing by Andrew Roche)
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted two independent experts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pets Help People Manage The Pain Of Serious Mental Illness

Any pet owner will tell you that their animal companions comfort and sustain them when life gets rough. This may be especially true for people with serious mental illness, a study finds. When people with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder were asked who or what helped them manage the condition, many said it was pets that helped the most.

"When I'm feeling really low they are wonderful because they won't leave my side for two days," one study participant with two dogs and two cats, "They just stay with me until I am ready to come out of it."

Another person said of their pet birds: "If I didn't have my pets I think I would be on my own. You know what I mean, so it's — it's nice to come home and, you know, listen to the birds singing and that, you know."

Many people with serious mental illness live at home and have limited contact with the health care system, says Helen Brooks, a mental health researcher at University of Manchester in the United Kingdom and the lead author on the study, which was published Friday in the journal BMC Psychiatry. So they're doing a lot of the work of managing their conditions.

Brooks says, "Many felt deep emotional connections with their pet that weren't available from friends and family."

Brooks and her colleagues interviewed 54 people with serious long-term mental illnesses. Twenty-five of them considered their pets to be a part of their social network. The scientists asked who they went to when they needed help or advice, where they gained emotional support and encouragement and how they spent their days.

The participants were then given a diagram with three consecutive circles radiating out from a square representing the participant. They were asked to write the people, places and things that gave them support into the circles, with the circles closest to the center being the most important.

Sixty percent of the people who considered pets to be a part of their social networks placed them in the central, most important circle — the same place many people put close family and social workers. 20 percent placed pets in the second circle.

The interviews with participants are poignant, and reveal the struggle and isolation that can come with mental illness.

"I think it's really hard when you haven't had a mental illness to know what the actual experience is [like]," said one participant. "There's like a chasm, deep chasm between us ... [Other people are] on one side of it, and we're on the other side of it. We're sending smoke signals to each other to try and understand each other but we don't always — we don't always understand."

People with mental illnesses often see their social groups shrink and find themselves alienated from their friends. For many of these people, says Brooks, animals can break through the isolation. They give affection without needing to understand the disorder.

"[Pets] don't look at the scars on your arms," one participant said. "They don't question where you've been."

The pets provided more than just emotional support and companionship, participants said. The animals also could distract them from their illness, even from severe psychosis.

One study participant placed birds in his closest social circle. When he was hearing voices, he said that they "help me in the sense, you know, I'm not thinking about the voices, I'm just thinking of when I hear the birds singing."

Another participant said that merely seeing a hamster climbing the bars on the cage and acting cute helped with some difficult situations.

And having to take care of pets keeps people from withdrawing from the world. "They force me, the cats force me to sort of still be involved," said one participant.

Another said that walking the dog helped them get out of the house and with people. "That surprised me, you know, the amount of people that stop and talk to him, and that, yeah, it cheers me up with him. I haven't got much in my life, but he's quite good, yeah."

"The routine these pets provide is really important for people," says Brooks. "Getting up in the morning to feed them and groom them and walk them, giving them structure and a sense of purpose that they won't otherwise have."

Many of the study participants are unemployed because of their illness, she notes. Having a pet that was well taken care of was a source of pride for them.

Mark Longsjo, the program director of adult services at McLean Southeast, an inpatient mental facility in Middleborough, Mass., says that the interviews in the study reflect his professional experiences. "We have so many patients come through, and we always ask them about their support system. Sometimes its family members, sometimes its friends, but it's very common to hear about pets."

When he does patient intake surveys, Longsjo says that he includes pets in their risk assessments. Patients with pets often say the animals help keep them from following through on suicidal thinking, because they know their pets depend on them.

The social workers at McLean also incorporate pets into their aftercare planning, encouraging patients to make walking and grooming their pets a part of their routine. "I think there's significant value in considering the common everyday pet to be as important as the relationships one has with one's family in the course of their treatment," says Longsjo. He feels this study is important because, although there's a lot of work looking at the benefits of trained therapy animals, they can be expensive and out of the reach of many patients.

Brooks hopes that more health workers will consider incorporating pets into care plans for people with mental illness. Many of her participants said that sometimes it felt like their pets could sense when they needed help the most, and were able to provide it — just like the owners took care of them.

As one person in the study said, "When he comes up and sits beside you on a night, it's different, you know. It's just, like, he needs me as much as I need him."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly highlights one source’s role in the research and incorporates input from a second source who was not associated with the research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The 161 subjects involved in the study consumed at least three portions of chicken and eggs per week, that were naturally enriched with omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (PUFA), the same nutrients found in oily fish.

The results from the clinical study saw an increase in omega-3-PUFA levels in blood and a positive shift in what is described as the 'omega-3 Index'-a test that measures the amount of the omega-3 fatty acids, Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) and Eicosapentaenoic Acid (EPA) in red blood cell membranes, which reflects the levels in your heart and other tissues.

A low omega-3 Index (<4%) indicates a heightened risk of heart and brain disease. The study showed that consuming omega-3 enriched chicken and eggs resulted in a halving of the number of subjects with such a high-risk omega-3 Index.

The chicken meat and eggs used in the study came from birds offered OmegaPro, a sustainable and algae-based source of omega-3 PUFA, developed by Devenish.

The findings were presented by Professor Alice Stanton of The Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland:

"Greater consumption of oily fish has long been linked to a reduced incidence of heart attack, stroke, diabetes and cancer and improved brain health, vision, muscle and joint health," said Professor Alice Stanton.

"International guidelines recommend eating oily fish at least once per week, however, many people do not eat fish at all and less than 20% of the world's population have optimal omega-3 PUFA levels.

"Therefore, in this project we studied the recently developed alternatives to oily fish or supplementation, namely chicken meat and eggs, naturally enriched with sustainable algae-based omega-3 PUFA.

"Omega-3 enriched chicken and eggs offer consumers an attractive alternative to eating oily fish or to the lifelong taking of supplements, with the potential for substantial health benefits," Professor Stanton said.

Dr. Heather Hayes, Director of Food Innovation with Devenish, said:

"Offering birds a natural and sustainable source of omega-3 PUFA is good for the bird and good for the consumer. Taste panel studies have shown that the omega-3 enriched chicken meat tastes as good, if not better than conventional chicken.

"This science has demonstrated the importance of food nutrients to promote good health and prevent ill health. We are also focusing our research efforts on producing sustainable and nutrient rich pork, beef and milk, with scientifically proven health claims. Omega-3 is just one nutrient that we are interested in-we are working on others too."

"We worked closely with Moy Park, Waitrose and the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, to deliver an innovative, nutrient-rich food, that increases omega-3 levels in consumers, naturally. The science shows the importance of food nutrients to promote good health in consumers and the innovation starts on the farm.

"The farmer has a key role to play in delivering sustainable and nutritious food with a health claim. Devenish is working hard to increase the opportunity for consumers to benefit from this nutrient-rich food, as less than 20% of the world's population is eating enough Omega-3."

Dr. Patrick Wall, Professor of Public Health at University College Dublin, said:

"By enriching the birds' diet, the meat and eggs become naturally enriched with omega-3 PUFA and the associated nutritional benefits are then passed on to consumers.

"Morbidity is unevenly distributed in society and poorer people experience poorer health. By including the omega-3 in chicken and eggs, both very affordable sources of quality protein, all segments of the population can benefit from this approach to using innovative animal nutrition to benefit human health."

Professor Chris Elliott, Founder of the Institute for Global Food Security & Pro Vice Chancellor, Faculty of Medicine, Health & Life Sciences, Queens University Belfast said:

"The cost to the health service of treating cardiovascular related illness in the UK is £10billion/year. Having access to sustainably produced nutrient-rich food, with a scientifically proven health claim, offers huge potential to turn this around globally."

INTERVIEW FOOTAGE WITH PROFESSOR ALICE STANTON, The Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland CAN BE DOWNLOADED VIA: https://vimeo.com/241661898

NOTES TO EDITOR:

DEVENISH

Devenish delivers sustainable and innovative nutritional products and solutions for the feed industry, the food industry and for human health.

Devenish has ten manufacturing sites across Ireland, the UK (Northern Ireland and England), USA (Iowa, Georgia and Minnesota), Turkey and Uganda, as well as offices in UAE, Uganda, Mexico, Philippines, Dominican Republic and India and it exports to over 35 countries worldwide.

Devenish manufactures pre-mix and special feed for pigs, poultry, cattle, sheep, equine, game, companion animals and aquaculture. They also deliver tailored nutritional products and solutions for their customers' specific requirements.

The Devenish strategy, 'One Health, From Soil to Society, focuses on the importance of optimising nutrient utilisation in soil, plant, animal, environmental and human health, as key and interlinked components of the value chain.

THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION

The American Heart Association's Scientific Sessions is a global exchange for cardiovascular scientists and clinicians, exploring the future of cardiovascular science and medicine. It is attended by 18,000 delegates from over 100 countries.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release never specifically says who funded the research, although most readers would assume it was Devenish, the manufacturer of the chicken feed being touted and the company that issued the release. The release does disclose that “The chicken meat and eggs used in the study came from birds offered OmegaPro, a sustainable and algae-based source of omega-3 PUFA, developed by Devenish.” 
The release should have noted whether there were any financial ties between the researchers and Devenish. Without a published study this is hard for us to verify.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Allos defends the price, saying it made a significant investment to develop the first approved drug for this type of cancer.

“It’s a very aggressive disease, and patients right now have no options,” said James V. Caruso, the chief commercial officer for Allos, a 17-year-old publicly traded company based in Westminster, Colo., that has no other drugs on the market.

Mr. Caruso also said the price of Folotyn was not out of line with that of other drugs for rare cancers. Patients, moreover, are likely to use the drug for only a couple of months because the tumor worsens so quickly, he said. So the total cost of using Folotyn will be less than for many other drugs with lower monthly prices.

“We believe we are fairly priced,” he added, “and we’re benchmarked” against other drugs. In a conference call with analysts last month, Mr. Caruso said Allos had “not had pushback of any type at this point” from insurers.

Some drugs for rare cancers are close to Foltyn’s price. Genzyme’s Clolar for pediatric leukemia costs about $34,000 a week, though the company says that only two weeks of treatment are typically needed. Genzyme’s drug Campath, for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, costs about $5,000 a week for several weeks.

GlaxoSmithKline is charging up to $98,000 for a six-month treatment course of Arzerra, a drug approved in late October for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, which strikes about 15,000 Americans a year. About $60,000 of the cost would be incurred in the first eight weeks, when the drug is given more frequently.

Gloucester Pharmaceuticals, which won approval in November for a drug to treat cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, another rare cancer, declined to discuss what it would charge when that treatment, called Istodax, goes on sale in January.

Despite such comparisons, Dr. Lee N. Newcomer, senior vice president for oncology at the big insurer UnitedHealthcare, called the price of Folotyn “unconscionable.” He said that Folotyn alone would cost as much as UnitedHealthcare now typically spends in total to treat a lymphoma patient from diagnosis until death. That median expenditure now, he said, is $87,000 for a little over a year of treatments.

But Dr. Newcomer said insurers would be obligated to pay for Folotyn because there were no alternatives.

Folotyn has not yet shown an effect on longevity. In the clinical trial that led to approval of the drug, 27 percent of the 109 patients experienced a reduction in tumor size. The reductions lasted a median of 9.4 months.

But considering all the patients in the trial, only 12 percent had a reduction in tumor size that lasted for more than 14 weeks. The trial did not compare Folotyn to another drug or a placebo.

“This drug is not a home run,” Dr. Brad S. Kahl, a lymphoma specialist at the University of Wisconsin, said during a meeting of an advisory committee to the F.D.A. on Sept. 2. “It’s not even a double. It’s a single.”

Saying that even a single was helpful, Dr. Kahl was part of a majority on the panel that recommended approval of the drug, 10 to 4.

But after recently learning what Allos planned to charge for Folotyn, Dr. Kahl said he was “disappointed” by the “excessive” price.

“It dampens my enthusiasm for using that drug,” he said. “It creates these huge ethical quandaries about trying a drug that has a modest benefit for the average patient at enormous expense.”

Folotyn is given by a rapid intravenous procedure once a week for six weeks out of every seven. Even to try the drug for the first seven-week cycle to see if it works would cost over $50,000. In the clinical trial, the median duration of use was 70 days, which would cost roughly $70,000 to $80,000. But some patients used the drug for many months.

In a note to clients in October, Joshua Schimmer, an analyst at Leerink Swann, estimated that a typical treatment would last 3.5 months and cost $126,000, or about $36,000 a month.

For investors, a high price is usually a good thing. Mr. Schimmer’s note was entitled “Folotyn Prices High, Reiterate Outperform.” He estimated annual sales of the drug in the United States reaching about $300 million by 2014.

Patient advocacy groups say that while they wish prices were lower, high prices might be needed to encourage companies to develop new drugs.

“It’s a two-edged sword that we have to live with and deal with,” said Louis J. DeGennaro, chief scientific officer of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, which has received donations from Allos and other companies. “A peripheral T-cell lymphoma patient,” he said, “at first blush will see this therapy as a very good thing.”

Allos, which is still unprofitable, has lost $350 million since its founding in 1992 and failed to win approval of a previous drug.

“Every dime that goes into the company supports Folotyn,” Mr. Caruso said.

At the time Folotyn was approved in September, stock in Allos briefly peaked above $8.50 but has slipped since then, closing up 16 cents at $6.62, or an increase of nearly 2.5 percent, on Friday.

After the approval, Allos raised $93 million in a secondary stock offering. In the prospectus for that offering, the company said that one of the risks for investors was “the relative price of Folotyn as compared to alternate treatment options.” It said there was a risk it might have to lower the price or offer discounts to successfully market Folotyn.

Like many other companies with high-priced drugs, Allos has established a program to help patients arrange insurance reimbursement. It says it will give the drug free to uninsured patients who cannot pay for it any other way.

And because a patient’s out-of-pocket co-payments alone — Medicare’s is 20 percent — could be thousands of dollars a month for Folotyn, Allos is financing a co-payment assistance program run by the National Organization for Rare Disorders, a patient advocacy group.

While this helps patients, it also helps the company sell more of its drug. If the 20 percent Medicare co-payment is made, then Medicare will pay the other 80 percent of the drug’s price — or about $24,000 a month.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple stakeholders, including experts from the drug manufacturer, a large insurance company, and lymphoma researchers. The provide valuable diversity of perspectives on this controversial issue.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SEATTLE, June 24 -- For the first time, researchers at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center have found that weight loss, in combination with vitamin D supplementation, has a greater effect on reducing chronic inflammation than weight loss alone. Chronic inflammation is known to contribute to the development and progression of several diseases, including some cancers.

Results of the randomized, controlled clinical trial -- which involved more than 200 overweight, postmenopausal women who had insufficient levels of vitamin D at the beginning of the study -- are published online ahead of the July print issue of Cancer Prevention Research, a journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.

"We know from our previous studies that by losing weight, people can reduce their overall levels of inflammation, and there is some evidence suggesting that taking vitamin D supplements can have a similar effect if one has insufficient levels of the nutrient," said lead and corresponding author Catherine Duggan, Ph.D., a principal staff scientist in the Public Health Sciences Division at Fred Hutch. However, it has not been known whether combining the two -- weight loss and vitamin D -- would further boost this effect. "It's the first study to test whether adding vitamin D augments the considerable effect of weight loss on inflammatory biomarkers," she said.

To explore this question, Duggan and colleagues recruited 218 healthy, overweight older women who had lower-than-recommended levels of vitamin D (less than 32 ng/mL). The women then took part in a 12-month diet and exercise program (including 45 minutes of moderate-to-vigorous exercise five days a week). Half of the study participants were randomly selected to receive 2,000 IU of vitamin D daily for the duration of the year-long trial, and the other half received an identical-appearing placebo, or dummy vitamin. Biomarkers of inflammation were measured at the beginning and end of the study. The researchers then compared changes in these levels between the two groups.

At the end of the study, all of the participants had reduced levels of inflammation, regardless of whether they took vitamin D, "which highlights the importance of weight loss in reducing inflammation," Duggan said. However, those who saw the most significant decline in markers of inflammation were those who took vitamin D and lost 5 to 10 percent of their baseline weight. These study participants had a 37 percent reduction in a pro-inflammatory cytokine called interleukin-6, or IL-6, as compared to those in the placebo group, who saw a 17.2 percent reduction in IL-6. The researchers found similar results among women in the vitamin D group who lost more than 10 percent of their starting weight. While IL-6 has normal functions in the body, elevated levels are associated with an increased risk of developing certain cancers and diabetes and may be implicated as a cause of depression, Duggan said.

"We were quite surprised to see that vitamin D had an effect on an inflammation biomarker only among women who lost at least 5 percent of their baseline weight," Duggan said. "That suggests vitamin D can augment the effect of weight loss on inflammation."

Vitamin D is a steroid hormone that has multiple functions beyond its widely recognized role in regulating calcium levels and bone metabolism. Vitamin D receptors are found in more than 30 cell types and the research focus around this nutrient recently has shifted from bone health to vitamin D's effect on cancer, cardiovascular health and weight loss, among other health issues.

Inflammation occurs when the body is exposed to pathogens, such as bacteria or viruses, which puts the immune system in overdrive until the "attack" ceases and the inflammatory response abates. Overweight or obese people, however, exist in a state of chronic inflammation. This sustained upregulation of the inflammatory response occurs because fat tissue continually produces cytokines, molecules that are usually only present for a short time, while the body is fighting infection, for example.

"It is thought that this state of chronic inflammation is pro-tumorigenic, that is, it encourages the growth of cancer cells," she said. There is also some evidence that increased body mass "dilutes" vitamin D, possibly by sequestering it in fat tissue.

"Weight loss reduces inflammation, and thus represents another mechanism for reducing cancer risk," Duggan said. "If ensuring that vitamin D levels are replete, or at an optimum level, can decrease inflammation over and above that of weight loss alone, that can be an important addition to the tools people can use to reduce their cancer risk."

Duggan encourages women to speak to their health care providers about measuring their levels of vitamin D to determine the most appropriate dosage.

The Breast Cancer Research Foundation, Susan G. Komen for the Cure, National Institutes of Health, Seattle Cancer Consortium Breast Cancer Specialized Program in Research Excellence, Fred Hutchinson/University of Washington Cancer Consortium and Safeway Foundation funded the research.

Editor's note: To obtain a copy of the Cancer Prevention Research paper, "Effect of vitamin D3 supplementation in combination with weight loss on inflammatory biomarkers in postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial," or to arrange an interview with corresponding author Catherine Duggan, please contact: Kristen Woodward in Fred Hutch media relations, kwoodwar@fredhutch.org or 206-667-5095.

At Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, home to three Nobel laureates, interdisciplinary teams of world-renowned scientists seek new and innovative ways to prevent, diagnose and treat cancer, HIV/AIDS and other life-threatening diseases. Fred Hutch's pioneering work in bone marrow transplantation led to the development of immunotherapy, which harnesses the power of the immune system to treat cancer with minimal side effects. An independent, nonprofit research institute based in Seattle, Fred Hutch houses the nation's first and largest cancer prevention research program, as well as the clinical coordinating center of the Women's Health Initiative and the international headquarters of the HIV Vaccine Trials Network. Private contributions are essential for enabling Fred Hutch scientists to explore novel research opportunities that lead to important medical breakthroughs. For more information visit fredhutch.org or follow Fred Hutch on Facebook, Twitter or YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Funding sources are well documented.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Baltimore, Md. Oct. 8, 2018 – The Maryland Proton Treatment Center (MPTC) is now offering deep-tissue external thermal therapy in combination with high-precision proton-beam radiotherapy as a potential way to boost survival chances for certain cancer patients. MPTC is the only center in the world to offer these two treatments at the same facility, an advantage to patients because these therapies are typically given within an hour of each other.

Research has shown that thermal therapy can be especially useful in difficult-to-reach cancers in the abdomen and pelvic region. Studies have found that adding thermal therapy to standard treatments can significantly shrink tumors and can improve survival for some patients. External thermal therapy, or hyperthermia – in the range of 104° up to 110° F. – sensitizes tumor cells to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. In addition, heat has been shown to enhance anti-tumor immune response.

“We are very pleased to be able to offer deep-tissue thermal therapy, which can be combined with standard radiation therapy as well as proton-beam therapy to enhance the cancer-killing effects of the radiation,” says Zeljko Vujaskovic, MD, PhD, a professor of radiation oncology and director of the Division of Translational Radiation Sciences (DTRS) in the Department of Radiation Oncology at the University of Maryland School of Medicine (UMSOM).

“Early research suggests that adding thermal therapy to proton-beam therapy may be associated with an even greater benefit than when combined with standard radiation therapy, and we are excited to be at the forefront of making this combination therapy available to cancer patients,” says Dr. Vujaskovic, an internationally recognized expert in hyperthermic oncology.

Proton therapy is a precise form of radiation therapy that deposits all of its energy within the tumor and allows for less irradiation of noncancerous tissue. MPTC – which is affiliated with the University of Maryland Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer Center (UMGCCC) at the University of Maryland Medical Center – is the only proton treatment center in Maryland.

Radiation oncologists at UMGCCC already use external thermal therapy to treat a range of cancers, but do not currently use it for cancers that are deeper in the body.

According to Dr. Vujaskovic, the new deep-tissue thermal therapy equipment, which is made by Pyrexar, will be used to treat cancers of the abdominal and pelvic region, including cancer of the bladder, rectum, cervix, ovaries, pancreas and connective tissue, which are known as sarcomas. Patients would typically receive the thermal therapy two times a week for an hour before or after they receive standard (photon) radiation or proton-beam therapy.

The system heats the tumor tissue to 108° F. with internal and external probes that enable doctors to continuously monitor the temperature. A water-filled applicator is placed over the area to be treated, and non-invasive radio frequency energy is directed at the tumor. The heat causes the blood vessels in the tumor to dilate, bringing more oxygen into the tumor, which makes cancer cells more vulnerable to radiation therapy.

The acquisition of the deep-tissue thermal therapy system was made possible by donations from Jack and Emily Howell and the Middendorf Foundation, Inc.

“Within the Department of Radiation Oncology and throughout our cancer center, we strive to make every available tool in the cancer-fighting toolbox available to our patients,” says William F. Regine, MD, FACR, FACRO, the Isadore & Fannie Schneider Foxman Endowed Chair and Professor of radiation oncology at UMSOM and chair of radiation oncology at UMGCCC. “By continuing to develop a comprehensive thermal oncology program, we are giving patients more effective treatment options and therefore another reason to hope for better outcomes.”

“The Maryland Proton Treatment Center has achieved another milestone by becoming the first center to offer both deep-thermal therapy and proton therapy,” says E. Albert Reece, MD, PhD, MBA, Executive Vice President for Medical Affairs at UM Baltimore and the John Z. and Akiko K. Bowers Distinguished Professor and dean at UMSOM. “This achievement is a testament to Dr. Vujaskovic’s considerable expertise in hyperthermic oncology and leadership in developing an outstanding thermal oncology program at the University of Maryland. It’s this type of innovation that sets MPTC apart from other proton treatment centers.”

About the University of Maryland School of Medicine

Commemorating its 210th Anniversary, the University of Maryland School of Medicine was chartered in 1807 as the first public medical school in the United States. It continues today as one of the fastest growing, top-tier biomedical research enterprises in the world -- with 43 academic departments, centers, institutes, and programs; and a faculty of more than 3,000 physicians, scientists, and allied health professionals, including members of the National Academy of Sciences, and a distinguished recipient of the Albert E. Lasker Award in Medical Research. With an operating budget of more than $1 billion, the School of Medicine works closely in partnership with the University of Maryland Medical Center and Medical System to provide research-intensive, academic and clinically-based care for more than 1.2 million patients each year. The School has over 2,500 students, residents, and fellows, and nearly $450 million in extramural funding, with more than half of its academic departments ranked in the top 20 among all public medical schools in the nation in research funding. As one of the seven professional schools that make up the University of Maryland, Baltimore campus, the School of Medicine has a total workforce of nearly 7,000 individuals. The combined School and Medical System (“University of Maryland Medicine”) has a total budget of $5 billion and an economic impact of nearly $15 billion on the state and local community. The School of Medicine faculty, which ranks as the 8th-highest public medical school in research productivity, is an innovator in translational medicine with 600 active patents and 24 start-up companies. The School works locally, nationally, and globally, with research and treatment facilities in 36 countries around the world. Visit medschool.umaryland.edu/

The Maryland Proton Treatment Center (MPTC) offers proton therapy – a highly advanced and precise form of radiation therapy that can increase radiation dose to tumor while decreasing dose to healthy, surrounding tissue – to the Baltimore/Washington region and beyond. It is a highly effective treatment for a wide range of localized tumors such as those found in the brain, base of the skull, head and neck area, eye tumors, tumors of the esophagus, lung, prostate, liver, breast, spinal cord, as well as gastrointestinal malignancies. It is also an important treatment option for children with cancer.

At MPTC, each treatment room is equipped with the most advanced form of “pencil beam” proton therapy, which essentially paints the radiation onto the tumor while stopping precisely at the site of the tumor. Proton therapy is performed on an outpatient basis and is a well-tolerated, non-invasive treatment that can reduce side effects. It can be used in conjunction with other modalities of cancer treatments such as chemotherapy and surgery. MPTC offers a robust clinical trial program to all its patients to further evidence-based medicine.

MPTC has been patient-centered from the beginning – with a focus on accessibility and affordability. The center was designed to be a regional resource, providing the same training, privileges and clinical guidelines to physician groups across the region that work side-by-side with MPTC faculty and staff, thus improving efficiency and affordability. MPTC offers free concierge services to ensure a seamless patient experience and a successful reconnection back to their referring physician. One of the goals of MPTC is to remain cost-neutral to insurance providers, meaning patients pay the same for proton treatment as they would for other more conventionally available intensity-modulated treatments at the University of Maryland Medical Center. www.mdproton.com
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release identifies private donors and a foundation that contributed to their hyperthermia system, although they do not list other sources of funding for the proton therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
What if you could lose weight and reduce your risk of life-threatening disease without any changes in what you eat -- other than a five-day special diet once every few months?

That's what happened for 71 adults who were placed on three cycles of a low-calorie, "fasting-mimicking" diet. The phase II trial, conducted by researchers at the USC Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, demonstrated a host of benefits from the regimen.

The diet reduced cardiovascular risk factors including blood pressure, signs of inflammation (measured by C-reactive protein levels), as well as fasting glucose and reduced levels of IGF-1, a hormone that affects metabolism. It also shrank waistlines and resulted in weight loss, both in total body fat and trunk fat, but not in muscle mass.

In effect, the diet reduced the study participants' risks for cancer, diabetes, heart disease and other age-related diseases, according to the findings published Feb. 15 in Science Translational Medicine.

"This study provides evidence that people can experience significant health benefits through a periodic, fasting-mimicking diet that is designed to act on the aging process," said Valter Longo, director of the USC Longevity Institute and a professor of biological sciences for USC Davis and Dornsife. "Prior studies have indicated a range of health benefits in mice, but this is the first randomized clinical trial with enough participants to demonstrate that the diet is feasible, effective and safe for humans.

"Larger FDA studies are necessary to confirm its effects on disease prevention and treatment," he added.

One hundred people participated in the trial from April 2013 to July 2015. The participants, ages 20 to 70 and all generally healthy, were divided into two groups for the randomized trial.

Participants in the first group, the control group, were asked to continue their normal eating habits for three months. People in the second group were placed on a three-month test of the fasting-mimicking diet.

Those on the special diet were required to eat food products supplied by the nutrition company L-Nutra during the fasting periods of five days each month. The diet, which was designed to mimic the results of a water-only fast, allowed for participants to consume between 750 and 1,100 calories per day. The meals for the fast-mimicking diet contained precise proportions of proteins, fats and carbohydrates.

After three months, participants in the control group were moved onto the special diet.

The researchers found that participants on the fasting-mimicking diet lost an average of about 6 pounds. Their waistlines shrank by 1 to 2 inches. Their systolic blood pressure, which was in the normal range when the study began, dropped by 4.5 mmHG, while their diastolic blood pressure dropped by 3.1 mmHg. Also, their levels of IGF-1 dropped to between 21.7 ng/mL and 46.2 ng/mL, reaching a range associated with lower cancer risk.

"After the first group completed their three months on the fasting diet, we moved over participants in the control group to see if they also would experience similar results," Longo said. "We saw similar outcomes, which provides further evidence that a fasting-mimicking diet has effects on many metabolic and disease markers. Our mouse studies using a similar fasting-mimicking diet indicate that these beneficial effects are caused by multi-system regeneration and rejuvenation in the body at the cellular and organ levels.

"Our participants retained those effects, even when they returned to their normal daily eating habits," he added.

The researchers also noted that participants considered "at risk" because they had risk factors such as high IGF-1, cholesterol, blood pressure or blood sugar levels, made significant progress toward better health.

For example, baseline fasting glucose levels for participants with high blood sugar levels (putting them at risk for diabetes) dropped into the healthy range, below 99 mg/dl -- but these levels didn't drop among participants who already had healthy levels at the beginning of the study. Cholesterol was reduced by 20 mg/dl in those with high cholesterol levels, and by about 5 mg/dl in all participants.

"Fasting seems to be the most beneficial for patients who have the great risk factors for disease, such as those who have high blood pressure or pre-diabetes or who are obese," Longo said.

The researchers had invited participants in the study for one last set of tests three months later, at the end of the diet. The research team found that the beneficial effects -- from weight loss, smaller waistlines and lower glucose, blood pressure and IGF-1 levels -- were sustained.

The next step for researchers is a large, FDA phase III clinical trial to test the FMD on patients diagnosed with age-related diseases or at high risk for them. The researchers said further investigation will determine whether the benefits of the diet can continue for several months.

The work was funded by the USC Edna M. Jones Chair in Gerontology fund, as well as through a National Institutes of Health grant to co-author Wendy Mack at the Keck School of Medicine of USC, through the Southern California Clinical and Translational Science Institute.

Study co-authors from USC Davis were Min Wei and Sebastian Brandhorst (lead co-authors) and Mahshid Shelehchi, Hamed Mirzaei, Chia Wei Cheng, Julia Budniak, Esra Guen, Stefano Di Biase, Pinchas Cohen and Todd Morgan. Others were Tanya Dorff of USC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center; Kurt Hong, of the Keck School of Medicine; Andreas Michalsen of Charité University Medical Center in Germany; and Alessandro Laviano at IFOM, the FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology.

Longo is the founder of L-Nutra, whose food products were used in the study. His interest in L-Nutra has been disclosed and managed per USC's conflicts of interest policies to assure objectivity and a lack of bias in the conduct and reporting of his research.

USC also has an ownership interest in L-Nutra, and the potential to receive royalty payments from L-Nutra. USC's financial interest in the company has been disclosed and managed under USC's institutional conflict of interest policies.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We applaud the release for including detailed information on the financial conflicts of the lead author and the University of California at Davis. Here is how the release disclosed the financial conflicts:
“Longo is the founder of L-Nutra, whose food products were used in the study. His interest in L-Nutra has been disclosed and managed per USC’s conflicts of interest policies to assure objectivity and a lack of bias in the conduct and reporting of his research.
USC also has an ownership interest in L-Nutra, and the potential to receive royalty payments from L-Nutra. USC’s financial interest in the company has been disclosed and managed under USC’s institutional conflict of interest policies.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two big studies suggest possible new ways to screen healthy people for cervical or prostate cancers, but a third disappointed those hoping for a way to detect early signs of deadly ovarian tumors.

-For women 30 and over, a test for the virus, HPV, is better than a Pap smear for predicting cervical cancer risk, and those who test negative on both can safely wait three years to be screened again.

-A single PSA blood test at ages 44 to 50 might help predict a man's risk of developing advanced prostate cancer or dying of it up to 30 years later. The PSA test is notoriously unreliable, but using it this way separates men who need a close watch from those who are so low-risk that they can skip testing for five years or more.

-Screening women with no symptoms for ovarian cancer with a blood test and an ultrasound exam is harmful. It didn't prevent deaths and led to thousands of false alarms, unneeded surgeries and serious complications.

The last study is a warning to people who get screening tests that aren't recommended, or who question whether screening can ever hurt.

"The answer is, it could hurt a lot," said Dr. Allen Lichter, chief executive of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. The group published these and 4,000 other studies Wednesday, ahead of its annual meeting next month.

Cervical cancer is easy to prevent. It's very slow-growing and screening finds precancerous cells and allows early treatment. The new study was the first big one to examine a newer screening tool, HPV tests, with or without Pap smears in routine practice.

For a Pap test, cells scraped from the cervix, the gateway to the uterus, are checked under a microscope. But this can miss problems or raise false alarms.

HPV tests detect the human papillomavirus, which causes most cases of cervical cancer. But HPV is "the common cold" of the nether regions — most sexually active young people have been exposed to it, said Debbie Saslow, the American Cancer Society's director of breast and gynecologic cancer. Most infections go away on their own; they're only a cancer risk when they last a year or more.

Younger women tend to have short-term infections, so Pap tests are a better way to screen them. HPV tests are approved as an option along with Paps for women 30 and older, and the cancer society says that if a woman tests negative on both, she can wait three years to be screened again. Few take this advice, though.

"Women still want their annual Pap and doctors still want to give them," and think it's rationing care to test less often, Saslow said.

The new study gives "very, very solid support" for screening less often, Lichter said.

Hormuzd Katki of the National Cancer Institute studied more than 330,000 women getting HPV and Pap tests through Kaiser Permanente Northern California for five years.

Only about three out of 100,000 women each year developed cervical cancer after negative HPV and Pap tests. HPV tests were twice as good as Paps for predicting risk. Adding a Pap after a negative HPV test did little to improve risk prediction.

However, if an HPV test was positive, a Pap test helped confirm or rule out the need for follow-up.

The study didn't look at the downside of HPV testing — how many false alarms and needless procedures it triggered. HPV tests cost $80 to $100 compared to $20 to $40 for Paps.

The prostate study sought a better way to use PSA tests, which are troublesome because PSA can be high for many reasons besides cancer, and doctors don't know which cancers need treatment or whether screening saves lives. Most groups don't recommend PSA tests, but most men over 50 get them anyway.

The new study "is not going to end the controversy, but it suggests a very interesting middle ground," Lichter said.

Researchers at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York used stored blood samples that 12,000 Swedish men gave for a heart study decades ago, when most were 44 to 50 years old. They also had second samples from some of them six years later, and samples from other 60-year-old men.

Looking 27 years later, researchers saw that 44 percent of cancer deaths occurred in men whose initial PSAs had been in the top 10 percent when they were 44 to 50 years old.

Conversely, scoring below the median meant very little cancer risk years later.

"They're identifying a group of guys who don't need to be screened, or need to be screened less often," said Dr. Otis Brawley, the cancer society's chief medical officer.

The results are "provocative," but this type of study can't prove that screening prevents deaths, said Dr. Matthew R. Smith of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center. Few of the Swedish men were treated for prostate cancer as most men are today, which can affect survival.

The National Cancer Institute, the Swedish Cancer Society and several foundations paid for the work, and one researcher holds patents for two PSA-related tests.

Baseline PSA tests for men in their 40s can't be recommended yet, Brawley said. The cancer society says men should be informed of the risks and benefits of PSA tests starting at age 50, and sooner for blacks and those with family history of prostate cancer.

The government-funded ovarian cancer study involved nearly 80,000 women. Half were screened annually with an ultrasound for four years and a blood test for six years. The blood test looked for CA-125, a substance often elevated in ovarian cancer.

After 13 years, there were no major differences in ovarian cancers found or deaths from the disease. Screening found only 212 cancers while giving 3,285 false alarms that led to 1,080 unneeded biopsy surgeries and 163 serious complications.

"So many people say `how can cancer screening be harmful?' This thing documents it," Brawley said.

The results don't apply to using these tests on women with symptoms of ovarian cancer or abnormal physical exams. That's still the best way to check for ovarian cancer in those cases.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story made good use of experts who put the studies’ findings into context. The story also noted the funding behind the studies and one potential conflict of interest, saying, “The National Cancer Institute, the Swedish Cancer Society and several foundations paid for the work, and one researcher holds patents for two PSA-related tests.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PROVIDENCE, R.I. [Brown University] -- To the tantalizing delight of chocolate lovers everywhere, a number of recent studies employing various methods have suggested that compounds in cocoa called flavanols could benefit cardiovascular health. Now a systematic review and meta-analysis of 19 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of cocoa consumption reveals some further pieces of supporting evidence.

The meta-analysis in the Journal of Nutrition, an assessment of the combined evidence from all 19 RCTs, focused on whether consumption of flavanol-rich cocoa products was associated with improvements in specific circulating biomarkers of cardiometabolic health as compared to consuming placebos with negligible cocoa flavanol content. In all, 1,139 volunteers were involved in these trials.

"Our meta-analysis of RCTs characterizes how cocoa flavanols affect cardiometabolic biomarkers, providing guidance in designing large, definitive prevention trials against diabetes and cardiovascular disease in future work," said corresponding author Dr. Simin Liu, professor and director of the Center for Global Cardiometabolic Health at Brown University who worked with epidemiology graduate student and lead author Xiaochen Lin. "We found that cocoa flavanol intake may reduce dyslipidemia (elevated triglycerides), insulin resistance and systemic inflammation, which are all major subclinical risk factors for cardiometabolic diseases."

Liu noted some limitations in the trials. All studies were small and of short duration, not all of the biomarkers tracked in these studies changed for the better, and none of the studies were designed to test directly whether cocoa flavanol consumption leads to reduced cases of heart attacks or type 2 diabetes.

But taking into account some of these heterogeneities across studies, the team's meta-analysis summarizing data from 19 trials found potential beneficial effects of flavanol-rich cocoa on cardiometabolic health. There were small-to-modest but statistically significant improvements among those who ate flavanol-rich cocoa product vs. those who did not.

The greatest effects were seen among trial volunteers who ate between 200 and 600 milligrams of flavanols a day (based on their cocoa consumption). They saw significant declines in blood glucose and insulin, as well as another indicator of insulin resistance called HOMA-IR. They also saw an increase in HDL, or "good," cholesterol. Those consuming higher doses saw some of the insulin resistance benefits and a drop in triglycerides, but not a significant increase in HDL. Those with lower doses of flavanols only saw a significant HDL benefit.

In general, Lin said, where there were benefits they were evident for both women and men and didn't depend on what physical form the flavanol-rich cocoa product was consumed in --dark chocolate vs. a beverage, for example.

"The treatment groups of the trials included in our meta-analysis are primarily dark chocolate -- a few were using cocoa powder-based beverages," Lin said. "Therefore, the findings from the current study apparently shouldn't be generalized to different sorts of chocolate candies or white chocolates, of which the content of sugar/food additives could be substantially higher than that of the dark chocolate."

The authors therefore concluded, "Our study highlights the urgent need for large, long-term RCTs that improve our understanding of how the short-term benefits of cocoa flavanol intake on cardiometabolic biomarkers may be translated into clinical outcomes."

In addition to Lin and Liu, the study's other authors are Isabel Zhang, Alina Li from Brown University, JoAnn Manson, Howard Sesso and Lu Wang from Brigham and Women's Hospital.

The authors acknowledge funding from the National Institutes of Health including the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the American Heart Association, and Pfizer. Co-authors at Brigham and Women's also noted receiving funding from Mars Symbioscience, a research segment of Mars, Inc., which makes chocolate products.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release makes the funding sources clear.
In addition to Lin and Liu, the study’s other authors are Isabel Zhang, Alina Li from Brown University, JoAnn Manson, Howard Sesso and Lu Wang from Brigham and Women’s Hospital.
The authors acknowledge funding from the National Institutes of Health including the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, the American Heart Association, and Pfizer. Co-authors at Brigham and Women’s also noted receiving funding from Mars Symbioscience, a research segment of Mars, Inc., which makes chocolate products.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 19, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- New research finds that a minimally invasive surgical procedure to treat hernias results in less chronic pain and a faster recovery when compared to a traditional approach.

One expert, however, said the older strategy may still be the best option in some cases.

"It's not one-size-fits-all," said Dr. L. Michael Brunt, a professor at Washington University in St. Louis. "One repair isn't appropriate for all circumstances."

Hernias occur when part of an internal organ, such as the intestines, bulges out through muscle. At issue are the surgical approaches that physicians use when a patient suffers from a hernia in the groin.

The procedures are designed to reduce the bulge of the hernia and make a patch so it doesn't protrude again. "It's as if you had a leak in a tire that's ballooned out," Brunt said. "You'll patch it to prevent it from continuing to protrude."

The study, led by researchers at Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, examined two procedures.

One procedure, known as total extraperitoneal inguinal hernioplasty, is performed under a general anesthetic and uses a laparoscopic approach through a small opening. It was developed in the 1990s, Brunt said.

The other approach is older and is performed through a 2- to 2.5-inch incision in the groin, Brunt said. It can be done under local anesthesia. The study authors didn't examine a third approach, known as "patch and plug," he said.

In the study, researchers randomly assigned 660 hernia patients to one of the two surgical procedures. Almost all the patients were men, and their average age was around 55.

The researchers followed up with 75 percent of the patients after an average period of five years.

Hernias recurred in 5 percent of laparoscopic and 8 percent of the traditional-procedure patients. Recurrences decreased to 0.5 percent and 4 percent, respectively, if the procedures were performed by experienced surgeons.

After five years, 28 percent of those who had the traditional procedure reported chronic pain, compared to 15 percent of the laparoscopic group.

The study "confirms what a lot of surgeons who do both procedures know already," Brunt said. "There's less pain and a bit of a faster recovery from the laparoscopic procedure."

Still, "the vast majority of patients do well, regardless of the approach," he said.

Why use the traditional approach if the laparoscopic technique is better in some ways? The traditional approach may be appropriate when it's too risky to place patients under general anesthesia, Brunt said, such as in elderly patients and those with multiple health problems.

Brunt said the costs of the two procedures are comparable, although the laparoscopic procedure may cost more.

The findings appear in the March issue of the Archives of Surgery.

For more about hernias, try the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent source provided useful context about the important continuing role of the traditional “open” procedure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Brynne Henn, 26, leaned back onto a pristine white couch and settled white-and-red headphones over her ears. She picked up a handset, grasping one buzzer in each hand, closed her eyes, and the session began.

The room was quiet. Through the headphones, Henn heard an alternating tone — first in the right ear, then the left, back and forth. The handset buzzed in synchrony, right-left-right-left, part of a trauma treatment that also involves recalling painful memories. She turned her thoughts to the day her brother, Nate, died.

Nate Henn had been visiting relatives and working with Invisible Children, a nonprofit in Kampala, Uganda. On July 11, 2010, he was at a sports complex with friends, enjoying the broadcast of a World Cup soccer match, when terrorists struck. Nate was only 25 when shrapnel from a bomb ended his life.

“ ‘Your brother’s dead, and you need to come home to take care of your mom,’ ” she remembered her father saying. With those simple words, her brother was gone — and she felt compelled to take control in the ensuing chaos. Henn, who had been visiting her boyfriend in Chapel Hill, immediately returned home to Raleigh, N.C.

“I didn’t stop for the first week after Nate died,” she said.

The ordeal didn’t end with the news of Nate’s death. Her other brother, Kyle, rushed home from Delaware to be with the family. But the private plane carrying him crashed the next day in nearby Chapel Hill. The pilot was killed and the co-pilot was seriously injured, but Kyle survived.

“And then the media storm went crazy,” Henn said. The family already had received inquiries from journalists about Nate’s death; Kyle’s brush with death only intensified the interest of media outlets from Philadelphia to Raleigh.

“It made it so much worse,” Henn said. At age 20, she began functioning as the family spokeswoman. “I felt like I had to protect my family from all of it,” she said. She occupied herself with press inquiries and funeral arrangements. But after the whirlwind passed, unaddressed grief remained with her.

When a person experiences trauma, the associated memories can remain as vivid and urgent as on the day the event happened. The brain perceives the trauma as happening in the present and reacts accordingly, even in safe situations.

When Henn’s traumatic memories of her brother’s violent death were triggered, they “popped” and glowed in her mind as if they were being shown on a projector screen.

“All these memories around me started playing like a video loop,” Henn said. Her body remembered the sensations vividly: the heat and discomfort of the summer day, the pain of her high heels as she delivered the eulogy at the funeral.

Henn did cognitive behavioral therapy — a form of conventional talk therapy — for five years.

“It helped me realize feelings were normal,” she explained, and that she was not weak for reeling from the tragedy. “But I never felt like I was getting over it.” Random memories could send her spiraling into panic and fear. Talk therapy helped her manage those attacks, but it didn’t address the root cause.

Henn was initially diagnosed with a condition known as complicated grief; she was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder only last year. She was surprised. She had thought of PTSD as an affliction of soldiers and others directly involved in horrendous events — not of people like her, suffering from the ripple effects of a bombing in Uganda.

It was Kyle Henn, recovering from his own PTSD after surviving the plane crash, who recommended eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy, or EMDR.

Psychologist Francine Shapiro developed EMDR in 1987. Three years later, she founded the EMDR Institute, which has trained more than 100,000 practitioners.

Some therapists use sounds from headphones during a session. Others use eye movement, moving a finger or object back and forth as the patient follows, eyes moving left to right and back again. Others employ a bar on which small bulbs light up from one side to another.

Patients follow the light or object with their eyes or listen to the alternating tone while thinking about a specific traumatic memory or series of memories. They describe the memories to the therapist, who gives guidance as needed.

The idea is that reliving the memories helps remove the sting and that the urgency of the memories can be reduced as the brain begins to move them from short-term to long-term memory. The sound or the eye movement is supposed to activate both sides of the brain in an imitation of REM sleep, when the brain usually converts short-term memories into long-term recollections.

Studies have found benefits to EMDR. But there is debate about whether the eye movement makes a difference, said Stephen Holland, founder of the Capital Institute for Cognitive Therapy and co-author of the textbook “Treatment Plans and Interventions for Depression and Anxiety Disorders.” “The question is whether stimulation adds to it.” He does not use it in his practice because he considers it no more effective than cognitive behavioral therapy.

Brynne Henn, who lives in the District, began seeing a licensed clinical psychologist who practices EMDR last September. In Gail Kalin’s office, nestled in a tree-shaded apartment building in Northwest Washington, Henn confronted the trauma that still haunted her.

The techniques associated with EMDR may merely have a placebo effect, some psychologists say. In early sessions, Henn focused on the headphones and handset; they helped distract her from the terror of reliving the traumatic events surrounding her brother’s death, she said. This distraction had a positive effect on her, she said, allowing her to dive deeply into the therapy without freezing in the face of fear.

Some insurance plans cover EMDR. Henn’s does not; she pays for the sessions out of pocket.

Henn, who is a communications associate at a Washington research institution, was initially very skeptical of EMDR.

“It is so weird,” she said. “When I first got there and she hands me these two paddles that vibrate in my hands, and then [I] put on these giant headphones — I was, like: What is this, a hearing test? What are we doing?”

But Henn was encouraged by the progress she made. “I started getting really interested in it,” she said. “Why is my brain coming up with this? What in the world are you doing to me, that this is what I came up with?” Henn was surprised by the vivid memories — some of which she hadn’t known existed — that resurfaced after so much time had passed.

It didn’t matter to her whether research supported EMDR; what mattered was whether it worked for her. Each time a particularly painful memory resurfaced, Henn said, “you have to go through it again until it has no meaning.” By confronting the trauma head-on, she added, it became less powerful.

“It’s integrating what’s stuck in time,” explained Kalin, the psychologist. Memories formed under the adrenaline of trauma are never put to rest, she said. “EMDR processing is untangling the knot.”

Once the memories are processed, therapists say, they are less vivid — less like the film reel Henn would see in her mind. Henn was able to recall processed memories without feeling panic.

EMDR’s central appeal lies in the possibility of closure — an end to PTSD, and to therapy for it.

“I’m going to come out equipped with tools to take care of myself,” Henn said. She already has put these tools to the test: Two months after she started EMDR, terrorists hit Paris, killing at least 130 people.

Soon after that attack, she heard reports that a video, possibly from the Islamic State, contained a threat to hit Washington next, and she had a “full-fledged panic attack,” she said.

“I was not sure where I was; I was sweating profusely but also really cold,” she said. She stepped onto the 11th-floor terrace at work and looked down.

“The thought came into my head: ‘I just need to walk off, and that will wake me up,’ ” Henn remembered. “And I had enough awareness that I sat myself down and was trying to think of calming breaths and going back and forth” — actions reminiscent of EMDR processing.

“It took a while, and it was a little terrifying that I had that thought,” she said. “But the process of being able to calm myself down was much better than anything I had been equipped with before.”

In a few weeks, Henn mentioned to Kalin, she would be marrying her college sweetheart. Beneath the excitement, she felt a twinge of panic: How would she react to her brother’s absence from the wedding? She asked a close friend to write a speech from Nate’s point of view, as if he were speaking at the celebration. But Henn admitted she was worried that the speech would trigger an extreme emotional reaction, a fear shared by many who suffer from PTSD. They never know when the trauma will reignite; it can spread from the smallest spark, even on the happiest day.

“Does EMDR deal with the future?” she asked Kalin. Kalin nodded, and they began processing memories again.

Among the painful recollections, Henn encountered a happy memory — friends who arrived at the funeral to support the family — and a smile broke through the tears.

“It felt like a gift from Nate,” she said.

EMDR, Henn said, allowed her to have a do-over — to be able to grieve properly and then to move beyond grief. She was finally able to remember the good times with her brother without being overwhelmed by pain.

“I’m still sad, but I’m not hurt by it anymore,” she said. “It’s not opening up any fresh wounds.”

As Henn walked outside into a brisk April evening after her session, there was a new easiness to her, as though something had finally been freed.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: There is at least one independent source not connected with the patient’s story. We would have liked to have seen input from a psychiatrist, as well (not just psychologists).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Study: Honey better than drugs for kids' coughs For kids' coughs, silence is golden and sweet

Parents might consider giving their coughing child honey instead of medicine, according to a study released Monday.

Buckwheat honey — a dark variety sold in most grocery stores — relieved children's coughs and helped them sleep better than dextromethorphan, the drug in most over-the-counter cough suppressants, according to a report published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Honey also beat out no treatment at all.

"(Honey) is a cheap and effective treatment," said Dr. Ian Paul, lead investigator for the study. "Consider using this as a treatment before going to the pharmacy to pick up an over-the-counter cough and cold medicine."

Honey has long been used by some parents as an alternative treatment for cough, although it should not be given to children under 1 year old.

The study comes at a time when parents are on the lookout for new ways to give sick children relief. A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel recommended last month that children under the age of 6 not be given over-the-counter cough and cold medicines.

For the study, 105 children ages 2-18 with upper respiratory tract infections that kept them awake at night were given either a dose of buckwheat honey, honey-flavored cough syrup or no treatment half an hour before bedtime.

One dose measured one-half teaspoon for children aged 2-5, one teaspoon for children aged 6-11 and two teaspoons for children aged 12-18.

Parents of the 35 children who received honey, given either on its own or with a non-caffeinated drink, reported they coughed less and slept better than those who gave their children nothing. The group that used honey also reported more favorable results than those who used cough syrup, but since the study group was small, those differences weren't statistically significant.

One local pediatrician said she wouldn't discourage parents from trying honey with their children, but more studies are needed to draw solid conclusions.

"In older children, if it makes them comfortable and it helps them sleep at night, then there may be a potential benefit," said Dr. Sara Rizvi, assistant professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine who also works at a primary care clinic at Texas Children's Hospital. "I would be reluctant to routinely recommend to all parents that they give honey, because in some rare cases children can have reactions to honey."

Paul, a pediatrician who practices at Penn State Children's Hospital and teaches at the university's College of Medicine, said he began the study because he was frustrated no treatment had been proven beneficial to relieve the common children's cough. Several years ago, he led another study that showed over-the-counter cough medicine was no more effective than placebos.

Honey is not only cheap and readily available, it's also generally safer than cough medicine, which can have side effects or be administered in the wrong dose.

Honey should not, however, be given to children under the age of 1 because it sometimes contains a bacteria that causes botulism, a rare paralytic illness that can result in death. Unlike older children, infants can't fight the bacteria.

Paul's group tested buckwheat honey instead of the lighter, more popular varieties because it's known to have more antioxidant and antimicrobial effects, which have been shown in other studies to help wounds heal. Honey may suppress cough because its sweetness causes salivation that coats the throat, authors of the study suggested.

"It's kind of amazing that something so simple could be an answer," Paul said.

The study was paid for by the National Honey Board, an industry-funded agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Under the provisions of the grant, the group was not involved in the study or the published results, Paul said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does quote an independent expert in addition to the lead author of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cutting the cord is a momentous event in a baby's life.

For nine months, the developing fetus is attached to its mother by the umbilical cord. Then, moments after birth, that cord is severed.

Now, research suggests there may be benefits to keeping mom and baby attached a few minutes longer.

Those benefits, researchers say, likely have to do with iron.

Waiting a few minutes before clamping the umbilical cord allows more iron-rich blood from the placenta to reach the newborn.

Iron deficiency occurs in about one in six American babies, and it's more common among those clamped quickly, said Ola Andersson, a neonatologist and pediatrician at Uppsala University in Sweden, who led a study published today in JAMA Pediatrics. Babies who are anemic often appear tired and pale.

His previous research has shown that babies whose cords were clamped a few minutes later than usual were 90% less likely than others to have iron-deficiency anemia when they were 4 months old.

The benefits of those extra few minutes may last a long time.

In the new study, Andersson found that healthy, full-term newborns whose umbilical cords were left attached for three extra minutes had better fine motor control when they reached preschool than those clamped immediately. Some 4-year-old boys who were clamped later even appeared to have better social skills.

Iron is essential to the developing brain, he said, and deficiencies during early months — perhaps linked to early clamping — could affect nerve and muscle control, making it harder for the child to later control a pen or interact comfortably with peers.

Andersson's study marks the first time researchers have followed children to see whether the clamping makes a difference later in life. In 2011, he published a study of 400 healthy, full-term babies showing that those clamped later fared better; the new study of 263 of those children extends those findings by nearly four years.

Boys showed more benefit than girls, probably because they are more likely to be iron-deficient, Andersson said.

Immediate clamping started about 70 years ago out of concern that leaving the delivered infant attached to the placenta could rob the mother of too much blood.

But those doctors overestimated the benefit to the mother and didn't look at the impact their change had on the babies, said Heike Rabe, a researcher at Brighton and Sussex Medical School and University Hospitals, in the United Kingdom, who wrote an editorial accompanying the study.

For babies born at full-term, "we should trust nature more than we do now," she said.

Rabe has published reviews showing that delaying clamping for 30 seconds, or squeezing the umbilical cord to get the blood out faster, is also better for premature babies.

Many countries and professional organizations, including the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, have called on obstetricians to delay cord clamping in premature babies when feasible. There was not enough evidence before to extend that recommendation to full-term babies, but Rabe thinks this study should tip the balance in favor of delay.

Kjersti Aagaard, vice chair of obstetrics and gynecology at Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children's Hospital, is more skeptical. She said the decision about when to clamp should be made between the doctor and parents, depending on the delivery, the health of the baby and the mother's condition.

"The most important thing for parents to be talking with their provider about is how will we adapt to the delivery as it emerges," she said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quoted a separate source not involved in the study with a different point of view. And while we applaud the story’s inclusion of that voice, we think the air time could have been used more fruitfully. Asking the reader to talk to a doctor/make an individual choice [Dr. Ishani speaking here as someone such people are sent to], without more explanation as to why they would choose one route or another, misses an opportunity to deliver succinct, useful information about the downsides of delayed clamping.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Not everyone was convinced. Some, like Dr. Dean Ornish, a longtime promoter of low-fat diets and president of the Preventive Medicine Research Institute in Sausalito, Calif., said that the women did not reduce their fat to low enough levels or eat enough fruits and vegetables, and that the study, even at eight years, did not give the diets enough time.

Others said that diet could still make a difference, at least with heart disease, if people were to eat the so-called Mediterranean diet, low in saturated fats like butter and high in oils like olive oil. The women in the study reduced all kinds of fat.

The diets studied "had an antique patina," said Dr. Peter Libby, a cardiologist and professor at Harvard Medical School. These days, Dr. Libby said, most people have moved on from the idea of controlling total fat to the idea that people should eat different kinds of fat.

But the Mediterranean diet has not been subjected to a study of this scope, researchers said.

And Barbara V. Howard, an epidemiologist at MedStar Research Institute, a nonprofit hospital group, and a principle investigator in the study, said people should realize that diet alone was not enough to stay healthy.

"We are not going to reverse any of the chronic diseases in this country by changing the composition of the diet," Dr. Howard said. "People are always thinking it's what they ate. They are not looking at how much they ate or that they smoke or that they are sedentary."

Except for not smoking, the advice for a healthy lifestyle is based largely on indirect evidence, Dr. Howard said, but most medical researchers agree that it makes sense to eat well, control weight and get regular exercise.

That is also what the cancer society recommends. Dr. Thun, who described the study's results as "completely null over the eight-year follow-up for both cancers and heart disease," said his group had no plans to suggest that low-fat diets were going to protect against cancer.

Others cautioned against being too certain that a particular diet would markedly improve health, and said that whether someone developed a chronic disease might not be entirely under their control -- genetics also plays a role.

David A. Freedman, a statistician at the University of California, Berkeley, who is not connected with the study but has written books on the design and analysis of clinical trials, said the results should be taken seriously.

"The studies were well designed," Dr. Freedman said, "and the investigators tried to confirm popular hypotheses about the protective effect of diet against three major diseases in women."

"But," he added, "the diet studied here turned out not to be protective after all."

The study was part of the Women's Health Initiative of the National Institutes of Health, the same program that showed that hormone therapy after menopause might have more risks than benefits.

In this case, the study addressed a tricky problem. For decades, many scientists have said, and many members of the public have believed, that what people eat -- the composition of the diet -- determines how likely they are to get a chronic disease. But that has been hard to prove. Studies of dietary fiber and colon cancer failed to find that fiber was protective, and studies of vitamins thought to protect against cancer failed to show an effect.

Many cancer researchers have questioned large parts of the diet-cancer hypothesis, but it has kept a hold on the public imagination. "Nothing fascinates the American public so much as the notion that what you eat rather than how much you eat affects your health," said Dr. Libby, the Harvard professor.

The study found that women who were randomly assigned to follow a low-fat diet ate significantly less fat over the next eight years. But they had just as much breast and colon cancer and just as much heart disease. The women were not trying to lose weight, and their weights remained fairly steady. But their experiences with the diets allowed researchers to question some popular notions about diet and obesity.

There is a common belief that Americans get fat because they eat too many carbohydrates. The idea is that a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet leads to weight gain, higher insulin and blood glucose levels, and more diabetes, even if the calories are the same as in a higher-fat diet. That did not happen here.

Others have said the opposite: that low-fat diets enable people to lose weight naturally. But that belief was not supported by this study.

As for heart disease risk factors, the only one affected was LDL cholesterol, which increases heart disease risk. The levels were slightly higher in women eating the higher-fat diet, but not high enough to make a noticeable difference in their risk of heart disease.

Although all the study participants were women, the colon cancer and heart disease results should also apply to men, said Dr. Jacques Rossouw, the project officer for the Women's Health Initiative.

Dr. Rossouw said the observational studies that led to the hypothesis about colon cancer and dietary fat included men and women. With heart disease, he said, researchers have found that women and men respond in the same way to dietary fat.

The most recent study follows a smaller one, reported last year, on low-fat diets for women who had breast cancer. That study hinted that eating less fat might help prevent a recurrence. But the current study, asking if a low-fat diet could protect women from breast cancer in the first place, had findings that fell short of statistical significance, meaning they could have occurred by chance.

Dr. Rossouw said he was still intrigued by the breast cancer data, even though it was not statistically significant. The women on low-fat diets had a 9 percent lower rate of breast cancer; the incidence was 42 per thousand per year in women in the low-fat diet group, compared with 45 per thousand per year in women consuming their regular diet.

That could mean that fat in the diet may have a small effect, Dr. Rossouw said, perhaps in some subgroups of women or over a longer period of time. He added that the study investigators would continue to follow the women to see if the effect became more pronounced.

While cancer researchers said they were disappointed by the results, heart disease researchers said they were not surprised that simply reducing total fat had no effect, because they had moved on from that hypothesis.

Of course, Dr. Libby acknowledged, the latest advice, to follow a Mediterranean diet and get regular exercise, has never been tested in a large randomized clinical trial. "If they did a study like that and it was negative," he said, "then I'd have to give up my cherished hypotheses for data."

The low-fat diet was not easy to follow, said Dr. Rowan T. Chlebowski, a medical oncologist at Harbor-U.C.L.A. Medical Center and one of the study's principal investigators. Women were told to aim for a diet that had just 20 percent of its calories as fat, and most fell short.

The diet they were told to follow "is different than the way most people eat," Dr. Chlebowski said. It meant, for example, no butter on bread, no cream cheese on bagels, no oil in salad dressings.

"If a physician told a patient to eat less fat, that will do nothing," he said. "If you send someone to a dietitian one time, that will do next to nothing." The women in the study had 18 sessions in small groups with a trained nutritionist in the first year and four sessions a year after that.

In the first year, the women on the low-fat diets reduced the percentage of fat in their diet to 24 percent of daily calories, and by the end of the study their diets had 29 percent of their calories as fat. In the first year, the women in the control group were eating 35 percent of their calories as fat, and by the end of the study their dietary fat content was 37 percent. The two groups consumed about the same number of calories.

Some medical specialists emphasized that the study did not mean people should abandon low-fat diets.

"What we are saying is that a modest reduction of fat and a substitution with fruits and vegetables did not do anything for heart disease and stroke or breast cancer or colorectal cancer," said Dr. Nanette K. Wenger, a cardiologist and professor of medicine at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta. "It doesn't say that this diet is not beneficial."

But Dr. Freedman, the Berkeley statistician, said the overall lesson was clear.

"We, in the scientific community, often give strong advice based on flimsy evidence," he said. "That's why we have to do experiments."

Correction: February 16, 2006, Thursday A front-page article on Feb. 8 about a new study finding that low-fat diets have no effect on the risk of cancer or heart disease misstated the incidence of breast cancer among women in the study. It was 42 per 10,000 per year in women in the low-fat-diet group, compared with 45 per 10,000 in women consuming their regular diet -- not per 1,000. (The difference was deemed statistically insignificant.)
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Scientists with a variety of different perspectives and interests are quoted. It is unfortunate that the quotes used focused more on personal beliefs than on evaluation of the evidence. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Bernat added that brain imaging promised to improve the diagnosis of unconscious states in certain patients, but that the prospect of imaging could also raise false hopes in cases like that of Terri Schiavo, the Florida woman who was removed from life support and died last year after a bitter national debate over patients’ rights.

Ms. Schiavo suffered far more profound brain damage than the woman in the study and was unresponsive for some 15 years, according to neurologists who examined her.

The journal that published the new paper, Science, promoted the finding in a news release, but added a “special note” citing the Schiavo case and warning that the finding “should not be used to generalize about all other patients in a vegetative state, particularly since each case may involve a different type of injury.”

The brain researchers, led by Adrian Owen at the Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit in Cambridge, England, performed scans on the patient’s brain five months after her accident. The imaging technique, called functional M.R.I., reveals changes in activity in specific brain regions. When the researchers spoke sentences to the patient, language areas in her brain spiked in the same way healthy volunteers’ did.

When presented with sentences containing ambiguous words, like “The creak came from a beam in the ceiling,” additional language processing areas also became active, as in normal brains. And when the researchers asked the woman to imagine playing tennis or walking through her house, they saw peaks of activity in the premotor cortex and other areas of her brain that mimicked those of healthy volunteers.

“If you put her scans together with the other 12 volunteers tested, you cannot tell which is the patient’s,” Dr. Owen said in an interview. Doctors from the University of Cambridge and the University of Liège in Belgium collaborated on the research.

Dr. Nicholas Schiff, a neuroscientist at Weill Cornell Medical College in New York, said that the study provided “knock-down, drag-out” evidence for mental awareness, but that it was not clear “whether we’ll see this in one out of 100 vegetative patients, or one out of 1,000, or ever again.”

In a more recent exam, more than 11 months after her injury, the patient exhibited a sign of responsiveness: she tracked with her eyes a small mirror, as it was moved slowly to her right, and could fixate on objects for more than five seconds, said Dr. Steven Laureys, a neurologist at the University of Liège and an author of the study. This means by definition that the young woman has transitioned from an unresponsive, vegetative state to a sometimes responsive condition known as a minimally conscious state, Dr. Laureys said in an interview. An estimated 100,000 Americans exist in this state of partial consciousness, and some of them eventually regain full awareness.

The chances that an unresponsive, brain-damaged patient will eventually emerge depend on the type of injury suffered, and on the length of time he or she has been unresponsive. Traumatic injuries to the head, often from car accidents, tend to sever brain cell connections and leave many neurons intact. About 50 percent of people with such injuries recover some awareness in the first year after the injury, studies find; very few do so afterward. By contrast, brains starved of oxygen — like that of Ms. Schiavo, whose heart stopped temporarily — often suffer a massive loss of neurons, leaving virtually nothing unharmed. Only 15 percent of people who suffer brain damage from oxygen deprivation recover some awareness within the first three months. Very few do after that, and a 1994 review of more than 700 vegetative patients found that none had done so after two years.

The imaging techniques used in the new study could help identify which patients are most likely to emerge — once the tests are studied in larger numbers of unconscious people, said Dr. Joseph Fins, chief of the medical ethics division of New York Presbyterian Hospital-Weill Cornell Medical Center.

Without this context, Dr. Fins said, the imaging tests could create some confusion, because like any medical tests they may occasionally go wrong, misidentifying patients as exhibiting consciousness or lacking it. “For now I think what this study does is to create another shade of gray in the understanding of gray matter,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple, independent sources who were not directly involved in the research study and who provided valuable perspectives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By MARILYNN MARCHIONE

 The Associated Press

 Monday, February 28, 2011; 9:39 PM 



-- In a bold new approach ultimately aimed at trying to cure AIDS, scientists used genetic engineering in six patients to develop blood cells that are resistant to HIV, the virus that causes the disease.

It's far too early to know if this scientific first will prove to be a cure, or even a new treatment. The research was only meant to show that, so far, it seems feasible and safe.

The concept was based on the astonishing case of an AIDS patient who seems to be cured after getting blood cells from a donor with natural immunity to HIV nearly four years ago in Berlin. Researchers are seeking a more practical way to achieve similar immunity using patients' own blood cells.

The results announced Monday at a conference in Boston left experts cautiously excited.

"For the first time, people are beginning to think about a cure" as a real possibility, said Dr. John Zaia, head of the government panel that oversees gene therapy experiments. Even if the new approach doesn't get rid of HIV completely, it may repair patients' immune systems enough that they can control the virus and not need AIDS medicines - "what is called a functional cure," he said.

Carl Dieffenbach, AIDS chief at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, agreed.

"We're hopeful that this is sufficient to give the level of immune reconstitution similar to what was seen with the patient from Germany," he said.

This is the first time researchers have permanently deleted a human gene and infused the altered cells back into patients. Other gene therapy attempts tried to add a gene or muffle the activity of one, and have not worked against HIV.

The virus can damage the immune system for years before people develop symptoms and are said to have AIDS - acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The virus targets special immune system soldiers called T-cells. It usually enters these cells through a protein receptor, or "docking station," called CCR5.

Some people (about 1 percent of whites; fewer of minorities) lack both copies of the CCR5 gene and are naturally resistant to HIV. One such person donated blood stem cells in 2007 to an American man living in Berlin who had leukemia and HIV.

The cell transplant appears to have cured both problems, but finding such donors for everyone with HIV is impossible, and transplants are medically risky.

So scientists wondered: Could a patient's own cells be used to knock out the CCR5 gene and create resistance to HIV?

A California biotechnology company, Sangamo (SANG-uh-moh) BioSciences Inc., makes a treatment that can cut DNA at precise locations and permanently "edit out" a gene.

Dr. Jacob Lalezari, director of Quest Clinical Research of San Francisco, led the first test of this with the company and colleagues at the University of California in San Francisco and Los Angeles.

He warned that it would be "way overstated" to suggest that the results so far are a possible cure.

"It's an overreach of the data. There are a lot of people out there with hopes and dreams around the C-word," so caution is needed.

In the study, six men with HIV had their blood filtered to remove a small percentage of their T-cells. The gene-snipping compound was added in the lab, and about one-fourth of the cells were successfully modified. The cells were mixed with growth factors to make them multiply and then infused back into the patients.

Three men received about 2.5 billion modified cells. Three others received about 5 billion.

Three months later, five men had three times the number of modified cells expected. As much as 6 percent of their total T-cells appear to be the new type - resistant to HIV, Lalezari said.

The sixth man also had modified cells, but fewer than expected. In all six patients, the anti-HIV cells were thriving nearly a year after infusion, even in tissues that can hide HIV when it can't be detected in blood.

"The cells are engrafting - they're staying in the bloodstream, they're expanding over time," said Lalezari, who has no personal financial ties to Sangamo, the study's sponsor.

The only side effect was two days of flulike symptoms. It will take longer to determine safety, but several AIDS experts said they were encouraged so far.

"It is a huge step" and a first for the field of genetics, said John Rossi, a researcher at City of Hope in Duarte, Calif., where he and Zaia plan another study to test Sangamo's approach. "The idea is if you take away cells the virus can infect, you can cure the disease."

On Wednesday, Dr. Carl June, a gene therapy expert at the University of Pennsylvania, will report partial results from a second, federally funded study of 10 people testing Sangamo's product. He treated his first patient with it in July 2009.

- People born without the CCR5 gene are generally healthy, but will deleting it have unforeseen consequences?

- Will HIV find another way into cells? Certain types of the virus can use a second protein receptor, though this is less common and usually when AIDS is advanced. Sangamo is testing a similar approach aimed at that protein, too.

- How long will the modified cells last? Will more be needed every few years?

- Could doctors just infuse Sangamo's product rather than removing cells and modifying them in the lab?

- What might this cost?

Sangamo spokeswoman Liz Wolffe said it's too early in testing to guess, but it would be "a premier-priced" therapy - in the neighborhood of Dendreon Corp.'s new prostate cancer immune therapy, Provenge - $93,000.

Yet AIDS drugs can cost $25,000 a year, so this could still be cost-effective, especially if it's a cure.

Jay Johnson, 50, who works for Action AIDS, an advocacy and service organization in Philadelphia, had the treatment there in September.

"My results are excellent," he said. "The overall goal is to not have to take medication, and then hopefully lead maybe to a cure."

Matt Sharp, 54, of suburban San Francisco, also had the treatment in September.

"I would trade anything to not have to take a handful of medications every day for the rest of my life and suffer all the consequences and side effects," he said.

"I may not live long enough to see the cure, but I always hoped for a chance."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent sources were quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Boston, MA - Women who eat more high-fiber foods during adolescence and young adulthood--especially lots of fruits and vegetables--may have significantly lower breast cancer risk than those who eat less dietary fiber when young, according to a new large-scale study led by researchers at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.

The study will be published online February 1, 2016 in Pediatrics.

"Previous studies of fiber intake and breast cancer have almost all been non-significant, and none of them examined diet during adolescence or early adulthood, a period when breast cancer risk factors appear to be particularly important," said Maryam Farvid, visiting scientist at Harvard Chan School and lead author of the study. "This work on the role of nutrition in early life and breast cancer incidence suggests one of the very few potentially modifiable risk factors for premenopausal breast cancer."

The researchers looked at a group of 90,534 women who participated in the Nurses' Health Study II, a large long-running investigation of factors that influence women's health. In 1991, the women--ages 27-44 at the time--filled out questionnaires about their food intake, and did so every four years after that. They also completed a questionnaire in 1998 about their diet during high school. The researchers analyzed the women's fiber intake while adjusting for a number of other factors, such as race, family history of breast cancer, body mass index, weight change over time, menstruation history, alcohol use, and other dietary factors.

Breast cancer risk was 12%-19% lower among women who ate more dietary fiber in early adulthood, depending on how much more they ate. High intake of fiber during adolescence was also associated with 16% lower risk of overall breast cancer and 24% lower risk of breast cancer before menopause. Among all the women, there was a strong inverse association between fiber intake and breast cancer incidence. For each additional 10 grams of fiber intake daily--for example, about one apple and two slices of whole wheat bread, or about half a cup each of cooked kidney beans and cooked cauliflower or squash--during early adulthood, breast cancer risk dropped by 13%. The greatest apparent benefit came from fruit and vegetable fiber.

The authors speculated that eating more fiber-rich foods may lessen breast cancer risk partly by helping to reduce high estrogen levels in the blood, which are strongly linked with breast cancer development.

"From many other studies we know that breast tissue is particularly influenced by carcinogens and anticarcinogens during childhood and adolescence," said Walter Willett, Fredrick John Stare Professor of Epidemiology and Nutrition at Harvard Chan School and senior author of the study. "We now have evidence that what we feed our children during this period of life is also an important factor in future cancer risk."

Other Harvard Chan School researchers involved in the study included Heather Eliassen, associate professor in the Department of Epidemiology, and Xiaomei Liao, research scientist in the Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics.

The study was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01 CA050385 and UM1 CA176726 and a grant from The Breast Cancer Research Foundation. Farvid was supported by the Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association.

"Dietary Fiber Intake in Young Adults and Breast Cancer Risk," Maryam S. Farvid, A. Heather Eliassen, Eunyoung Cho, Xiaomei Liao, Wendy Y. Chen, and Walter C. Willett, online February 1, 2016, Pediatrics, 137(3):e20151226 doi: 10.1542/peds.2015-1226

Visit the Harvard Chan School website for the latest news, press releases, and multimedia offerings.

Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health brings together dedicated experts from many disciplines to educate new generations of global health leaders and produce powerful ideas that improve the lives and health of people everywhere. As a community of leading scientists, educators, and students, we work together to take innovative ideas from the laboratory to people's lives--not only making scientific breakthroughs, but also working to change individual behaviors, public policies, and health care practices. Each year, more than 400 faculty members at Harvard Chan School teach 1,000-plus full-time students from around the world and train thousands more through online and executive education courses. Founded in 1913 as the Harvard-MIT School of Health Officers, the School is recognized as America's oldest professional training program in public health.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The National Institutes of Health and The Breast Cancer Research Foundation are named as funders. An existing financial arrangement between a lead researcher and the Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association is also disclosed in the release. It’s not at all clear how this trade group was involved with the study or how its interests dovetail with a fiber-rich diet.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But the latest research suggests it doesn't do the job for most of us, reported The Early Show medical correspondent Dr. Emily Senay Wednesday.

She explained that a review of numerous studies concluded that vitamin C isn't what it's cracked up to be, failing to help prevent the common cold in any meaningful way, except in some people exposed to extremely high stress.

For the rest of us, the chances of vitamin C warding off colds is so slight, the lead researcher concludes it "doesn't make sense to take vitamin C 365 days a year to lessen the chance of catching a cold."

Senay explained that a research team examined 30 studies conducted over several decades, involving more than 11,000 people. All compared people taking at least 200 milligrams of Vitamin C each day with people taking placebos. The researchers added up how often people in those studies got colds, and how long those colds tended to last. And the results, just published by The Cochrane Library, are likely to disappoint people who swear by vitamin C.

According to their analysis, daily vitamin C basically had no effect on the incidence of the common cold in the general population, except for very specific groups of people, all of them small groups. It did reduce the severity and duration of colds slightly, but the researchers say the difference was so slight it ended up being pretty meaningless, and not worth the effort or expense of taking all that vitamin C.

People apparently protected from colds by vitamin C, Senay said, are those who subject their immune systems to extraordinary amounts of physical stress, such as people who run marathons, or do serious trekking in the winter. The researchers found that these people were 50 percent less likely to catch cold if they took vitamin C daily. But they were the exceptions.

The message from the researchers, Senay observed, is that, if your activity profile doesn't match that of people like these, vitamin C won't keep colds away.

But, she emphasized, this doesn't mean vitamin C is useless, not by a long shot.

According to the National Institutes of Health, vitamin C has several important benefits. Preventing colds just isn't one of them. Vitamin C is an important building block for the growth and repair of tissues throughout your body, including skin, tendons, ligaments and blood vessels. If you suffer an injury, vitamin C is a vital part of the healing process. Vitamin C is also an antioxidant, which means it's believed to help prevent or minimize conditions that include cancer, heart disease, and inflammatory conditions such as arthritis. So, even if it doesn't fight colds, you do need a certain amount of it daily for other aspects of your health.

For adult males, the recommended amount is 90 milligrams per day. For women, it's 75 milligrams. Citrus fruits and juices, strawberries and broccoli are among the many foods that are rich in vitamin C.

So, where does this research leave us in the fight against the common cold?

It makes us look toward other methods, aside from vitamin C, Senay concluded. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says the best bit of cold prevention involves not taking a pill, but doing simple, if boring, things such as washing your hands, thoroughly and often.

Until a magic pill is found, keeping your hands clean, and not sharing items such as drinking cups and utensils with someone who has a cold, are still considered the most practical ways to avoid getting sick.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The segment accurately indicates the high crediblity of the Cochrane group, and there appear to be no underlying conflicts of interest that would call the conclusions into question.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, May 16, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A daily dose of the antioxidant selenium doesn't appear to elevate "bad" cholesterol levels, and may in fact prompt a very modest boost in "good" cholesterol, a new British study reveals.

The finding comes from a six-month examination of the impact of various dosages of the supplement on the cholesterol levels of healthy people in England.

"The issue is that there have been an awful lot of studies, about eight, that have looked at blood cholesterol, both good and bad, and have found an association with high blood selenium," said study author Margaret P. Rayman, a professor of nutritional medicine at the University of Surrey in Guildford, England. But an association is only that; it doesn't mean one thing causes another.

"So we looked for whether selenium actually causes cholesterol to rise, and we definitively found that there wasn't an adverse effect," Rayman said. "In fact, we can safely and confidently say that, if anything, selenium had a slightly beneficial effect."

However, the safety of selenium has not been studied, and the authors said the findings weren't significant enough to recommend supplementation of the trace mineral. They also noted that the results can't necessarily be applied to Americans, because of differences in the food supply and diets of each country.

For the study, published in the May 17 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine, the authors focused on about 500 healthy British men and women aged 60 to 74 between 2000 and 2001.

Blood tests determined blood selenium, good cholesterol and bad cholesterol levels at the start of the study. For six months, some participants were assigned to take daily selenium yeast supplements in either low, intermediate or high doses, while others were given a dummy pill for the duration.

Noting that blood selenium levels were relatively low across the board at the study's launch, the authors found that selenium levels did rise as a result of supplementation, while those taking selenium also experienced a slight drop in both bad cholesterol (LDL) and overall cholesterol levels. Good cholesterol (HDL) levels rose a bit solely among those assigned to the highest selenium dosage. None of the patients experienced any serious side effects as a result of selenium supplementation.

Rayman and her associates concluded that selenium supplementation does not appear to have a negative impact on blood cholesterol levels overall, and may in fact be "modestly beneficial." High cholesterol levels can increase the risk of heart attack.

However, she cautioned that in general such supplementation has a minor impact and is not advisable as an effective means to combat high cholesterol, particularly for people who already have high blood selenium levels.

She added that the team's observations were based exclusively on an analysis of British residents, and that the findings may not necessarily apply in North America.

"In the U.K., people's baseline selenium levels in the blood are considerably lower than they are in the U.S.," she noted. "There are various reasons for that, including the fact that in the U.S. you have a wheat belt that means there is quite a high amount of selenium in the bread staple, which is not the case in the U.K."

"So, we can't extrapolate our findings to the U.S.," Rayman said. "And so I would caution against anybody in the U.S. increasing their selenium intake based on what we found, because we also know there's an increased risk for type 2 diabetes when you increase selenium intake if you are already at a high level of blood selenium levels."

Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said that efforts to gauge the potential health impact of selenium have not yet demonstrated any clear benefit attributable to the trace mineral.

"Overall, the evidence is inadequate to establish a protective role of selenium in cardiovascular disease or to recommend selenium supplementation to improve cardiovascular health," he said.

There's more on selenium at the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: An independent expert source was quoted and there were no obvious conflicts of interest that weren’t disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two drugs already on the market — an antifungal and a steroid — may potentially take on new roles as treatments for multiple sclerosis. According to a study published in Nature today, researchers discovered that these drugs may activate stem cells in the brain to stimulate myelin producing cells and repair white matter, which is damaged in multiple sclerosis. The study was partially funded by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), part of the National Institutes of Health.

Specialized cells called oligodendrocytes lay down multiple layers of a fatty white substance known as myelin around axons, the long “wires” that connect brain cells. Myelin acts as an insulator and enables fast communication between brain cells. In multiple sclerosis there is breakdown of myelin and this deterioration leads to muscle weakness, numbness and problems with vision, coordination and balance.

“To replace damaged cells, the scientific field has focused on direct transplantation of stem cell-derived tissues for regenerative medicine, and that approach is likely to provide enormous benefit down the road. We asked if we could find a faster and less invasive approach by using drugs to activate native nervous system stem cells and direct them to form new myelin. Our ultimate goal was to enhance the body’s ability to repair itself,” said Paul J. Tesar, Ph.D., associate professor at Case Western Reserve School of Medicine in Cleveland, and senior author of the study.

It is unknown how myelin-producing cells are damaged, but research suggests they may be targeted by malfunctioning immune cells and that multiple sclerosis may start as an autoimmune disorder. Current therapies for multiple sclerosis include anti-inflammatory drugs, which help prevent the episodic relapses common in multiple sclerosis, but are less effective at preventing long-term disability. Scientists believe that therapies that promote myelin repair might improve neurologic disability in people with multiple sclerosis.

Adult brains contain oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), which are stem cells that generate myelin-producing cells. OPCs are found to multiply in the brains of multiple sclerosis patients as if to respond to myelin damage, but for unknown reasons they are not effective in restoring white matter. In the current study, Dr. Tesar wanted to see if drugs already approved for other uses were able to stimulate OPCs to increase myelination.

OPCs have been difficult to isolate and study, but Dr. Tesar and his colleagues, in collaboration with Robert Miller, Ph.D., professor at George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences in Washington, D.C., developed a novel method to investigate these cells in a petri dish. Using this technique, they were able to quickly test the effects of hundreds of drugs on the stem cells.

The compounds screened in this study were obtained from a drug library maintained by NIH’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS). All are approved for use in humans. NCATS and Dr. Tesar have an ongoing collaboration and plan to expand the library of drugs screened against OPCs in the near future to identify other promising compounds.

Dr. Tesar’s team found that two compounds in particular, miconazole (an antifungal) and clobetasol (a steroid), stimulated mouse and human OPCs into generating myelin-producing cells.

Next, they examined whether the drugs, when injected into a mouse model of multiple sclerosis, could improve re-myelination. They found that both drugs were effective in activating OPCs to enhance myelination and reverse paralysis. As a result, almost all of the animals regained the use of their hind limbs. They also found that the drugs acted through two very different molecular mechanisms.

“The ability to activate white matter cells in the brain, as shown in this study, opens up an exciting new avenue of therapy development for myelin disorders such as multiple sclerosis,” said Ursula Utz, Ph.D., program director at the NINDS.

Dr. Tesar and his colleagues caution that more research is needed before miconazole and clobetasol can be tested in multiple sclerosis clinical trials. They are currently approved for use as creams or powders on the surfaces of the body but their safety administered in other forms, such as injections, in humans is unknown.

“Off-label use of the current forms of these drugs is more likely to increase other health concerns than alleviate multiple sclerosis symptoms. We are working tirelessly to ready a safe and effective drug for clinical use,” Dr. Tesar said.

This work was supported by the NINDS (NS085246, NS030800, NS026543), the New York Stem Cell Foundation and the Myelin Repair Foundation, New York City.

The NINDS is the nation’s leading funder of research on the brain and nervous system. The mission of NINDS is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease.

The National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences is a distinctly different entity in the research ecosystem. Rather than targeting a particular disease or fundamental science, NCATS focuses on what is common across diseases and the translational process. The Center emphasizes innovation and deliverables, relying on the power of data and new technologies to develop, demonstrate and disseminate advancements in translational science that bring about tangible improvements in human health. For more information, visit http://www.ncats.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We are told up front that the study was funded by a division within the National Institutes of Health, and there is no apparent conflict of interest according to the paper.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Human Genome Sciences, based in Rockville, Md., is sharing development and marketing rights to the drug with GlaxoSmithKline. Results from a second Phase 3 trial are due in November. If that succeeds, the companies will apply for regulatory approval in the first half of next year.

Lupus is an autoimmune disease, in which the defense system against pathogens attacks the body’s own tissues. The disease, which primarily affects women of child-bearing age, can cause rashes, arthritis, mouth sores, kidney damage and other problems.

One recent study estimated that 322,000 Americans definitely or probably have systemic lupus erythematosus, the most common form of the disease and the one against which Benlysta was tested. The Lupus Foundation of America estimates that 1.5 million Americans have some form of lupus.

Because the disease’s symptoms wax and wane on their own and vary considerably from one patient to another, it has been hard to demonstrate the efficacy of drugs in clinical trials.

Among the companies that have had setbacks or outright failures in clinical trials are Roche and Biogen Idec with their drug Rituxan; La Jolla Pharmaceutical with Riquent; Bristol-Myers Squibb with Orencia; ZymoGenetics and Merck Serono with atacicept; Genelabs Technologies with Prestara; Teva Pharmaceutical Industries with edratide; and Aspreva Pharmaceuticals and Roche with CellCept.

Benlysta, which was previously called Lymphostat-B and is known generically as belimumab, also failed in its Phase 2, or midstage, trial.

But Human Genome Sciences, in consultation with the Food and Drug Administration, restricted the Phase 3 trials to a subset of patients who seemed to respond better to the drug in the earlier trial. It also changed the measurement of success and lengthened the trial to give the drug more time to work.

“We knew the drug was safe and biologically active,” H. Thomas Watkins, chief executive of the company, said in an interview. “The question was, ‘Can you prove in a very large trial what we’ve proven here?’ ”

The 865 patients in the trial, who were mainly in Asia, South America and Eastern Europe, received either Benlysta or a placebo in addition to the drugs they were already taking.

More patients on the drug had the required improvement in symptom severity. In addition, about 20 percent of patients taking Benlysta were able to reduce their use of the steroid prednisone by at least 25 percent, compared with about 12 percent of those on placebo.

Although the difference between the treated patients and those given the placebo in the trial might appear modest, Dr. Joan T. Merrill, a lupus expert at the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, said Benlysta’s safety and its ability to reduce steroid use would make it attractive to doctors. Steroids can cause severe weight gain, acne and the weakening of bones, among other side effects.

“I think it looks good,” Dr. Merrill said. “And we are in a field where we haven’t even had anything fair.”

Benlysta, which is given by infusion once every four weeks, inhibits the action of a protein in the body called B-lymphocyte stimulator, which helps B cells in the blood respond to infections. The company said high levels of the protein might spur the immune system to attach the body’s own tissues.

Human Genome, a pioneer in studying human genes, discovered the gene for the stimulator protein. If Benlysta gets to market, it will be the first drug from the company, and one of the first in the industry, to result from genomics.

In 2000, the company’s share price soared to over $100 on anticipation that understanding the human DNA blueprint — the human genome — would lead to a cornucopia of drugs. On Friday, it closed at $3.32 a share.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included quotes from a company spokesperson, a clinician who is a consultant for the company, and a clinician with expertise in lupus who does not appear to have overt ties with the company.  The story would have been more informative to readers had several clinicians with expertise in treating people with lupus been interviewed as part of this story.  The comments of those involved with drug development or promotion have limited credibility.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For years, research has shown that babies born by cesarean section are more likely to develop health problems. Now, a groundbreaking study suggests that not all C-sections are equally risky.

The research looked at all full-term, firstborn births in Scotland over a 15-year period and tracked the babies’ long-term health. It is one of the largest and longest studies to explore how planned C-sections differ from other deliveries.

Surprisingly, the data showed more health problems among babies born by planned C-section than among those delivered by emergency C-section or vaginal birth, even though the planned surgery is done under more controlled conditions. The finding suggests that the arduous experience of labor — that exhausting, sweaty, utterly unpredictable yet often strangely exhilarating process — may give children a healthy start, even when it’s interrupted by a surgical birth.

The new findings, published in JAMA this month, are important because the number of babies born by C-section has increased tremendously. In the United States, nearly one in three babies are born by C-section. Cesarean births that had no medical indication increased, to 5.5 percent of low-risk women in 2001, up from 3.3 percent of such women in 1991.

Dr. Mairead Black, the University of Aberdeen obstetrician who led the study, said that as cesarean births had increased in Scotland and worldwide, the researchers wondered what, if anything, children born by C-section “are missing out on.”

“Our thinking was: If a baby is born naturally, it comes into contact with bacteria from the mother, which might help with immune system development,” Dr. Black said.

Even attempted labor may provide some exposure to bacteria, she said. But babies delivered by a planned C-section, which is usually scheduled to take place well before the first pang of labor, may miss out entirely.

“When you don’t wait for labor to begin on its own, you cut short all kinds of physiological changes and preparations for birth that are taking place toward the end of pregnancy,” said Carol Sakala, the director of the nonprofit Childbirth Connection programs at the National Partnership for Women & Families. “What is the effect of cutting off those processes so casually on such a large scale?”

Studies have consistently found that children born by C-section are at higher risk for health problems like obesity and allergies. C-section birth has also been associated with a higher risk for Type 1 diabetes.

The Scottish study took advantage of the small country’s rich trove of linked birth and medical databases to track the long-term health of 321,287 babies. Nearly 4 percent were born by planned C-section and 17 percent were delivered by emergency surgery. The remaining 252,917 were vaginal births.

The researchers compared a range of health outcomes among the babies, including asthma, irritable bowel syndrome, obesity, Type 1 diabetes, early death and cancer.

Over all, the differences between a scheduled C-section and an emergency C-section were slight. However, the data do begin to shed light on why babies born through vaginal birth may have fewer health risks than babies born by C-section.

The biggest difference between babies born by scheduled and unscheduled C-section appeared in risk for Type 1 diabetes. The results showed that babies born by planned C-section had a 35 percent higher risk of Type 1 diabetes compared with babies born by emergency C-section, after adjusting for differences among the mothers.

All of the babies born by C-section were slightly more likely to use an asthma inhaler at age 5: 10.3 percent of planned C-section babies and 10.19 percent of unscheduled C-section babies wound up using an inhaler, compared with 9.6 percent of vaginally born babies. Asthma hospitalization rates were also higher for babies born by planned C-section with a statistically significant increase of 22 percent over vaginally born babies.

Although all of the C-section babies were more likely to be obese at age 5, the differences were not statistically significant after adjusting for differences among the mothers. There were no significant differences in cancer and irritable bowel disease among any of the types of births.

No one knows exactly why labor may be protective, but the spontaneous onset of labor prompts fluid to clear from a baby’s lungs, said Dr. Aaron Caughey, who helped draw up 2014 guidelines for the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists that urged providers to let women spend more time in labor and avoid an unnecessary C-section.

The step is just one of a cascade of physiological changes that take place in mother and baby during the labor process, including surges in stress hormones and reproductive hormones like oxytocin that may help the fetus adapt during labor, preserve blood flow to the organs, and keep the baby alert and prepared for breast-feeding.

During labor, a newborn absorbs maternal microbes into its mouth and gastrointestinal tract, said Dr. Josef Neu, a neonatologist at the University of Florida who has written about C-section babies and the hygiene hypothesis.

The theory is that maternal microbes “train” the infant’s immune system, so it doesn’t overreact or become destructive and precipitate autoimmune disorders like Type 1 diabetes.

“It’s an education process that says, ‘Calm down, you’re going to be seeing this antigen again, you don’t have to be so aggressive,’” Dr. Neu said.

Dr. Neu said the broad-spectrum antibiotics prescribed to the mother before a surgical delivery were another concern; the antibiotics can be transmitted to the baby through breast milk if not before birth, decreasing the diversity of natural bacteria.

The findings are a reminder that although C-sections are appropriate in some circumstances, they are a poor substitute for labor.

Childbirth and labor are “a physiological process that we’ve evolved to over millions of years,” Dr. Caughey said. “It’s been really well-designed by evolution.”
• Does Frequent Sex Prime the Immune System for Pregnancy?



 For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent experts were quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A large waistline more than doubles the risk that people in their 40s will develop precancerous cells in the colon, according to Korean researchers.

The chances of finding abnormal cells during a screening test were just as good in younger men with too much belly fat as in slimmer men over 50.

As a result, the researchers recommend lowering the age of colon cancer screening from 50 years to 45 in men with weight problems.

But US experts say it’s too soon to change the current recommendations.

“The idea that you’re tailoring screening to age and some combination of risk factors is entirely reasonable,” said Robert Smith, the director of cancer screening at the American Cancer Society. “But attempts to draw those conclusions now is a bit premature, because most colorectal polyps don’t become cancers.”

The Korean researchers, at Konkuk University in Seoul, examined more than 1,700 men and women, aged 40 to 59, who had no signs of colon cancer and no family history for the disease.

As part of their employer-provided health benefits, each participant in the study underwent screening colonoscopy at Konkuk University, which also sponsored the research.

One in 40 of those younger than 50 years had late-stage polyps, but no one actually had colon cancer. By contrast, two of those over 50 did, and late-stage polyps were almost twice as common in this age group.

To find a late-stage polyp, which may or may not turn into cancer, the researchers calculated they would have to test 23 of the people who were in their 50s.

That number was the same in younger people who had large waistlines, and even lower in those with metabolic syndrome, a combination of risk factors including belly fat, high blood pressure and high blood sugar.

“It may be reasonable to offer colonoscopic screening to these individuals,” Dr. Sung Noh Hong and colleagues write in the journal Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.

One gastroenterologist said the results were “important” but should not change practice.

“This paper substantiates what we suspected, that people who are obese have higher risk of colon cancer,” Dr. John Allen, a colon cancer expert and a community practice counselor with the American Gastroenterological Association, told Reuters Health.

Allen, of Minnesota Gastroenterology PA, said this risk factor might be taken into consideration when deciding when to screen, but that so far more studies were needed before recommending colonoscopy at younger ages.

During colonoscopy, the doctor inserts a slim, flexible tube into the rectum. A camera at the tip shows the inside of the gut, so that unusual cell clumps can be found and removed.

At this point, colon cancer screening is only recommended by the American Cancer Society and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force in people under 50 if a first-degree relative developed cancer at a young age.

In younger people, it is unclear that the benefits of screening offset the risks. During widely used colonoscopy, for instance, bleeding or perforation of the colon may happen in rare cases.

“You want to make sure that the advantages are going to outweigh the harms,” said the American Cancer Society’s Smith.

Colonoscopy, used in millions of Americans every year, is just one of many methods to detect abnormalities. There are cheaper methods such as testing stool for blood, Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, of the University of Missouri in Columbia, told Reuters Health.

LeFevre, a member of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally appointed expert panel, said the chances that a polyp turns into cancer is currently a matter of debate. As a result, he said, it is hard to know whether removing polyps in younger people would in turn lower their risk of getting cancer.

“If we back screening down to age 45, does that affect mortality?” he said. “From a task force perspective, this article alone would not prompt us to look at the screening guidelines.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes several independent experts who provide very valuable perspectives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Also missing, Nelson said, are randomized studies that would indicate how often patients should be screened. One of the best studies the panel found focused on healthy women over age 65 and concluded that screenings spaced eight years or less apart did not make much of a difference in identifying which women would be more at risk for fractures.

The report identified possible benefits of screening, but noted that there is no solid evidence — in the form of randomized trials, medicine’s gold standard — comparing fracture rates of patients who have been screened with those who have not been screened.

But the panel is in the process of updating its recommendations, which were issued in 2002. A preliminary report in July packed a surprise: No direct evidence was found that testing patients for low bone density helped avoid broken bones. “It’s still amazing to me,’’ said the report’s lead author, Dr. Heidi Nelson, a professor at Oregon Health & Science University.

The task force offers no advice for women younger than 60 or for men of any age, though men account for at least 20 percent of US patients with osteoporosis.

The US Preventive Services Task Force, which sets standards on disease prevention and primary care, suggests that all women get a bone density screening by age 65, or by 60 if a patient might be at high risk for fractures. Risk factors include being female, having a family history of osteoporosis or broken bones, being small and thin, and having low levels of sex hormones, in addition to older age.

One of the first dilemmas patients typically encounter is when to get screened for osteoporosis, and then how often to repeat the test — a painless body scan that measures bone density.

“What is right in 2010,’’ she said, “might not be right in 2011 in a rapidly evolving medical science.’’

Dr. Felicia Cosman, clinical director of the National Osteoporosis Foundation and a professor at Columbia University, said the swirl of new information makes it critical for patients to review with their physicians their treatment decisions.

Even the issues of how much vitamin D adults should take and whether calcium supplements help keep bones strong have been matters of debate.

The safety of one of the most popular types of medication used to lessen the risk of fractures — bisphosphonates, such as Fosamax and Boniva — has also been questioned.

Over the past several months, studies have raised questions about the effectiveness of screening for osteoporosis, a silent disease that weakens the bones of an estimated 10 million Americans, most over age 50.

Sorting through all the recent news about osteoporosis, or low bone density, can be dizzying.

A task force of specialists appointed by the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research reported last month that long-term use of bisphosphonates, typically beyond five years, may increase a patient’s risk of an unusual but serious type of thigh fracture. The panel reviewed 310 such cases and concluded that they represent less than one-half of 1 percent of all American patients taking bisphosphonates. However the panel also said it believed the number of such fractures is under-reported.

There is little dispute over the conclusion of several studies that bisphosphonates can be effective in lowering patients’ risk of fractures, some by as much as 50 percent. But in recent months, questions have grown about their safety.

Bisphosphonates — the class of drugs that includes Fosamax, Boniva, and others — were approved by federal regulators in 1995 and have since been prescribed for millions of patients. Taken orally or by injection, the drugs work by slowing the growth of cells that break down bones, giving the edge to other cells that rebuild them.

When it comes to the most popular type of osteoporosis treatment, bisphosphonates, the question is not so much about how much to take, but whether there are harmful consequences from long-term use.

An updated report on recommended levels for both nutrients is due next month from the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academy of Sciences, which advises the federal government.

There are fewer differences of opinion among health professionals about calcium levels, with most recommending about 1,200 daily milligrams for adults over 50. However, the most extensive study on the calcium question, done by the Women’s Health Initiative as a randomized controlled trial, was inconclusive. It found no significant reduction in fractures in the study population, which received supplements of 1,000 milligrams of calcium and 400 international units of vitamin D daily.

Beyond the screening question, many physicians routinely ask patients about their calcium and vitamin D intake. The federal government recommends just 400 international units daily of vitamin D for adults over age 50, while the National Osteoporosis Foundation recommends 800 to 1,000 units. Some doctors suggest doubling those higher amounts for post-menopausal women.

Waiting until women are in their 60s to scan will result in missing many who could be diagnosed and treated, she said. “The reason you want to find people at the time of menopause is because there is acceleration [of bone loss] at this time,’’ Cosman said. This is when estrogen plummets, and estrogen helps protect bone health.

“I believe all women should have a bone screening test approximately at the time of menopause,’’ said Cosman, emphasizing that “this is my personal opinion as a specialist who treats women,’’ and not representative of her position with the National Osteoporosis Foundation.

In the absence of clear guidelines, many physicians make their own judgment calls.

“The thigh is one of the strongest bones in the body and it’s unusual for it to break,’’ said Columbia University professor Dr. Elizabeth Shane, the task force cochair and a specialist who has prescribed the medications to many of her osteoporosis patients.

Her task force recommended that an international registry be created for tracking such cases to help researchers better pinpoint which patients might be at risk. It also called on the US Food and Drug Administration to change medication labeling to alert physicians and patients to the possibility of these unusual fractures, and to urge awareness of possible warning signs: prolonged groin or thigh pain.

In a statement, the FDA said it is reviewing the data and is considering changing the labeling on bisphosphonates. It also recommended that patients report groin or thigh pain to their physicians, but did not suggest they stop taking the medications unless ordered to do so by their doctors.

In August, a team of researchers reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association that bisphosphonate use was not linked to an increased risk of stomach or esophageal cancer. The scientists reviewed about 80,000 patient records from a 6 million-person database in Britain.

But in September, a different group of scientists used the same database and concluded in an article in the British Medical Journal that bisphosphonates appeared to double the risk of esophageal cancer after about 5 years of use. Still, this group stressed the risk was very small, resulting in 2 cases of throat cancer in 1,000 people ages 60 to 79, compared with the normal rate of 1 per 1,000.

Some doctors are giving their patients “drug holidays’’ in which they take them off the prescriptions for a while.

Physicians face a tough choice when it comes to frail patients who have brittle bones. If they pull them off the medications because of the possible risk of serious side effects with longer-term use, there is little else to prescribe.

For Dr. Douglas C. Bauer, a professor at the University of California-San Francisco and a researcher who also treats many osteoporosis patients, the hardest decision is when to stop the drugs in patients who still have low bone density after five years of treatment but are not especially frail.

“It was appropriate to treat them to begin with, but you are not clear on added benefit for prolonged use beyond five years,’’ he said. “So I ask them, ‘What would you like to do?’ And I explain the data and say it’s a gray area, and I say we can decide together.’’
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article included commentary from several independent experts who provided useful insights. The article did not discuss potential conflicts of interest among these experts. However, the journalist’s hard work in soliciting a diversity of comments outweighs the lack of discussion of financial conflicts. 
 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heterosexuals who are HIV negative can significantly reduce their risk of infection by taking a daily dose of an antiviral drug, according to a new study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The study, called TDF2, followed 1,200 uninfected heterosexual men and women between the ages of 18 and 39 years in Botswana, Africa.

Study participants took a tablet containing tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and emitricitabine (TDF/FTC), whose brand name is Truvada, or a placebo. On average, patients were followed for a year although some were followed for about three and a half years. The risk of infection was reduced 63% overall, but for participants who actually got the drugs, that risk decreased by 78%.

Giving daily antiretroviral drugs to uninfected individuals to prevent the disease is called pre-exposure prophylaxis or PrEP. Previous studies have shown PrEP to be effective in reducing infection rates among the uninfected.

Dr. Kevin Fenton, director of the CDC's national Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, called the news a milestone. "It is clear we are not going to find one magic pill to solve the issue of HIV but by combining this approach with others we are beginning to get a better handle on combination packages. There is reason to be excited."

The news comes at the same time a second study looking at PrEP in heterosexual couples in Kenya and Uganda also found significant reductions in infection rates. The Partners PrEP study participants took either TDF/FTC, the drug tenofovir–brand name Viread, or a placebo. Preliminary results showed both treatments significantly reduced transmission in couples where one partner was already infected with the virus. Patients who took tenofovir had 62% fewer infections while those taking the combination drug had 73% fewer infections than those who got the placebo.

"Just a few years ago the tool kit for HIV prevention was not very large," says Dr. Jared Baeten, the principal investigator of the Partners PrEP study at the University of Washington. "Now we have a nice collection of really powerful strategies that work for the population at greatest risk in the world. This is really a game changer."

"We now have findings from two studies showing that PrEP can work for heterosexuals, the population hardest hit by HIV worldwide," Fenton said. "Taken together, these studies provide strong evidence the power of this prevention strategy."

In fact, an interim review of the Partners data on effectiveness was so compelling that the trial was stopped early and the placebo arm was discontinued. Clear evidence Baeten said, that PrEP substantially reduces infection risk. At the same time he says, there was no evidence of safety concerns. Patients taking the placebo will be put on one of the drugs.

In the TDF2 study those taking the drug reported nausea, vomiting and dizziness.

An earlier PrEP trial, the iPrEx study, looked at treatment in men who have sex with men. Infection rates dropped by 90% in patients who consistently used PrEP.

“We are in a critical moment in HIV prevention research,” said Robert Grant, M.D., M.P.H, of the Gladstone Institutes and the University of California at San Francisco. He is the iPrEx protocol chair. “iPrEx provided the first proof of an important new method of HIV prevention that can help slow the global toll of 2.6 million new HIV infections each year. Partners PrEP and the TDF2 study have now expanded that finding by demonstrating the effectiveness of PrEP in heterosexual women and men.

"Developing and deploying proven HIV prevention methods – including PrEP, microbicides, vaginal gels, clean needles, medical male circumcision, early treatment, counseling, testing, condoms and suppressive therapy for pregnant women will all be key to slowing the global epidemic," he said.

The CDC says the next step is to fully review all the data and begin to develop guidelines for the use of these drugs in heterosexual men and women here in the U.S.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: At least one independent source is quoted, and there don’t appear to be any conflicts of interest that should have been pointed out to readers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The blood test that millions of men undergo each year to check for prostate cancer leads to so much unnecessary anxiety, surgery and complications that doctors should stop testing elderly men, and it remains unclear whether the screening is worthwhile for younger men, a federal task force concluded yesterday.

In the first update of its recommendations for prostate cancer screening in five years, the panel that sets government policy on preventive medicine said that the evidence that the test reduces the cancer's death toll is too uncertain to endorse routine use for men at any age, and that the potential harm clearly outweighs any benefits for men age 75 and older.

"The benefit of screening at this time is uncertain, and if there is a benefit, it's likely to be small," said Ned Calonge, who chairs the 16-member U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. It published the new guidelines today in the Annals of Internal Medicine. "And on the other side, the risks are large and dramatic."

The task force and other groups concluded previously that it was unclear whether the benefits of the prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, test outweigh the risks. The new review of the scientific literature found no evidence to alter that assessment for younger men. It did find enough new data to recommend for the first time against screening for older men.

"We felt with sufficient certainty that your risk of being harmed exceeded your potential benefits starting at age 75," Calonge said.

The recommendations come at a time when doctors are increasingly questioning whether many tests, drugs and procedures are being overused, unnecessarily driving up health-care costs and exposing patients to the risks of unneeded treatment.

"There is this idea that more is always better, and if a test is available we should use it," said Howard A. Brody, a professor of family medicine at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. "A lot of times, we're doing more harm than good."

The guidelines address perhaps the most important and contentious issue in men's health, and were praised by officials at several leading medical groups, including the National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society. But they drew strong criticism from others who are convinced that routine screening is necessary.

"I think they're really missing the boat," said William J. Catalona, a professor of urology at Northwestern University. "It's a disservice to patients. A lot of men die from prostate cancer, and there's just an overwhelming amount of evidence that screening saves lives."

Each year, prostate cancer is diagnosed in more than 218,000 U.S. men. About 28,000 die of it, making it the most common cancer and second-leading cancer killer among men.

The PSA test, which measures a protein in the blood produced by prostate tissue, has significantly increased the number of prostate cancer cases being diagnosed at very early stages. But it remains unclear whether that translates into a reduction in the death rate from the disease. Prostate cancer often grows so slowly that many men die from something else without ever knowing they had it.

Because it is not clear precisely what PSA level signals the presence of cancer, many men experience stressful false alarms that lead to unnecessary surgical biopsies to make a definitive diagnosis, which can be painful and in rare cases can cause serious complications.

Even when the test picks up a real cancer, doctors are uncertain what, if anything, men should do about it. Many men simply are monitored closely to see if the tumor shows signs of growing or spreading. Others undergo surgery, radiation and hormone treatments, which often leave them incontinent, impotent and experiencing other complications.

"People say, 'What's the harm in screening?' In fact, there are several ways in which screening can actually be harmful," said Howard L. Parnes of the National Cancer Institute.

Since the task force issued its previous recommendations in 2002, at least eight new studies have been published. Among them was a large Swedish review that found that men age 65 and older who were treated for prostate cancer were no more likely to survive than those who were not.

"If therapy isn't providing meaningful benefit, then how could screening provide benefit?" Calonge said. "And we know that the therapy produces significant harms."

Men younger than 75 should be carefully counseled about the potential risks associated with the test and the lack of evidence about any benefit before getting it, the panel said.

Men at high risk for prostate cancer, such as African Americans and those with a family history of the disease, are the most likely to benefit from PSA screening. But the panel concluded that the evidence remains inconclusive for those men as well.

Several other experts said that the new recommendations strike a careful balance, and that they hope they might discourage large-scale screenings where the risks and benefits are not carefully laid out.

"I think they are right on target," Parnes said.

Others were highly critical, noting that prostate cancer death rates have plummeted in many countries after they instituted widespread PSA screening.

"We have seen a dramatic drop in mortality," said J. Brantley Thrasher, chairman of the urology department at the University of Kansas and a spokesman for the American Urological Association. "They're not paying attention to that."

Others objected to setting an age cutoff, saying men should be evaluated individually.

"Men are living a lot longer and healthier these days. I play golf with 84-year-old guys who beat me all the time," said E. David Crawford, a professor of surgery and radiation at the University of Colorado at Denver. "You have to individualize treatment. If a 75-year-old man is found to have high-grade prostate cancer, it's going to kill him, and we can intervene and do something for him."

Two large studies are underway -- one in the United States and one in Europe -- to answer the question of whether screening reduces mortality.

"If it turns out that PSA screening and aggressive treatment saves lives, maybe all the harm that it has caused is worth it," said Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer at the American Cancer Society. "If PSA screening does not save lives, then it's clearly not worth it. We just don't know yet."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included comments from a number of individuals with relevant expertise.  The story did not do an adequate job of indicating whether those quoted served on the recommendation task force other than for Ned Calonge, who was mentioned as chair of the US Preventive Services Task Force.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People who cram all their exercise into one or two sessions at the weekend benefit nearly as much as those who work out more frequently, researchers say.



A study of more than 60,000 adults in England and Scotland found that “weekend warriors” lowered their risk of death by a similar margin to those who spread the same amount of exercise over the whole week.



The findings will reassure people who find it hard to make time for a daily exercise routine and opt instead to break a sweat once or twice a week in the hope of keeping fit.



“Millions of people enjoy doing sport once or twice a week, but they may be concerned that they are not doing enough,” said Gary O’Donovan, a physical activity researcher and author on the study at Loughborough University. “We find a clear benefit. It’s making them fit and healthy.”



The UK’s National Health Service recommends that to ward off an early death, people should spend 150 minutes a week performing moderate exercise, or 75 minutes a week doing vigorous exercise. As a rule of thumb, moderate exercise can be done while maintaining a conversation, whereas during vigorous exercise talking at the same time is too hard.



In the study, those who met the physical activity target by exercising through the week had a 35% lower risk of death than the inactive adults, with cardiovascular deaths down 41% and a 21% lower risk of cancer death.



But the weekend warriors also saw substantial health benefits if they met the physical activity target too. Their overall risk of death was 30% lower than the sedentary adults, with the risk of cardiovascular and cancer deaths lower by 40% and 18% respectively.



“Weekend warriors are people who meet the recommended volume of physical activity each week through only one or two sessions. There are doing a large proportion of vigorous exercise and that makes you fitter than moderate exercise,” said O’Donovan. Men and women benefited equally, according to the study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association: Internal Medicine.



The results are based on medical data gathered for 63,591 adults aged 40 and above between 1994 and 2012. Nearly 9,000 of the study participants died in the period.



For those who have resolved to get fit in the New Year, O’Donovan recommends to start with moderate exercise, such as brisk walking, and then to set realistic, incremental goals to boost confidence without running the risk of setbacks due to injury. “A middle aged or older person should do as much as 12 weeks of moderate exercise before introducing vigorous exercise,” he said.



Ulf Ekelund at the Norwegian School of Sport Sciences in Oslo said the study emphasised what researchers have found time and again: that even a small amount of regular exercise wards off death. In the study, those who exercised a little had a 29% lower risk of death than those who did no exercise at all. “The novel finding is that it appears the duration, and possibly the intensity, of leisure time physical activity is more important than the frequency,” Ekelund said.



“My take home message is that the greatest risk reduction and the greatest gain for the individual and for public health is if those who are physically inactive take up some activity,” he added.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The sources don’t appear to have any conflicts of interest, and there was one additional source included beyond the lead researcher.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COPENHAGEN (Reuters) - Merck & Co scored a double hit on Sunday with new clinical data showing its Keytruda immunotherapy offered big benefits in previously untreated lung cancer patients, either when given on its own or with chemotherapy.

As a monotherapy, Keytruda halved the risk of disease progression and cut overall deaths by 40 percent compared to chemotherapy alone in pre-selected patients whose tumors had been tested using a biomarker.

And when given with two older chemotherapy drugs in non-selected patients, it was almost twice as likely to shrink tumors as chemotherapy alone.

Another similar drug from Roche also demonstrated broad efficacy as a so-called second-line option in patients who had received prior treatment.

“Remember this day. It’s a new day for lung cancer treatment,” Stefan Zimmermann of Lausanne’s University Hospital told reporters at the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) congress as the results were presented.

An editorial in the New England Journal of Medicine, where the Merck monotherapy results were published, said Keytruda could become “a new standard of care”.

The various findings suggest that treating lung cancer - the biggest cancer killer globally - with powerful new immune system-boosting medicines is going to involve more permutations than some experts originally expected.

Rival drugmaker Bristol-Myers Squibb had tried a catch-all approach with its Opdivo drug but it failed to help previously untreated patients when given on its own in a trial that included people with low levels of a protein called PD-L1.

Keytruda, as a sole agent, was targeted only at patients with high PD-L1, making them more receptive to immunotherapy.

Lead researcher Martin Reck of Germany’s Lung Clinic Grosshansdorf predicted that testing for the PD-L1 biomarker would now become standard “from today”.

U.S. regulators are expected to decide whether to approve Keytruda for first-line non-small cell lung cancer, the most common type, by Dec. 24.

Merck had already said in June that Keytruda worked in the trial but the scale of the benefit was only disclosed at ESMO.

The second trial, mixing Keytruda with chemotherapy, was much smaller but was notable because it was the first time that a combination of immunotherapy and chemotherapy has been shown to work in a randomized Phase II study.

Many experts have been skeptical about this approach and investors’ expectations, up until now, have been quite low.

In the event, researchers reported that Merck’s combination cut the risk of disease progression or death by 47 percent compared to chemotherapy alone after 10.6 months, while 55 percent of patients saw their tumors shrink versus 29 percent.

Patients in this trial were not selected by PD-L1 expression but the study did find that those with higher PD-L1 had a higher response.

Roger Perlmutter, Merck’s head of research, said both trials suggested Keytruda could offer a broad array of patients meaningful improvement over standard platinum-based chemotherapy, which is now more than two decades old.

Drugs like Keytruda and Opdivo work by taking the brakes off the immune system and allowing the body’s natural killer cells to home in on tumors.

They are expected to sell tens of billions of dollars in the years ahead, with lung cancer the largest market.

Up until now, Bristol has dominated the field but investors have started to shift their bets, with forecasts for Opdivo declining while those for Keytruda have risen.

The current consensus forecast among analysts is for Keytruda sales to reach $8 billion in 2021, with Opdivo selling $10.5 billion, according to Thomson Reuters data.

Results of Bristol’s failed Opdivo trial, which included patients with tumors testing only 5 percent or higher for PD-L1 against the 50 percent cut-off used by Merck, were also presented at ESMO.

These showed progression-free survival was 4.2 months with Opdivo and 5.9 months with chemotherapy, although the difference was not statistically significant. Overall survival was 14.4 months with Opdivo versus 13.2 months.

The failure of Opdivo to work for “all comers” in lung cancer was first announced in August, without any details. It was a major setback for Bristol, wiping out around a quarter of the company’s market value, and it has caused investors to rethink prospects for immunotherapy treatments.

Many now believe that combination therapy is the way ahead, with Bristol and AstraZeneca working primarily on using two immunotherapies together, while Roche and Merck look at adding chemotherapy.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This story just barely scores a Satisfactory rating on this one. It is clear that Merck & Co. is funding this research. A couple of sources are overtly linked to the company. A third, Dr. Stefan Zimmerman, appears to be independent, though he wasn’t quoted saying anything that helped illuminate the findings, instead he’s quoted as saying “Remember this day. It’s a new day for lung cancer treatment.” Some additional commentary from an oncologist or a patient advocate would likely have helped put the findings in perspective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You know your cholesterol, your blood pressure ... your heart gene score?

Researchers say a new way of analyzing genetic test data may one day help identify people at high risk of having a heart attack at a young age in time to help.

Today, gene testing mostly focuses on rare mutations in one or a few genes, like those that cause cystic fibrosis or sickle cell disease, or the BRCA gene responsible for a small fraction of breast cancer. It is less useful for some of the most common diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, because they are influenced by vast numbers of genes-gone-wrong working together in complicated ways.

On Monday, researchers revealed a new way to measure millions of small genetic variations that add up to cause harm, letting them calculate someone's inherited risk for the most common form of heart disease and four other serious disorders. They estimated that up to 25 million Americans may have triple the average person's risk for coronary artery disease even if they haven't yet developed warning signs like high cholesterol.

"What I foresee is in five years, each person will know this risk number, this 'polygenic risk score,' similar to the way each person knows his or her cholesterol," said Dr. Sekar Kathiresan, who led the research team from the Broad Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School.

If the approach pans out and doctors adopt it, a bad score wouldn't mean that you'd get a disease, just that your genetic makeup increases the chance — one more piece of information in deciding on care. For example, when the researchers tested the system using a DNA database from Britain, less than 1 percent of people with the lowest risk scores were diagnosed with coronary artery disease, compared with 11 percent of people with the highest risk score.

"There are things you can do to lower the risk," Kathiresan said — the usual advice about diet, exercise, cholesterol medication and not smoking helps.

On the flip side, a low-risk score "doesn't give you a free pass," he added. An unhealthy lifestyle could overwhelm the protection of good genes.

The scoring system can also predict an increased risk of Type 2 diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, breast cancer and an irregular heartbeat called atrial fibrillation, the team reported in the journal Nature Genetics — noting that next steps include learning what might likewise lower those risks.

It doesn't require the most sophisticated type of genetic testing. Instead, Kathiresan can calculate risk scores for those five diseases — eventually maybe more — simply by reanalyzing the kind of raw data people receive after sending a cheek swab to companies like 23andMe.

A geneticist who specializes in cardiovascular disease, he hopes to open a website where people can send in such data to learn their heart risk, as part of continuing research. Kathiresan and co-author Dr. Amit Khera, a Mass General cardiologist, are co-inventors on a patent application for the system.

Other scientists and companies have long sought ways to measure risk from multiple, additive gene effects — the "poly" in polygenic — and Myriad Genetics has begun selling a type of polygenic test for breast cancer risk.

But specialists in heart disease and genetics who weren't involved with the research called the new findings exciting because of their scope.

"The results should be eye-opening for cardiologists," said Dr. Charles C. Hong, director of cardiovascular research at the University of Maryland School of Medicine. "The only disappointment is that this score applies only to those with European ancestry, so I wonder if similar scores are in the works for the large majority of the world population that is not white."

Hong pointed to a friend who recently died of a massive heart attack despite being a superfit marathon runner who'd never smoked, the kind of puzzling death that doctors have long hoped that a better understanding of genetics could help to prevent.

"Most of the variation in disease risk comes from an enormous number of very tiny effects" in genes, agreed Stanford University genetics Professor Jonathan Pritchard. "This is the first time polygenic scores have really been shown to reach the level of precision where they can have an impact" on patient health.

First, the Boston-based team combed previous studies that mapped the DNA of large numbers of people, looking for links to the five diseases — not outright mutations but minor misspellings in the genetic code.

Each variation alone would have only a tiny effect on health. They developed a computerized system that analyzed how those effects add up, and tested it using DNA and medical records from 400,000 people stored in Britain's UK Biobank. Scores more than three times the average person's risk were deemed high.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does quote one source unaffiliated with the research effort and also points out that two of the researchers “are co-inventors on a patent application for the system,” so their potential for conflicts is clear to the reader.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Biesecker acknowledged that there was no guarantee of success. He and his colleagues know the gene mutation in the Del Sontro family must be rare. Otherwise, lots of people would have early heart disease but no obvious risk factors. To keep the focus on truly rare mutations, the researchers are excluding those that are present in both members of the Del Sontro family and 3 percent or more of the other study participants. That strategy alone, Dr. Biesecker said, has eliminated the vast majority of candidate genes.

The researchers are now searching for culprits among genes that remain — a search that could take years. Or the change might be in a poorly understood region of DNA that controls genes rather than in a gene itself. Researchers’ ignorance of these control regions and what many of them do might doom the effort. So the researchers are hoping the Del Sontro family’s heart disease is caused by a mutated gene.

“Our main job is to find the gene,” Dr. Biesecker said.

Still, Mr. Del Sontro is preparing for the worst. He has life insurance and long-term care insurance.

“I keep waiting for the day when I have shortness of breath,” he said.

When his heart disease was first diagnosed four and a half years ago, Mr. Del Sontro, now 50, told his cardiologist he wanted to run one more Bay to Breakers race, a century-old 12-kilometer race in San Francisco. His doctor told him absolutely not, saying, “You are the kind of guy we will read about who dies during the race of a massive heart attack.” Mr. Del Sontro could still exercise, his cardiologist said, but no more than 45 minutes a day.

Mr. Del Sontro is all too aware that the cause of his heart disease is a mystery, but he worries that if he fails to eat right and exercise he might make his illness even worse.

So he left for the gym before dawn on a recent chilly morning. He lifted weights, using dumbbells and bars, moving quickly from exercise to exercise. Forty-five minutes later, sweating, he was done.

His disease casts a dark shadow, not just on him, but on his entire family. At dinner one recent evening at their yellow brick townhouse in the Georgetown neighborhood in Washington, his wife, Pura, admitted to worrying, but said, “We don’t talk about it a lot.” She served Indian takeout — saffron rice, tandoori chicken, eggplant. Tall, slender and elegant in skinny jeans and a long beige sweater, she ate sparingly and drank a Coke Zero. Mr. Del Sontro drank only water and took small portions.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A number of qualified experts weigh in regarding the significance of this research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New Orleans, LA - Research led by Frank Lau, MD, Assistant Professor of Clinical Surgery at LSU Health New Orleans School of Medicine, has found that long-term breast reduction outcomes can be improved by using techniques that minimally disrupt the lower breast suspensory ligaments. The paper, The Sternum-Nipple Distance is Double the Nipple-Inframammary Fold Distance in Macromastia, is published Ahead-of-Print online in the Annals of Plastic Surgery.

"Breast reduction is one of the most commonly performed plastic surgery procedures. The long-term appearance after reduction is not optimized 50% of the time using standard reduction techniques," notes lead author Dr. Frank Lau. "At LSU Health New Orleans, we offer an improved technique that preserves more of the critical breast anatomy. This study provides an anatomical foundation for why our technique may yield better, longer-lasting results."

About 50% of patients who undergo the most commonly used breast reduction technique experience pseudoptosis or "bottoming out" as a long-term complication. This occurs when breast tissue drops to the lower portion of the breast independent of nipple position.

"We want our patients to have a long-lasting, aesthetically pleasing breast shape," says Lau.

Believing that disruption of the lower suspensory ligaments may be a critical factor because they are stronger than the upper sensory ligaments, the researchers conducted a retrospective review of 208 patients who underwent breast reduction surgery from 2008-2015, studying the results in 400 individual breasts. In all patients, only one reduction technique was performed per patient. Ninety-two percent of the 174 reductions performed with the inferior pedicle technique used a Wise pattern incision, which disrupts the lower suspensory ligaments, and 7.5% used a Boston modification of Robertson technique, which preserves the lower suspensory ligaments. Of the 33 superomedial pedicle reductions, 25 (75.8%) used a Wise pattern incision and 8 (24.2%) used a vertical pattern incision.

By measuring the sternal notch-nipple distance and the nipple-inframammary fold distance ( proxies for upper and lower sensory ligament strength, respectively), the study found a differential rate of stretch - for every 1 cm in upper sensory ligament stretch, the lower sensory ligament length increases by 0.45 cm. This relationship strengthens the researchers' hypothesis that the lower pole ligaments stretch at a significantly slower rate than the upper pole ligaments. An anatomic basis for this differential may exist. A horizontal membrane of dense connective tissue originating at the level of the fifth rib that divides the breast into segments at the level of the nipple has been described. This division may signify a transition point in sensory ligament strength. On that basis, the authors recommend that techniques such as the Boston modification of Robertson technique should be preferred by surgeons seeking to avoid pseudoptosis. Other advantages of the Boston modification of Robertson technique include decreased operative time and elimination of the "triple point," the most common site of postoperative incision rupture.

"This study is one of the largest breast anthropometry (measurement) studies ever performed," says Lau. "These results help us provide the best breast reduction outcomes to our patients."

Co-authors include Thomas Steele, a 4th-year medical student at LSU Health New Orleans School of Medicine, and Julian Pribaz, MD, of Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School.

LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans educates Louisiana's health care professionals. The state's most comprehensive health sciences university, LSU Health New Orleans includes a School of Medicine, the state's only School of Dentistry, Louisiana's only public School of Public Health, and Schools of Allied Health Professions, Nursing, and Graduate Studies. LSU Health New Orleans faculty take care of patients in public and private hospitals and clinics throughout the region. In the vanguard of biosciences research in a number of areas in a worldwide arena, the LSU Health New Orleans research enterprise generates jobs and enormous economic impact. LSU Health New Orleans faculty have made lifesaving discoveries and continue to work to prevent, advance treatment, or cure disease. To learn more, visit http://www. , http://www. or http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release doesn’t mention a funding source but that’s understandable since the published study clearly states there is no conflict of interest and no funding source.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She is among just a dozen patients with advanced leukemia to have received the experimental treatment, which was developed at the University of Pennsylvania. Similar approaches are also being tried at other centers, including the and in New York.

“Our goal is to have a cure, but we can’t say that word,” said Dr. Carl June, who leads the research team at the University of Pennsylvania. He hopes the new treatment will eventually replace bone-marrow transplantation, an even more arduous, risky and expensive procedure that is now the last hope when other treatments fail in leukemia and related diseases.

Three adults with chronic leukemia treated at the University of Pennsylvania have also had complete remissions, with no signs of disease; two of them have been well for more than two years, said Dr. David Porter. Four adults improved but did not have full remissions, and one was treated too recently to evaluate. A child improved and then relapsed. In two adults, the treatment did not work at all. The researchers were presenting their results on Sunday and Monday in at a meeting of the American Society of Hematology.

Despite the mixed results, cancer experts not involved with the research say it has tremendous promise, because even in this early phase of testing it has worked in seemingly hopeless cases. “I think this is a major breakthrough,” said Dr. Ivan Borrello, a cancer expert and associate professor of medicine at the School of Medicine.

Dr. John Wagner, the director of pediatric blood and marrow transplantation at the , called the Pennsylvania results “phenomenal” and said they were “what we’ve all been working and hoping for but not seeing to this extent.”

A major drug company, , is betting on the Pennsylvania team and has committed $20 million to building a research center on the university’s campus to bring the treatment to market.

Hervé Hoppenot, the president of Novartis Oncology, called the research “fantastic” and said it had the potential — if the early results held up — to revolutionize the treatment of leukemia and related blood cancers. Researchers say the same approach, reprogramming the patient’s immune system, may also eventually be used against like breast and .

To perform the treatment, doctors remove millions of the patient’s T-cells — a type of white blood cell — and insert new genes that enable the T-cells to kill cancer cells. The technique employs a disabled form of H.I.V. because it is very good at carrying genetic material into T-cells. The new genes program the T-cells to attack B-cells, a normal part of the immune system that turn malignant in leukemia.

The altered T-cells — called chimeric antigen receptor cells — are then dripped back into the patient’s veins, and if all goes well they multiply and start destroying the cancer.

The T-cells home in on a protein called CD-19 that is found on the surface of most B-cells, whether they are healthy or malignant.

A sign that the treatment is working is that the patient becomes terribly ill, with raging fevers and chills — a reaction that oncologists call “shake and bake,” Dr. June said. Its medical name is cytokine-release syndrome, or cytokine storm, referring to the natural chemicals that pour out of cells in the immune system as they are being activated, causing fevers and other symptoms. The storm can also flood the lungs and cause perilous drops in — effects that nearly killed Emma.

Steroids sometimes ease the reaction, but they did not help Emma. Her temperature hit 105. She wound up on a ventilator, unconscious and swollen almost beyond recognition, surrounded by friends and family who had come to say goodbye.

But at the 11th hour, a battery of blood tests gave the researchers a clue as to what might help save Emma: her level of one of the cytokines, interleukin-6 or IL-6, had shot up a thousandfold. Doctors had never seen such a spike before and thought it might be what was making her so sick.

Dr. June knew that a drug could lower IL-6 — his daughter takes it for . It had never been used for a crisis like Emma’s, but there was little to lose. Her oncologist, Dr. Stephan A. Grupp, ordered the drug. The response, he said, was “amazing.”

Within hours, Emma began to stabilize. She woke up a week later, on May 2, the day she turned 7; the intensive-care staff sang

Since then, the research team has used the same drug, tocilizumab, in several other patients.

In patients with lasting remissions after the treatment, the altered T-cells persist in the bloodstream, though in smaller numbers than when they were fighting the disease. Some patients have had the cells for years.

Dr. Michel Sadelain, who conducts similar studies at the Sloan-Kettering Institute, said: “These T-cells are living drugs. With a pill, you take it, it’s eliminated from your body and you have to take it again.” But T-cells, he said, “could potentially be given only once, maybe only once or twice or three times.”

The Pennsylvania researchers said they were surprised to find any big drug company interested in their work, because a new batch of T-cells must be created for each patient — a far cry from the familiar commercial strategy of developing products like or medicines, in which millions of people take the same drug.

But Mr. Hoppenot said Novartis was taking a different path with cancer drugs, looking for treatments that would have a big, unmistakable impact on a small number of patients. Such home-run drugs can be approved more quickly and efficiently, he said, with smaller studies than are needed for drugs with less obvious benefits.

But such drugs tend to be extremely expensive. A prime example is the Novartis drug Gleevec, which won rapid approval in 2001 for use against certain types of leukemia and gastrointestinal tumors. It can cost more than $5,000 a month, depending on the dosage.

Dr. June said that producing engineered T-cells costs about $20,000 per patient — far less than the cost of a bone-marrow transplant. Scaling up the procedure should make it even less expensive, he said, but he added, “Our costs do not include any profit margin, facility depreciation costs or other clinical care costs, and other research costs.”

The research is still in its early stages, and many questions remain. The researchers are not entirely sure why the treatment works, or why it sometimes fails. One patient had a remission after being treated only twice, and even then the reaction was so delayed that it took the researchers by surprise. For the patients who had no response whatsoever, the team suspects a flawed batch of T-cells. The child who had a temporary remission apparently relapsed because not all of her leukemic cells had the marker that was targeted by the altered T-cells.

It is not clear whether a patient’s body needs the altered T-cells forever. The cells do have a drawback: they destroy healthy B-cells as well as cancerous ones, leaving patients vulnerable to certain types of infections, so Emma and the other patients need regular treatments with immune globulins to prevent illness.

So far, her parents say, Emma seems to have taken it all in stride. She went back to school this year with her second-grade classmates, and though her grades are high and she reads about 50 books a month, she insists impishly that her favorite subjects are lunch and recess.

“It’s time for her to be a kid again and get her childhood back,” Mr. Whitehead said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Several independent experts are quoted in the story, although their input is used primarily to reinforce the “breakthrough” nature of the findings. The story could have gotten a lot more mileage from these sources had it probed more for limitations, caveats, and concerns about the research and its application to larger numbers of patients.  The story also noted Novartis’ investment in the work, something not mentioned in the competing Philadelphia Inquirer story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among nonsmokers who had diabetes, those who took the diabetes drug metformin had a decrease in lung cancer risk, according to a study in Cancer Prevention Research, a journal of the American Association for Cancer Research, by Lori Sakoda, PhD, MPH, research scientist at the Kaiser Permanente Division of Research in Oakland, California.

Some laboratory studies and a number of observational studies suggest that metformin may prevent cancer, but the data from human studies, however, are conflicting, explained Sakoda. The researchers conducted this study to further clarify the association between metformin use and lung cancer risk.

Sakoda and colleagues conducted a retrospective cohort study of 47,351 diabetic patients (54 percent men), 40 years or older, who completed a health-related survey between 1994 and 1996. Information on their diabetes medications was collected from electronic pharmacy records. About 46 percent of them were "ever-users" of metformin, defined as those who filled two or more prescriptions within a six-month period.

During 15 years of follow-up, 747 patients were diagnosed with lung cancer. Of them, 80 were nonsmokers, and 203 were current smokers.

Metformin use was not associated with lower lung cancer risk overall; however, the risk was 43 percent lower among diabetic patients who had never smoked, and the risk appeared to decrease with longer use. Nonsmokers who used metformin for five years or longer had a 52 percent reduction in lung cancer risk, but this finding was not statistically significant.

Metformin use for five or more years was associated with a 31 percent decrease in the risk for adenocarcinoma, the most common type of lung cancer diagnosed in nonsmokers, and an 82 percent increase in the risk for small-cell carcinoma, a type of lung cancer often diagnosed in smokers, but neither of these findings were statistically significant.

In an interview, Sakoda said, "Metformin use was not associated with lung cancer risk when we looked at all patients with diabetes. However, our results suggest that risk might differ by smoking history, with metformin decreasing risk among nonsmokers and increasing risk among current smokers. Our results suggesting that the risk associated with metformin might differ by smoking history were unexpected. Additional large, well-conducted studies are needed to clarify whether metformin may be used to prevent lung or other cancers, particularly in specific subpopulations, such as nonsmokers."

This study was funded by the National Institutes of Health. Sakoda declares no conflicts of interest. Assiamira Ferrara, Charles Quesenberry Jr., and Laurel Habel, coauthors on this study, have received research funding from Takeda to Kaiser Foundation Research Institute for a study of pioglitazone and cancer and from Sanofi through a subcontract from University of North Carolina to Kaiser Foundation Research Institute for a study of insulin glargine and cancer. Habel has received additional research funding from Genentech to Kaiser Foundation Research Institute for a study of HER2-positive breast cancer, including risk of cardiotoxicity following trastuzumab.

About the American Association for Cancer Research

Founded in 1907, the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) is the world's oldest and largest professional organization dedicated to advancing cancer research and its mission to prevent and cure cancer. AACR membership includes more than 33,000 laboratory, translational, and clinical researchers; population scientists; other health care professionals; and cancer advocates residing in 101 countries. The AACR marshals the full spectrum of expertise of the cancer community to accelerate progress in the prevention, biology, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer by annually convening more than 20 conferences and educational workshops, the largest of which is the AACR Annual Meeting with over 18,000 attendees. In addition, the AACR publishes eight peer-reviewed scientific journals and a magazine for cancer survivors, patients, and their caregivers. The AACR funds meritorious research directly as well as in cooperation with numerous cancer organizations. As the Scientific Partner of Stand Up To Cancer, the AACR provides expert peer review, grants administration, and scientific oversight of team science and individual grants in cancer research that have the potential for near-term patient benefit. The AACR actively communicates with legislators and policymakers about the value of cancer research and related biomedical science in saving lives from cancer. For more information about the AACR, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly identifies the funding source for the research and also adequately discloses conflicts among the authors of the paper.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alcoholics see hope in new pill Migraine drug may curb drinking but comes with some side effects

CHICAGO — A migraine pill seems to help alcoholics taper off their drinking without detox treatment, researchers report, offering a potential option for a hard-to-treat problem.

The drug, Topamax, works in a different way than three other medications already approved for treating alcoholism.

Experts said the drug is likely to appeal to heavy drinkers who would rather seek help from their own doctors, rather than enter a rehab clinic to dry out. The drug costs at least $350 a month, plus the price of doctor's visits.

It's unclear whether the findings will make a dent in an addiction that affects millions of Americans.

Addiction specialists not involved in the study said the findings are promising, although side effects such as trouble concentrating, tingling and itching caused about one in five people to drop out of the study. Drowsiness and dizziness are also problems.

"The size of the treatment effect is larger than in most of the other medications we've seen," said Dr. Mark Willenbring of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. "And all the drinking variables changed in the right direction."

The study, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, was funded by the maker of the drug, Johnson & Johnson Inc.'s Ortho-McNeil Neurologics.

The study followed 371 heavy drinkers for 14 weeks. About half were randomly assigned to take Topamax, also called topiramate, in gradually increasing doses. The others took dummy pills.

All volunteers were encouraged — but not required — to stop drinking.

At the start of the study, they drank, on average, 11 standard drinks daily. That's about two six-packs of beer each day, or two bottles of wine, or a pint of hard liquor.

By the end of the study, 27 of the 183 people, or 15 percent, who took Topamax had quit drinking entirely for seven weeks or more. That compared to six out of 188, or 3 percent, in the placebo group.

Others cut back. The Topamax group cut back to six drinks a day, on average, assuming everyone who dropped out of the study relapsed into heavy drinking. That compared to seven drinks a day for the placebo group.

"You can come in drinking a bottle of scotch a day and get treatment without detox," said Dr. Bankole Johnson of the University of Virginia, who led the study, which was conducted at 17 U.S. sites from 2004-2006.

It's unclear how many relapsed after quitting the pill.

Tom Wolfe, 44, a carpenter from Earlysville, Va., said he felt "a little light-headed" at first until he got used to the drug. "It's been a miracle to me," Wolfe said.

The drug works by inhibiting dopamine, the brain's "feel-good" neurotransmitters that are involved in all addictions, said Stephen Dewey, a neuroscientist at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Experts in the field who were not associated with this study were quoted in the story.  In addition, the story clearly indicated that the study was funded by the maker of the drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors and patients “traditionally see palliative care as something extended to a hospitalized patient in the last week of life,” said Dr. Jennifer S. Temel, an oncologist and author of the paper. “We thought it made sense to start them at the time of diagnosis. And we were thrilled to see such a huge impact. It shows that palliative care and cancer care aren’t mutually exclusive.”

Dr. Atul Gawande, a Harvard Medical School surgeon and writer who just published a long article in The New Yorker about hospitalized patients’ suffering before death, called the study “amazing.”

“The field was crying out for a randomized trial,” he added.

Although the study could not determine why the patients lived longer, the authors and other experts had several theories: depression is known to shorten life, and patients whose pain is treated often sleep better, eat better and talk more with relatives. Also, hospitals are dangerous places for very sick people; they may get fatal blood infections, pneumonia or bedsores, or simply be overwhelmed by the powerful drugs and radiation attacking their cancer.

Saying the study was “of critical importance,” Dr. R. Sean Morrison, president of the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, said it was the “first concrete evidence of what a lot of us have seen in our practices — when you control pain and other symptoms, people not only feel better, they live longer.”

There is sometimes tension between medical specialties, since surgeons and oncologists often view cancer as a battle, while palliative care specialists are seen as “giving up.”

Palliative care typically begins with a long conversation about what the patient with a terminal diagnosis wants out of his remaining life. It includes the options any oncologist addresses: surgery, chemotherapy and radiation and their side effects. But it also includes how much suffering a patient wishes to bear, effects on the family, and legal, insurance and religious issues. Teams focus on controlling pain, nausea, swelling, shortness of breath and other side effects; they also address patients’ worries and make sure they have help with making meals, dressing and bathing when not hospitalized.

Hospice care is intensive palliative care including home nursing, but insurers and Medicare usually cover it only if the patient abandons medical treatment and two doctors certify that death is less than six months away.

During the debate over President Obama’s 2009 health care bill, provisions to have Medicare and insurers pay for optional consultations with doctors on palliative and hospice care led to rumors, spread by talk-show hosts like Rush Limbaugh and Glenn Beck and by the former vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin, that the bill empowered “death panels” that would “euthanize” elderly Americans.

Legislators eventually removed the provisions. In practice, Medicare and private insurers do pay for some palliative care, said Dr. Gail Austin Cooney, a former president of the palliative medicine academy. “But it’s piecemeal,” she said. “The billing is complicated, and for many physicians that’s enough of a deterrent to not bother.”

Dr. Cooney herself had such care along with surgery and chemotherapy for ovarian cancer in 2008.

“I decided I wanted every drop of chemotherapy they could give me, and it was very painful, dumping the drugs directly into my belly,” she said. She needed powerful painkillers, and also chose alternative-medicine options like acupuncture and “energy work” for nausea and fatigue.

“I’m rigid — I had my last chemo treatment on Christmas Eve because I wanted it on the day I was due for it,” she said. “But I couldn’t have completed the program without the psychosocial support.”

Palliative care experts now want to study patients with other cancers, heart disease, stroke, dementia and emphysema. But the National Institutes of Health is under budget pressure, and the other major source of money for medical research, the pharmaceutical industry, has little incentive to study palliative care. This trial was paid for by the American Society of Clinical Oncology and private philanthropy.

“Philanthropists tend to focus on curing cancer,” Dr. Temel said. “But we can’t ignore people who need end-of-life care.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A strong effort here. The story quotes one of the study authors, an independent editorialist, a physician-writer knowledgeable about end-of-life care, as well as leaders of professional groups that support hospice and palliative care. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A small, preliminary study finds that ginger root supplements seem to reduce inflammation in the intestines -- a potential sign that the pills might reduce the risk of colon cancer.

However, more study needs to be done, and the researchers aren't yet recommending that people head to the supplements' aisle or start gobbling up more ginger at meal times.

"If you want to add ginger to part of a healthy diet, that's great. But you can't make any conclusions about definite health benefits" based on the study findings, said lead author Suzanna M. Zick, a naturopathic physician and research associate professor at University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor.

The study, funded by the U.S. National Cancer Institute, was published online Oct. 11 in Cancer Prevention Research.

Ginger, an herb, is found in supplements and in many foods such as ginger snaps and Asian dishes. Research has supported its use to treat stomach problems such as nausea and vomiting; the U.S. National Library of Medicine says it's "likely safe," although some people may develop mild side effects.

Previous research in animals has suggested that ginger can reduce inflammation but isn't potentially toxic to the stomach like aspirin, Zick noted. And scientists have linked chronic inflammation in the gut to colon cancer, suggesting that easing this inflammation could reduce the risk of the disease.

In the new study, Zick's team randomly assigned 30 people to take pills containing 2 grams of ground ginger root extract or a "dummy" placebo pill each day for 28 days. They measured the level of inflammation in the participants' intestines before and after the test period.

The amount of ginger in the pills is equivalent to 20 grams of raw ginger root, the authors said. That is probably well beyond what most people would eat in their regular diet, Zick noted. As for cost, she said that a month's supply of similar ginger supplements typically runs about $10 to $30.

The researchers found that the level of inflammation in the subjects who took the ginger pills fell by an average of 28 percent, while staying about the same in those who took the placebo.

If more funding becomes available, the researchers hope to launch a larger study, Zick said. But for now, she said, "if you want to embrace ginger because you like the taste, go ahead," but there's no solid evidence that it prevents colon cancer.

Dr. Andrew Chan, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and a gastroenterologist at Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, said the findings are promising because they hint at how ginger may prevent colon cancer.

It's already clear that people with inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease are at higher risk of colon cancer, he noted. "We know there are anti-inflammatory drugs like aspirin that appear to have anti-cancer properties. And we know there are certain basic mechanisms which seem to be common to both inflammation and cancer," he said.

Still, Chan said, "it's much too early to tell whether ginger has anti-cancer properties."

There's more on ginger at the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent source was quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But the procedure's seeming ease and its growing popularity have some experts worrying that too many doctors and patients, spurred on by medical device makers, may embrace it without fully understanding that it is generally as risky as surgery -- and potentially riskier in some cases.

It is also expensive. Analysts estimate that sales of carotid stents, which cost around $3,000 each, have not yet topped $100 million. But some envision a $1 billion market for the devices within a decade -- not counting doctors' fees.

This country now spends about $2 billion annually on surgical treatment of carotid blockages. Both the surgery and carotid stenting procedures cost roughly $10,000 to $15,000. Prominent skeptics include Dr. Mark J. Alberts, a professor of neurology at Northwestern University Medical School. He cites clinical data showing stroke and death rates of more than 10 percent within one year among those getting stents -- not much different from the results in the same study for surgery.

Dr. Alberts and some other doctors say that both procedures are done too often and that the advent of carotid stenting seems to be making the problem of over-treatment worse. "There may be a few niche groups of patients that need a carotid stent, but we're already seeing more carotid stents being put in than is justified," said Dr. Alberts, who practices at Northwestern Memorial Hospital, a major stroke treatment center for the Chicago region.

Everyone agrees that clinical evidence about the relative risks in different types of patients is only beginning to emerge. But some clinical studies have found lower complications for both procedures than those cited by Dr. Alberts, with some results seeming to favor stenting and others leaning toward surgery.

And advocates of the technology say that more recent data show that stenting success rates are climbing, now that the systems use temporarily implanted filters to catch bits of life-threatening plaque knocked loose during the procedure. By contrast, they say, carotid surgery -- called endarterectomy -- has no significant room for improvement.

"We are beginning to see results that make us believers that carotid stents will replace endarterectomy, and that it's only a matter of time," Dr. L. Nelson Hopkins, a professor of neurosurgery and radiology at the State University at Buffalo School of Medicine, said last month at a symposium in Washington.

The trickiest cases involve elderly patients for whom surgery is risky but stenting might be even riskier. Patients older than 80 are more likely to have calcified blockages that are hard to push aside with a stent, and they are more likely to have twisted arteries in which it is harder to implant the stent. Even stenting proponents worry about overuse of the technology in challenging cases.

"There is too much focus on who is a high surgical risk and not enough on who is at high risk for stenting," Dr. Sriram S. Iyer, chief of endovascular interventions at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan, said at the same Washington symposium where Dr. Hopkins spoke. (Ms. Packer's procedure was conducted at Lenox Hill, one of the nation's busiest stenting centers.)

The Washington symposium was sponsored by Boston Scientific, a leader in stents used in cardiac cases, which hopes to receive Food and Drug Administration approval for a carotid stenting system by the end of the year. So far, only Guidant and Abbott Laboratories are cleared to sell carotid stents and related equipment in this country.

The F.D.A. has also tentatively approved a stent system from the Cordis division of Johnson & Johnson. Clearance is being delayed until Cordis convinces the government it has dealt with unrelated manufacturing and record-keeping problems. Medtronic, the largest company making only medical devices, could receive F.D.A. approval late next year.

Registries in which doctors track the outcomes of patients who receive carotid stents are providing a growing body of data about their performance. But doctors and insurers place far more weight on randomized clinical trials that compare the various makes and models of stents with one another or with other therapies.

By far the most important such trial under way is the Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy Versus Stenting Trial, commonly known as Crest. A government- and industry-sponsored test comparing surgery with Guidant's stent system, the trial started in 2000 after three years of planning. But with less than a third of the enrollment goal of 2,500 patients completed, doctors will have a long wait for esults.

Meanwhile, patient demand for stents is growing. Dr. Michael R. Jaff, the director of the vascular diagnostic laboratory at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, told doctors and analysts at the Washington symposium that patients were showing up with "reams of paperwork" from Web sites that have convinced them stenting is the right procedure for them.

Specialists known as interventional cardiologists are poised to grab a majority of the carotid stent business. They make up the largest medical group in stenting, with as many as 15,000 practitioners, and are usually the first to spot carotid disease, which often develops along with heart disease.

But those doctors face stiff competition from the nation's 2,800 vascular surgeons who, on average, receive about 30 percent of their revenue from endarterectomies. They say that their ability to do either procedure makes them the most unbiased source of information for carotid disease patients.

Dr. John J. Ricotta, the chairman of surgery at Stony Brook University Hospital, on Long Island, sought training in the stenting procedure last April, to be able to give patients more options. "There's going to be a lot of pressure to do these cases," he said of stenting. But Dr. Ricotta said that in most cases he would still probably prefer surgery, for which he has had a low complication rate.

Then there are the interventional radiologists, who have extensive experience with stenting in arteries not near the heart, and neurologists, who specialize in treating brain diseases. The neurologists moving into carotid stenting emphasize that they have superior training in recognizing and dealing with brain damage that carotid stenting can cause.

"All the specialties involved have the sense that they have as much or more to offer than the others," said Dr. Barry F. Uretsky, an interventional cardiologist at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston.

Doctors say the single biggest brake on expansion of carotid stenting is the government's reimbursement policy. Medicare restricts coverage to patients who have a blockage of at least 70 percent of an artery, who have already had a stroke or displayed some other clear symptom of carotid disease and who have conditions that make surgery highly risky. That covers fewer than 10 percent of the patients who currently undergo carotid surgery, which is routinely covered by Medicare and commercial insurance plans.

Meanwhile, Ms. Packer -- whose insurer, Guardian Health Net, agreed to pay for the procedure -- says she is happy she got the stent, despite some side effects. Those included swollen lymph glands and scattering bits of plaque that led to painful swelling in her foot and a serious infection in her thigh and groin, which required a two-week course of antibiotics.

Not only does she believe her risk of stroke has been reduced, Ms. Packer is also convinced the procedure has other benefits that device companies have not yet even asked regulators to consider.

"My memory and energy levels are better now," she said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Good job pointing out medical turf battle over ownership of this procedure, and 
industry sponsorship of symposium. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Edmonton, AB) Groundbreaking research from the University of Alberta and McGill University has opened the door towards the future prevention of cardiac fibrosis--a condition leading to heart failure for which there is currently no treatment.

The collaborative study, funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and published in PLOS One, examined the molecular mechanisms that lead to cardiac fibrosis in a pre-clinical model. The study discovered the specific triggers activating the development of fibrosis which accelerates heart failure. Blocking the triggers through the use of a specific kind of bile acid prevented cardiac fibrosis from occurring.

"This is something that nobody has ever seen before," says Marek Michalak, co-principal investigator and a distinguished professor in the Department of Biochemistry at the University of Alberta's Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry. "Cardiac fibrosis is considered a permanent remodeling of the heart. Inevitably it leads to heart failure and eventually death. The bottom line is that this shows for the first time that cardiac fibrosis is preventable."

"It offers hope to those who are living with heart failure," adds Luis Agellon, co-principal investigator and a professor at McGill University's School of Dietetics and Human Nutrition. "Prevention of fibrosis will extend the ability of the heart to function, even if at a reduced capacity. Currently patients with heart failure have poor quality of life and a dismal prognosis. Improving their quality of life will do wonders for these individuals."

Fibrosis is an early step on the path to heart failure. According to the Heart and Stroke Foundation there are currently 1.3 million Canadians living with heart disease or heart failure--a condition that severely limits physical activity because the heart cannot pump enough oxygenated blood that the body needs. About 30 per cent of patients diagnosed with heart failure will die within the first year.

Cardiac fibrosis itself is caused by a variety of factors including high blood pressure, overwork of cardiac muscle and long-term consumption of a diet that is high in both saturated fat and sugar--all cause increased stress to heart cells. Individuals with diabetes, cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy and heart transplant recipients are also known to be at high risk.

"It's almost like building a scar," says Michalak. "It's exactly the same type of biological activity but it's happening in the heart tissue. It destroys the ability of the heart to function normally."

The team is now pushing forward with additional studies to see if the same therapeutic effect can be achieved in humans. They also aim to gain a better understanding of exactly how bile acids can prevent cardiac fibrosis from occurring.

"We don't yet have a full understanding--nobody does--of how the bile acid actually does what it does in heart cells," explains Michalak. "So, another phase of the work is to find out what actually happens within heart cells at the molecular level. How can this bile acid affect the heart in such a dramatic way?"

Once that occurs, the team hopes to work with cardiologists to quickly move the research into clinical trials, involving chemotherapy and heart transplant patients.

"If cardiac fibrosis can be stopped, then that could substantially improve the outcome for people at risk," says Agellon. "This would be a significant advance in the fight against heart disease."

This research was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

"Inhibition of the Unfolded Protein Response Mechanism Prevents Cardiac Fibrosis," PLOS ONE, published online July 21, 2016.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly notes the funding source, the Canadian Institute for Health Research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Johns Hopkins Medicine specialists report they have developed a urine test for the likely emergence of cervical cancer that is highly accurate compared to other tests based on genetic markers derived directly from cervical tissue.

The new urine test, they say, is different because it analyzes not only multiple sources of human cellular DNA altered by precancerous changes, but also DNA from HPV that is sexually transmitted and causes virtually all cases of the disease.

In a proof-of-concept study, described online in Cancer Prevention Research on November 8, the investigators say their genetic markers test showed a "sensitivity" or accuracy rate of 90.9 percent in identifying so-called CIN2 lesions -- cervical lesions with abnormal cells likely to not only develop into cancer, but also to develop into cancers likely to spread. Additionally, they demonstrated that the DNA for all three human genes and one viral gene could be successfully extracted from urine, and they could identify such lesions with 75 percent sensitivity.

Two commercial tests based on markers of DNA chemical changes called methylation, released in Europe last summer, require Pap smears or swabs of cervical tissue, and show 64 percent sensitivity in identifying similar lesions, according to senior investigator Rafael Guerrero-Preston, Dr.P.H., M.P.H., assistant professor of otolaryngology-head and neck surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and member of the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center.

"If further studies confirm these findings, we see a significant use of urine screening as a way to quickly and inexpensively determine if a biopsy is warranted, or if physicians can use a 'watch and wait' approach before intervening," says Guerrero-Preston. Typically, he says, a woman who tests positive for HPV and has an abnormal Pap smear undergoes a biopsy to rule out cervical cancer using cells taken directly from cervical tissue. But previous studies suggest more than 50 percent of these biopsies are unnecessary and can result in pain, worry, infertility and higher health care costs.

"Our urine test would serve as a molecular triage," he says, "at times supplementing Pap test information. In developing countries that don't have the money, medical infrastructure or cultural approval for Pap test, our test could be used instead."

The new study builds on the Johns Hopkins team's previously published work, in which investigators identified three genes associated with cervical cancer or abnormal-looking cells known to become cancerous: FKBP6, INTS1 and ZNF516. As abnormalities progress, these genes were more likely to have a chemical methyl group attached to their DNA in certain spots.

The researchers tested the value of these genes as markers using 214 cervical cell samples collected from women undergoing Pap smears at Hospital Dr. Hernan Henriquez Aravena in Chile. The women ranged in age from 18 to 86. Among the test samples, 34 showed no abnormalities in their cervix; 87 showed one of three types of precancerous, abnormal tissue; and 90 showed clear evidence of cervical cancer.

Next, Guerrero-Preston's team isolated DNA from each cervical tissue sample and used advanced genetic sequencing methods to spell out the DNA makeup of cells in the cervical tissue samples. The researchers then compared the number of methyl groups attached to each gene in samples from the 34 healthy women to 53 samples with a specific subset of precancerous markers.

Using methylation as a value to diagnose malignancy, the three genes together showed a 90 percent sensitivity, meaning that their presence was able to predict a true positive cancer sample this percentage of the time. The test had an 88.9 percent specificity, meaning the percent of time the test correctly identified someone without the disease.

To further improve the accuracy of the test, the investigators added a new gene marker to the test. This time, rather than using a human gene, they used one from the virus, HPV16-L1, which also becomes methylated in human cells as cancer develops. They did the test again with the four-gene combination on a new population of women from the University of Puerto Rico. The 115 women ranged in age from 21 to 49; 41 participants had healthy cervical tissue, and 74 had one of three types of precancerous cells. Using all four genes, the test now had a sensitivity of 90.9 percent and a specificity of 60.9 percent.

"When developing a new cancer screening test, we want something in the range of 90 to 95 percent sensitivity, which is competitive with the effectiveness of tests developed and now marketed in Europe," says Guerrero-Preston.

The next step, the researchers report, was to verify that the four-gene test worked using freely circulating DNA from blood and urine, rather than DNA taken directly from cervical tissue.

For this experiment, they tested 40 samples of paired cervical tissue, blood and urine from a subset of the patients from Puerto Rico. Using the DNA from blood, they found the test had an 85.7 percent sensitivity and a 60.9 percent specificity. Using urine, they found a 75 percent sensitivity and an 83.3 percent specificity.

During the course of the study, the time to process cervical samples, blood or urine and get a test result took four days. They plan to continue modifying the test to improve the urine sensitivity to that of the cervical tissue samples.

According to World Cancer Research Fund International, 84 percent of cervical cancers occur in less developed countries, with the highest rates in Africa, Latin American and the Caribbean. In the United States, cervical cancer used to be the highest cause of cancer deaths among women, but that soon changed when the yearly Pap smear was introduced over 40 years ago. Countries without the infrastructure or cultural acceptance for regular Pap tests have not seen declining cancer rates.

Guerrero-Preston and his colleagues have a research agreement with Cepheid to develop a way to reduce the waiting time for a test result from a maximum of four days in the lab to under three hours in a Cepheid instrument using sealed cartridges to minimize sample handling and contamination.

Additional authors on the study include Blanca Valle, Anne Jedlicka, Nitesh Turaga, Oluwasina Folawiyo, Francesca Pirini, Fahcina Lawson, Angelo Vergura, Maartje Noorhuis, Amanda Dziedzic, Gabriela Perez, Marisa Renehan, Carolina Guerrero-Diaz, Bruce Trock Liliana Florea and David Sidransky of The Johns Hopkins University; Edgar De Jesus Rodriguez, Jose Rodriguez Orengo, Keimari Mendez and Josefina Romaguera of the University of Puerto Rico; and Teresa Diaz-Montes of the Institute for Cancer Care at Mercy.

The research was funded by National Cancer Institute grants (U01 CA084986, K01 CA164092 and U01 CA084986).
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Although the release offers no information about possible conflicts of interest (the article on which the release was based indicates the absence of such conflicts), it does provide information about funding. And it does disclose the start of a collaboration between the team and a company that intends to design and market a urine test product.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every year when Morton Pollner had his checkup, he worried that doctors would find something on his lung. For years, they didn't. Then his luck ran out.

"My reaction was, 'Well, you smoked for 30 years. You got away with it for another 30 years and this is it.' I thought it was a death sentence," he says.

Pollner, who lives in Monroe, N.Y., was 76 when he was diagnosed with lung cancer. Like many patients his age, he didn't expect there would be any effective treatment. Lung cancer is the second most common cancer in men and women. And it is mainly a disease of older people. Only about 2 percent of lung cancer patients are under 45 and the average age at diagnosis is about 70.

Older patients are frequently not offered curative treatment like surgery, because they and their families and even their doctors often think they won't be able to tolerate it. So they are referred for supportive care to control symptoms, rather than surgery to remove the cancer.

But many patients can survive and even thrive after surgery, says Dr. Prasad Adusumilli, a thoracic surgeon at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York. He was senior author of a study published in the Journal of Clinical Oncology in October. The study looked at more than 2,000 patients with Stage 1 non-small cell lung cancer who had surgery to remove their tumor. About 70 percent of the patients were 65 years old or older and about 30 percent were at least 75.

And he found that a surprising number of these older patients did quite well. One year after surgery, more people had died from other causes than died from lung cancer. And, after five years, almost 9 out of 10 patients were alive and cancer free.

"They did well and beat their lung cancer," Adusumilli says, proving that when it comes to surgery for early stage lung cancer, age should not be a limiting factor.

This was the case for Morton Pollner, who is one of Adusumilli's patients. His cancer had not spread, and Adusumilli told him there was a good possibility the cancerous tissue could be completely removed and he could go back to leading a normal life. That was seven years ago. Today, Pollner is 82, cancer free and enjoying life.

"Whatever I get from here on, it's like gravy," he says.

Surgery isn't the answer for all older lung cancer patients, according to Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society. Patients with heart or other health problems may not be candidates. At the same time, he says it's important to recognize that patterns of aging have changed over the past two decades.

Seventy today is not the same as it was 20 years ago, Lichtenfeld says. Older adults are more functional, both physically and mentally, than ever before, and he says the medical community needs to adjust its thinking about what treatments older cancer patients can tolerate.

"We shouldn't allow numerical age to be the deciding factor," Lichtenfeld says.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story included an independent source and we didn’t note any potential conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — A change in diet can improve the lives of those diagnosed with a common, but hard-to-treat gut disorder.

That’s the result of research by the University of Michigan Health System, presented at Digestive DiseaseWeek, that studied for the first time in the United States the result of following a carefully controlled diet to improve the symptoms and quality of life for those with irritable bowel syndrome.

“This is the only methodically rigorous clinical trial to show that diet-based therapy can not only improve symptoms, but also quality of life in patients with IBS,” says U-M assistant clinical professor and gastroenterologist Shanti Eswaran, M.D., who researches the role of diet and food in functional bowel diseases such as IBS.

Irritable bowel syndrome can be highly debilitating, if not virtually paralyzing, and affect work, sleep and personal and family relationships. Most treatments initially rely on medications that are often expensive, usually ineffective and frequently cause unwelcome side effects. And unfortunately there is no cure.

Many practitioners and patients have turned to diet as a possible treatment, but many of the dietary recommendations have not been backed by clinical trials.The study, the largest of its kind, measured the degree of relief from low FODMAP, a frequently recommended diet, which stands for Fermentable Oligo-Di-Monosaccharides and Polyols.

This diet excludes many compounds found in wheat, certain fruits and vegetables, garlic, onions and sugar substitutes.

Over a six-week process, registered dietitians educated and monitored the progress of more than 90 IBS patients. Roughly half followed a prescribed low FODMAP diet, and half were a control group that used a common-sense regimen, cutting down on large meals, binges and known irritants such as caffeine and alcohol.

The results were impressive: More than 50 percent of the patients on the low FODMAP diet had major improvement of their abdominal pain, compared with 20 percent of the control group.

There was also more improvement of other bothersome symptoms compared to the control group: bloating, diarrhea and stool urgency.

Eswaran collaborated with William Chey, M.D., professor of internal medicine, Kenya Jackson, Sivaram G. Pillai, Samuel W. Chey and Theresa Han-Markey, M.S., R.D., at the University of Michigan on the study abstract published in Gastroenterology.

At four weeks, the proportion of patients with a meaningful improvement in IBS quality of life was significantly higher in the low FODMAP group compared to the control group — 61 percent versus 27 percent.

While the results are highly encouraging for IBS sufferers, there are a few important caveats, Eswaran says.

Because of the many unknowns about the chemical causes and triggers of IBS, the list of “bad” foods is exhaustive and elusive, and help from a dietician is highly recommended.

“Low-FODMAP is not a new treatment, but we are now convinced that it really works,” she says. “Our next step will be to more precisely determine the underlying chemistry of how and why particular foods can yield dramatically different results for different people. Meanwhile, we strongly recommend that IBS patients work with their physician and a registered dietitian to navigate the Low-FODMAP diet to take control of their IBS symptoms.”

Eswaran received funding to conduct the research from the University of Michigan Nutritional and Obesity Center and Prometheus Diagnostics.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release says the research was funded by the University of Michigan Nutritional and Obesity Center and Prometheus Laboratories Inc. It might have disclosed that Prometheus Laboratories is owned by the global food and beverage giant Nestlé, and that it sells diagnostic tests for IBS.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Silicone breast implants were pulled off the market in 1992 amid concerns that leaks from the implants could lead to cancer or autoimmune disease.

Five years ago, revamped products returned to the market. But now the Food and Drug Administration has evaluated the safety of the second generation of silicone implants and the results are mixed.

An FDA report, released in late June, says silicone implants are generally safe. But complications from implants are frequent — things like hardening of the skin around the implant; ruptured, wrinkled, or lopsided implants; scarring, pain and infection.

As many as half of patients will need to have additional surgeries or have the implants removed in the first decade.

It also turns out that the longer a woman has the implants, the more likely she is to experience these complications.

Take Kate Marion. She had silicone implants for breast augmentation in her late 20s. Just shy of two decades later she noticed something unusual.

"When I was crossing my left arm across my body — for instance, to put lotion on my right arm — I would make a little noise from my armpit, the way little boys do when they stick their hand in their armpit and pump their arm up and down," Marion says. "A little tooty noise."

An MRI showed both her implants had burst. Her doctor immediately recommended removing them, which she did. Marion hasn't suffered any apparent harm from her ruptured implants, and she even confesses to having an occasional twinge of regret that she didn't have them replaced when she had the old ones removed. But ultimately she decided she didn't want to go through more surgery.

"Well, how long would these next ones last? I would be in my 60s when I had to do this again, and who wants to have surgery unnecessarily when you are 60 something?" says Marion.

Although the long-term effects of silicone in the body are still uncertain, many plastic surgeons don't see the leaking of modern implants as a health concern.

"The actual silicone that's within the implants is inert. So if the silicone gel leaks, it doesn't travel through the body, it doesn't cause systemic problems. So the MRI is really detecting a cosmetic concern," says New York City plastic surgeon Matthew Schulman.

But there have been more serious outcomes. Annette Knecht got silicone implants in 1991 following a double mastectomy. For years afterward she felt ill, suffered multiple bouts of pneumonia, had trouble breathing and pain in her chest. Doctors reassured her it wasn't her implants.

"We had a CT scan done, and it showed OK — everything looked fine, so we didn't worry about it," says Knecht.

But no one ever told her to get an MRI — something the FDA now recommends that women with silicone implants get every few years. As it turned out, Knecht's implants had leaked; a biopsy found silicone in her lymph nodes and in her lungs. She is currently disabled and awaiting a lung transplant — all, she says, for vanity.

"We're about four generations removed from those implants," says Schulman, the plastic surgeon. He explains that implants have undergone big changes since the early 1990s, when Knecht received hers. Back then they contained a runny liquid silicone.

"The silicone implants of today are what we call a cohesive gel — it's essentially like a jelly. So the jelly may ooze a little bit, but it will not run out like an oil," says Schulman.

Sid Wolf of the nonprofit watchdog group Public Citizen is among critics who point out that the data in the FDA report sample just a fraction of the nearly 400,000 women who receive breast implants each year. Moreover, that data are limited to just the last two or three years — not enough, Wolf says, to make any real claims about the long-term safety of the implants.

"There is a huge deficiency of long-term data at a time when we know that the longer these devices are in, the more problems ... occur," says Wolf.

Still, there are plenty of satisfied customers among the nearly 400,000 women who receive breast implants each year. Not only have the number of women choosing breast implants for augmentation risen by nearly 40 percent in the last decade, Schulman says that in his practice, 80 percent of them are choosing silicone over saline. What's more, he says few of them follow the recommendations to get routine MRIs to screen for leaks.

Schulman says that the rates of complications for silicone implants are roughly the same as for saline — though he feels these complications can be minimized by choosing an experienced surgeon. Still, he warns his patients that no procedure is without risks — and additional surgeries are a very real possibility.

"Your young breast implants don't last forever," says Schulman. "They may leak, they may rupture, you may decide you want a different size. So you have to at least expect that sometime in your life, you are going to need a reoperation. And if you are 100 percent against having another surgery related to these implants, then it's something you should reconsider."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two independent experts were quoted.  (Sidney Wolfe’s name was misspelled.) However, the article could have benefited from:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A treatment that improves the lives of nearly 1.3 million people with rheumatoid arthritis might one day originate from scorpion venom. A group of researchers led by Dr. Christine Beeton at Baylor College of Medicine has found that one of the hundreds of components in scorpion venom can reduce the severity of the disease in animal models, without inducing side effects associated with similar treatments. The study appears in the Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.

"Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease - one in which the immune system attacks its own body. In this case, it affects the joints," said Beeton, associate professor of molecular physiology and biophysics and member Dan L Duncan Comprehensive Cancer Center at Baylor College of Medicine. "Cells called fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) play a major role in the disease. As they grow and move from joint to joint, they secrete products that damage the joints and attract immune cells that cause inflammation and pain. As damage progresses, the joints become enlarged and are unable to move."

Current treatments target the immune cells involved in the disease and none are specific for FLS. Beeton and her colleagues studied FLS looking for an 'Achilles' heel' that would allow them to prevent or stop them from damaging the joints.

"In previous work, we identified a potassium channel on FLS of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and found that the channel was very important for the development of the disease," Beeton said. "We wanted to find a way to block the channel to stop the cells damaging the joints."

Potassium channels work by opening gates on the surface of cells that allow potassium ions - small charged atoms - to flow in and out of the cell. The flow of ions through the channels is necessary for the cells to carry out many of their essential functions. Animals such as scorpions have venoms that block potassium and other ion channels. They use the venoms to paralyze and kill prey. Decades ago, scientists discovered this and realized that, if handled correctly, venoms also might have medicinal applications.

Scorpion venom may lead to improved treatments for rheumatoid arthritis

"Scorpion venom has hundreds of different components. One of the components in the venom of the scorpion called Buthus tamulus specifically blocks the potassium channel of FLS and not the channels in other cells such as those of the nervous system," said first author Dr. Mark Tanner, a graduate student in the Beeton lab during the development of this project. "Here, we investigated whether this venom component, called iberiotoxin, would be able to specifically block the FLS potassium channel and reduce the severity of the rheumatoid arthritis in rat models of the disease."

When the researchers treated rat models of the disease with iberiotoxin, they stopped the progression of the disease. In some cases they reversed the signs of established disease, meaning that the animals had better joint mobility and less inflammation in their joints. In addition, treatment with iberiotoxin did not induce side effects, such as tremors and incontinence, observed when treating with another channel blocker called paxilline.

"It was very exciting to see that iberiotoxin is very specific for the potassium channel in FLS and that it did not seem to affect the channels in other types of cells, which might explain the lack of tremors and incontinence," Tanner said.

"Although these results are promising, much more research needs to be conducted before we can use scorpion venom components to treat rheumatoid arthritis," Beeton said. "We think that this venom component, iberiotoxin, can become the basis for developing a new treatment for rheumatoid arthritis in the future."

Other contributors of this work include Michael W. Pennington, Brayden H. Chamberlain, Redwan Huq, Elizabeth J. Gehrmann, Teresina Laragione and Pércio S. Gulko. The contributors are affiliated with one or more of the following institutions: Baylor College of Medicine, Peptides International, Inc. and Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

This work was supported by the Arthritis Foundation grant 6483 and the National Institutes of Health grants GM088129, AI050831, AR069960, HL007676, CA125123 and HG006348.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release reports that the study was supported by Peptide International, makers of the peptide iberiotoxin, the Arthritis Foundation and the National Institutes of Health. We didn’t find any undisclosed conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Sept. 11, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- New research suggests that Opdivo -- a drug that works with the immune system to fight melanoma -- is more effective than the current standard of care for patients who've had surgery to remove advanced tumors.

The international study was funded by Opdivo's maker, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and included more than 900 patients with stage III and stage IV melanoma.

Patients were treated at 130 medical centers across 25 countries. All underwent surgery for their cancer before they began treatment with either Opdivo (nivolumab) or Yervoy (ipilimumab), the drug that's the current standard of care.

Both drugs are "immunotherapies," which work by boosting the immune system's ability to spot and destroy tumor cells.

After a year of treatment, 71 percent of patients in the Opdivo group were alive without any recurrence of the disease, compared with 61 percent of those treated with Yervoy. And at 18 months, the rate was 66 percent for Opdivo and 53 percent for Yervoy, the findings showed.

According to the Skin Cancer Foundation, metastatic melanoma accounts for only about 1 percent of skin cancer cases but causes the majority of skin cancer deaths.

"Our results demonstrate that [Opdivo] is more effective in treating patients with stage III and IV melanoma, cutting the risk of relapse by a third," lead researcher Dr. Jeffrey Weber, professor of medicine at NYU School of Medicine, said in a university news release.

"Results like this will change how we practice medicine. Hopefully, physicians will embrace the use of [Opdivo] in these high-risk patients as adjuvant therapy," added Weber, who also helps direct NYU's Perlmutter Cancer Center in New York City.

One cancer surgeon who reviewed the findings was impressed.

"Based on this study, it appears that patients with advanced melanoma who have their disease completely removed by surgery should go on to receive additional therapy with Opdivo," said Dr. Gary Deutsch. He is a surgical oncologist at Northwell Health's Imbert Cancer Center in Bay Shore, N.Y.

"Not only did these patients have a better survival outcome at one year, but they had only one-third the side effects compared to Yervoy," Deutsch said.

The study found that patients taking Opdivo had fewer severe side effects than those taking Yervoy, at 14 percent versus 45 percent. Five percent of patients on Opdivo had to stop treatment due to side effects, compared with 31 percent of those on Yervoy. The most common side effects for both drugs were fatigue and diarrhea.

Weber added that "the safety of [Opdivo] is very promising."

The study is scheduled for presentation Monday in Madrid, Spain, at the annual meeting of the European Society for Medical Oncology. It was also published online Sept. 10 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Both Opdivo and Yervoy are already approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat advanced (metastatic) melanoma. In some patients, the drugs are used in combination.

Dr. Michele Green is a dermatologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. She said any advance in the care of aggressive melanomas is welcome news for patients.

"It is amazing that there is now an alternative that is superior to conventional chemotherapy for advanced metastatic disease," Green said after reviewing the new study findings. "With these advanced melanomas -- that have high risks of recurrences and have poor outcomes -- it is vital to look at alternative treatments. The future in cancer treatments lies in immunotherapy and other targeted options."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on melanoma.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story tells readers in the second paragraph that the study was funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb, which markets Opdivo. We like that the story places that information front and center. In addition, the story incorporates input from two independent sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, June 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new drug for type 2 diabetes causes significantly less weight gain and may carry lower risks for hypoglycemia (low blood sugar), heart attack and stroke than standard medications, a new study indicates.

Researchers in Germany noted that the new drug, linagliptin (Tradjenta), is intended for use in patients that do not fare well with metformin, the most common first-line drug used to treat the disease.

Patients with type 2 diabetes may stop responding to metformin over time. Others who do not respond to metformin alone are given a second drug to help them maintain normal blood sugar levels. The researchers noted that which drug they should be prescribed is unclear.

The researchers pointed out that most patients are prescribed a class of drugs called sulphonylureas to supplement metformin. However, these drugs can sometimes lead to hypoglycemia and weight gain, which increases the patients' risk for heart attack and stroke.

To compare the effects of linagliptin to glimepiride (the most commonly used sulphonylurea), the researchers conducted a double-blind study over the course of two years. The study, which was funded by linagliptin's maker, Boehringer Ingelheim, involved 1,500 people from 16 countries with type 2 diabetes. None of the patients had responded to metformin alone.

Although the effectiveness of the drugs were similar, the study showed the side effects of linagliptin were much less severe than those of glimepiride. The researchers found that 7 percent of patients on linagliptin experienced hypoglycemia, compared to 38 percent of patients treated with glimepiride.

The patients on linagliptin also had fewer heart attacks and strokes compared to those being treated with glimepiride.

The researchers argued that since linagliptin allows the body to increase the amount of insulin it produces in a glucose-dependent way, the risk for hypoglycemia may be significantly lower.

And since hypoglycemia "can have substantial negative clinical consequences" in terms of risk for death, illness, mental function and poor quality of life, preventing it is crucial, study co-author Baptist Gallwitz, of Tubingen University Hospital, said in a news release.

The study authors pointed out linagliptin was licensed in 2011 and this is the first long-term study examining its safety and effectiveness. They added more research is needed to confirm their findings.

One expert said patients and doctors may still have to balance the superiority of linagliptin against its higher cost in comparison to older drugs.

The new study provides more evidence that drugs like linagliptin "are just as good as the old standby sulfonylurea therapies, with the added benefits of inducing fewer hypoglycemic events, causing less weight gain, along with a likely decrease in cardiovascular events," said Dr. Stuart Weiss, an endocrinologist at NYU Langone Medical Center and clinical assistant professor at the NYU School of Medicine, New York City.

But millions of Americans suffer from type 2 diabetes, so "cost issues favoring sulfonylureas may be the only reason for preferring continued sulfonylurea use," he added. The results of a larger, ongoing study currently underway may help resolve the issue of whether the newer drug is worth the extra money, Weiss said.

The study was published online June 27 in The Lancet.

The American Diabetes Association provides more information on type 2 diabetes.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story says quite high that the study “was funded by linagliptin’s maker, Boehringer Ingelheim,” and it quotes one independent source. More sources would have been better.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WHIPPANY, N.J., Sept. 19, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Bayer announced today that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Kyleena™ (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) 19.5 mg, a progestin-containing intrauterine system (IUS), for the prevention of pregnancy for up to five years.1 Kyleena will be available by prescription only in October 2016.

"Data show that the use of effective, long-acting birth control methods including intrauterine devices – or IUDs – have helped to reduce unintended pregnancies in the United States but we still have a long way to go," 2 said Anita L. Nelson, M.D., Professor and Chair, Obstetrics and Gynecology at Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, Calif. "Kyleena is highly effective at preventing pregnancy and may be an appropriate choice for women who want a low-dose, non-daily birth control method."

Kyleena is a small, flexible plastic T-shaped device containing 19.5 mg of a progestin hormone called levonorgestrel. Kyleena is placed by a healthcare provider during an in-office visit and prevents pregnancy for up to five years, but may be removed by a healthcare provider at any time.

"With the approval of Kyleena, women have an important new birth control option that provides pregnancy prevention for up to five years," said Dario Mirski, M.D., Senior Vice President and Head of Medical Affairs for the Americas, Bayer. "Kyleena expands Bayer's IUD portfolio and is part of our commitment to provide women and their healthcare providers with a variety of contraceptive choices to meet their individual needs."

The use of long-acting reversible contraception (LARCs) has increased nearly five-fold in the last decade.3

Because Kyleena slowly releases levonorgestrel into a woman's uterus, only small amounts of the hormone enter the blood. For the first 3 to 6 months, a woman's period may become irregular and the number of bleeding days may increase. Women may also have frequent spotting or light bleeding. Some women have heavy bleeding during this time. After using Kyleena for a while, the number of bleeding and spotting days is likely to lessen. For some women, periods will stop altogether. When Kyleena is removed, menstrual periods should return.

About the Clinical Trial for Kyleena1

The contraceptive efficacy of Kyleena was evaluated in a clinical trial that enrolled generally healthy women aged 18 to 35, of whom 1,452 received Kyleena. Of these, 40% (574) were nulliparous women, 870 (60%) women completed 3 years of the study, 707 (49%) elected to enroll in an extension phase up to a total of 5 years, and 550 (38%) completed 5 years of use. The trial was a multicenter, multi-national, randomized, open-label study conducted in 11 countries in Europe, Latin America, the U.S. and Canada. Women less than six weeks postpartum, with a history of ectopic pregnancy, with clinically significant ovarian cysts or with HIV or otherwise at high risk for sexually transmitted infections were excluded. A total of 563 (39%) were treated at U.S. sites and 889 (61%) were at non-U.S. sites. The racial demographics of enrolled women who received Kyleena was: Caucasian (80%), Black/African American (5.1%), Other (2.6%) and Asian (1.2%); 11% indicated Hispanic ethnicity. The clinical trial had no upper or lower weight or BMI limit. The weight range was 38 to 173 kg (mean weight: 68.7 kg) and mean BMI was 25.3 kg/m2 (range 15.2–57.6 kg/m2). Of Kyleena-treated women, 22% discontinued the study treatment due to an adverse reaction, 5.0% were lost to follow-up, 2.3% withdrew for unspecified reasons, 1.2% discontinued due to a protocol deviation, 0.9% discontinued due to pregnancy, and 20% discontinued due to other reasons.

The pregnancy rate calculated as the Pearl Index (PI) in women aged 18-35 years was the primary efficacy endpoint used to assess contraceptive reliability. The PI was calculated based on 28-day equivalent exposure cycles; evaluable cycles excluded those in which back-up contraception was used unless a pregnancy occurred in that cycle. The Year 1 PI was based on 2 pregnancies and the cumulative 5-year pregnancy rate was based on 13 pregnancies that occurred after the onset of treatment and within 7 days after Kyleena removal or expulsion.

About 71% of 163 women who desired pregnancy after study discontinuation and provided follow-up information, conceived within 12 months after removal of Kyleena.

The most common adverse reactions (occurring in ≥ 5% users) were vulvovaginitis (24%), ovarian cyst (22%), abdominal pain/pelvic pain (21%), headache/migraine (15%), acne/seborrhea (15%), dysmenorrhea/uterine spasm (10%), breast pain/breast discomfort (10%), and increased bleeding (8%). In the combined studies, 22% discontinued prematurely due to an adverse reaction. The most common adverse reactions (> 1%) leading to discontinuation were increased bleeding (4.5%), abdominal pain/pelvic pain (4.2%), device expulsion (3.1%), acne/seborrhea (2.3%), and dysmenorrhea/uterine spasm (1.3%). In the clinical trials, serious adverse reactions occurring in more than a single subject included: ectopic pregnancy/ruptured ectopic pregnancy (10 subjects); pelvic inflammatory disease (6 subjects); missed abortion/incomplete spontaneous abortion/spontaneous abortion (4 subjects); ovarian cyst (3 subjects); abdominal pain (4 subjects); depression/affective disorder (4 subjects); and uterine perforation/embedded device (myometrial perforation) (3 subjects).

Indication for Kyleena 

Kyleena™ (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) is a hormone-releasing IUD that prevents pregnancy for up to 5 years.
• If you have a pelvic infection, get infections easily, or have certain cancers, don't use Kyleena. Less than 1% of users get a serious pelvic infection called PID.
• If you have persistent pelvic or stomach pain or if Kyleena comes out, tell your doctor. If Kyleena comes out, use back-up birth control. Kyleena may attach to or go through the uterus and cause other problems.
• Pregnancy while using Kyleena is uncommon but can be life threatening and may result in loss of pregnancy or fertility.
• Ovarian cysts may occur but usually disappear.
• Bleeding and spotting may increase in the first 3 to 6 months and remain irregular. Periods over time usually become shorter, lighter, or may stop.

Kyleena does not protect against HIV or STDs.

Only you and your healthcare provider can decide if Kyleena is right for you. Kyleena is available by prescription only.

For important risk and use information about Kyleena, please see the Full Prescribing Information

Bayer: Science For A Better Life

Bayer is a global enterprise with core competencies in the Life Science fields of health care and agriculture. Its products and services are designed to benefit people and improve their quality of life. At the same time, the Group aims to create value through innovation, growth and high earning power. Bayer is committed to the principles of sustainable development and to its social and ethical responsibilities as a corporate citizen. In fiscal 2015, the Group employed around 117,000 people and had sales of EUR 46.3 billion. Capital expenditures amounted to EUR 2.6 billion, R&D expenses to EUR 4.3 billion. These figures include those for the high-tech polymers business, which was floated on the stock market as an independent company named Covestro on October 6, 2015. For more information, go to www.bayer.us.

© 2016 Bayer 

Bayer and the Bayer Cross are registered trademarks of Bayer. Kyleena is a trademark of Bayer.

Forward-Looking Statement

This news release may contain forward-looking statements based on current assumptions and forecasts made by Bayer Group or subgroup management. Various known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors could lead to material differences between the actual future results, financial situation, development or performance of the company and the estimates given here. These factors include those discussed in Bayer's public reports which are available on the Bayer website at www.bayer.com. The company assumes no liability whatsoever to update these forward-looking statements or to conform them to future events or developments.

1Kyleena Prescribing Information, September 2016.

2 Finer LB and Zolna MR, Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United States, 2008–2011, New England Journal of Medicine, 2016, 374(9):843–852, http://nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMsa1506575.

3 Branum AM, Jones J. Trends in long-acting reversible contraception use among U.S. women aged 15–44. NCHS data brief, no 188. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2015.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release is clearly marked as being from the manufacturer of Kyleena.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SATURDAY, Sept. 29, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers say they've discovered a two-drug combination that delays treatment resistance in patients with advanced melanoma.

By targeting different points in the same growth-factor pathway, the kinase inhibitor drugs dabrafenib and trametinib postponed the development of drug resistance in patients with BRAF-positive metastatic melanoma, the study authors said.

Melanoma is the most serious, and often deadly, form of skin cancer. In about half of patients with melanoma that has spread, tumor growth is caused by genetic mutations that keep the BRAF protein -- part of the MAPK cell growth pathway -- constantly activated. Drugs that inhibit BRAF activity can rapidly stop and reverse tumor growth in about 90 percent of patients. But the response is temporary in most cases, and tumor growth resumes in six or seven months, the researchers explained.

Previous research suggested that this drug resistance develops because the MAPK pathway gets turned back on through activation of MEK, another protein that is part off the MAPK pathway.

"We investigated this (drug) combination because of research we and others have conducted into the molecular underpinnings of resistance to BRAF inhibitor therapy," study lead author Dr. Keith Flaherty, of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, said in a hospital news release.

The phase 1 and 2 study was sponsored by GlaxoSmithKline, which developed both drugs.

"We found that adding the MEK inhibitor trametinib to BRAF inhibitor dabrafenib clearly delays the emergence of resistance. In fact, the combination was at least twice as effective as BRAF inhibition alone," he said.

One expert agreed that the results were encouraging.

"This study addresses the problem of resistance to the mitogen-activated protein kinase [MAPK] pathway. This study combined dabrafenib [a selective BRAF inhibitor] and trametinib, [a selective MAPK kinase (MEK) inhibitor]. These drugs can be safely combined, and the survival was significantly improved without untoward side effects," said Dr. Michele Green, a dermatologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

The study was conducted at 14 sites in the United States and Australia and included 162 patients who received different dose combinations of the drugs: two daily 150 milligram (mg) doses of dabrafenib plus one 2 mg dose of trametinib; the same dabrafenib dose with a 1 mg dose of trametinib; or treatment with dabrafenib alone.

Patients who received dabrafenib alone were able to receive the full-dose combination treatment if their cancer resumed progression.

Treatment with both combinations of dabrafenib and trametinib led to a four-month longer delay in drug resistance than treatment with dabrafenib alone. After one year of treatment, 41 percent of patients receiving the full-dose combination treatment had no progression of their melanoma, compared with 9 percent of those receiving dabrafenib alone.

Among patients receiving the combination treatment, the development of side effects such as skin rash and a less dangerous type of skin cancer called squamous cell carcinoma was similar to that typically seen in patients taking only one of the drugs.

The study was scheduled for presentation Saturday at the European Society for Medical Oncology meeting in Vienna and simultaneous publication in the New England Journal of Medicine.

The drug combination is now being tested in a larger phase 3 study, which is required for U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval.

The American Cancer Society has more about melanoma.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story informs readers that both drugs studied are being developed by GSK, which sponsored the studies. And we hear from an independent dermatologist who was not involved with the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, scientists have shown that probiotics -- beneficial live bacteria and yeasts taken as dietary supplements -- can improve cognitive function in humans. In a new clinical trial, scientists show that a daily dose of probiotic Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium bacteria taken over a period of just 12 weeks is enough to yield a moderate but significant improvement in the score of elderly Alzheimer's patients on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scale, a standard measure of cognitive impairment.

Probiotics are known to give partial protection against certain infectious diarrheas, irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, eczema, allergies, colds, tooth decay, and periodontal disease. But scientists have long hypothesized that probiotics might also boost cognition, as there is continuous two-way communication between the intestinal microflora, the gastrointestinal tract, and the brain through the nervous system, the immune system, and hormones (along the so-called "microbiota-gut-brain axis"). In mice, probiotics have indeed been shown to improve learning and memory, and reduce anxiety and depression- and OCD-like symptoms. But prior to the present study there was very limited evidence of any cognitive benefits in humans.

Here, the researchers, from Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, and Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran, present results from a randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical trial on a total of 52 women and men with Alzheimer's between 60 and 95 years of age. Half of the patients daily received 200 ml milk enriched with four probiotic bacteria Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. casei, L. fermentum, and Bifidobacterium bifidum (approximately 400 billion bacteria per species), while the other half received untreated milk.

At the beginning and the end of the 12-week experimental period, the scientists took blood samples for biochemical analyses and tested the cognitive function of the subjects with the MMSE questionnaire, which includes tasks like giving the current date, counting backwards from 100 by sevens, naming objects, repeating a phrase, and copying a picture.

Over the course of the study, the average score on the MMSE questionnaire significantly increased (from 8.7 to 10.6, out of a maximum of 30) in the group receiving probiotics, but not in the control group (from 8.5 to 8.0). Even though this increase is moderate, and all patients remained severely cognitively impaired, these results are important because they are the first to show that probiotics can improve human cognition. Future research, on more patients and over longer time-scales, is necessary to test if the beneficial effects of probiotics become stronger after longer treatment.

"In a previous study, we showed that probiotic treatment improves the impaired spatial learning and memory in diabetic rats, but this is the first time that probiotic supplementation has been shown to benefit cognition in cognitively impaired humans," says Professor Mahmoud Salami from Kashan University, the senior author of the study.

Treatment with probiotics also resulted in lower levels of triglycerides, Very Low Density Lipoprotein (VLDL), high-sensitivity C-Reactive Protein (hs-CRP) in the blood of the Alzheimer patients, and likewise a reduction in two common measures (called "Homeostatic Model Assessment", HOMA-IR and HOMA-B) of insulin resistance and the activity of the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas.

"These findings indicate that change in the metabolic adjustments might be a mechanism by which probiotics affect Alzheimer's and possibly other neurological disorders," says Salami. "We plan to look at these mechanisms in greater detail in our next study."

Walter Lukiw, Professor of Neurology, Neuroscience and Ophthalmology and Bollinger Professor of Alzheimer's disease at Louisiana State University, who reviewed the study but was not involved in the research, said: "This early study is interesting and important because it provides evidence for gastrointestinal (GI) tract microbiome components playing a role in neurological function, and indicates that probiotics can in principle improve human cognition. This is in line with some of our recent studies which indicate that the GI tract microbiome in Alzheimer's is significantly altered in composition when compared to age-matched controls, and that both the GI tract and blood-brain barriersbecome significantly more leaky with aging, thus allowing GI tract microbial exudates (e.g. amyloids, lipopolysaccharides, endotoxins and small non-coding RNAs) to access Central Nervous System compartments."

The study is published in the open-access journal Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the research was supported by a grant from the Deputy of Research of Kashan University of Medical Sciences, and that the probiotic supplements were produced and provided by Tak Gen Zist Pharmaceutical Company in Tehran, Iran. The authors declared no commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Feb. 3, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A special restrictive diet may significantly reduce symptoms of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in young children, a new study suggests.

When children between the ages of 4 and 8 were placed on a diet containing no processed foods for five weeks, ADHD symptoms diminished in 78 percent of them. And, when suspected trouble foods were reintroduced into the diet, two-thirds of the children experienced a relapse in symptoms.

"A strictly supervised restricted elimination diet is a valuable instrument to assess whether ADHD is induced by food," wrote the study authors. "We think that dietary intervention should be considered in all children with ADHD, provided parents are willing to follow a diagnostic restricted elimination diet for a five-week period, and provided expert supervision is available," they concluded.

Results of the study are published in the Feb. 5 issue of The Lancet.

ADHD is a common childhood disorder, according to the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). Children with ADHD have trouble paying attention, focusing and can be hyperactive. Parents have long suspected that sugary foods might be a culprit in inducing symptoms, but there's not a lot of evidence to support this theory, according to the NIMH. However, food additives and preservatives have recently been singled out as possibly having an effect on children's behavior, though the evidence isn't yet conclusive.

Since some children have negative physical reactions to certain foods -- such as eczema, asthma and gastrointestinal problems -- that affect different organ systems, it has been suggested that foods may also affect the brain in a way that results in adverse behavior, according to information in the study.

To test this theory, the researchers recruited 100 children from Belgium and the Netherlands. The children were between the ages of 4 and 8, and all had been diagnosed with ADHD. Most of the children were boys.

The children were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group was placed on the restrictive elimination diet, and the other group served as a control group and received advice on healthy eating.

The restrictive diet began with a diet called the "few foods diet," which includes just rice, meat, vegetables, pears and water. The researchers then complemented this diet with certain foods, such as potatoes, fruits and wheat. The restrictive diet lasted for five weeks.

During the next four weeks, kids in the restricted diet group received two food challenge diets, in which certain foods were reintroduced into the diet. The researchers selected foods that were considered both low- and high-IgG foods.

IgG is an antibody made by the immune system that some alternative medicine practitioners believe is linked to food hypersensitivities; however, IgG testing is controversial among many mainstream physicians and even some naturopaths, according to background information in the study.

Some complementary medicine practices test for IgG and recommend eliminating foods high in IgG, explained Dr. Jaswinder Ghuman, who wrote an accompanying editorial in the same issue of the journal.

Forty-one children completed the restrictive phase of the diet. Of those, 78 percent had a reduction in their ADHD symptoms, compared with no improvement in the controls. Nine children (22 percent) didn't respond to the diet. On an ADHD symptom scale that ranges from 0 to 72 points, with a higher score indicating more severe symptoms, the average reduction was 24 points, according to the study.

Thirty children who had shown a response on the restrictive diet went on to the challenge test. Nineteen of those children had a relapse in symptoms on the challenge test. What's more, it didn't appear to matter if the children with challenged with a low- or high-IgG food.

"Measuring IgG levels in kids doesn't seem helpful," Ghuman said, but it does look as if the elimination diet may help some children.

"If parents have noticed that a child's behavior seems to get worse with certain foods, it may be worth considering," said Ghuman, who is an associate professor of psychiatry and pediatrics at the University of Arizona in Tucson.

"But, for this diet to work, you have to be very consistent with it, and you have to pay attention to nutrition. It should be done under the supervision of a primary care doctor, and if possible, a dietician," she advised.

Ghuman said that this study doesn't answer a number of questions, such as whether or not the elimination diet reduces symptoms long-term. And, she added, that clinical practice shouldn't be changed based on the results of one study.

Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at the Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York in New Hyde Park, echoed Ghuman's concerns.

"Since none of the children stayed on the diet beyond five weeks, it is hard to know if this dietary intervention offers sustained benefit," he said, adding, "Since it is more difficult to enforce restricted diets in older children, this approach may not be suitable for the majority of older children with ADHD."

Adesman also pointed out that this study is only applicable to children with ADHD, not to children who had ADD without the hyperactivity component.

Learn more about ADHD from the National Institute of Mental Health.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes one outside expert and one expert who wrote an accompanying editorial. Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at the Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children’s Medical Center of New York in New Hyde Park, said, “Since none of the children stayed on the diet beyond five weeks, it is hard to know if this dietary intervention offers sustained benefit. …Since it is more difficult to enforce restricted diets in older children, this approach may not be suitable for the majority of older children with ADHD.” Jaswinder Ghuman, MD, associate professor of psychiatry and pediatrics at the University of Arizona, who wrote a commentary, says, “”But, for this diet to work, you have to be very consistent with it, and you have to pay attention to nutrition. It should be done under the supervision of a primary care doctor, and if possible, a dietician.” These cautious voices are very different from the more exultant opinions in the WebMD piece.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A therapy that allows hay fever sufferers to get allergy shots in the form of a tablet or drops can help alleviate symptoms and cut people’s reliance on allergy medication, a new research review confirms.

Known as sublingual immunotherapy, the treatment relies on the same principles as traditional allergy shots, but is delivered by tablets or drops that dissolve under the tongue.

Allergy shots may be used for hay fever when antihistamines and other allergy medications do not control a person’s symptoms adequately, or for people who want to reduce their reliance on medication.

The shots help prevent hay fever symptoms by exposing people, over time, to small amounts of the pollen to which they are allergic, essentially desensitizing the immune system to the allergen.

Allergy shots are typically given weekly at first, followed by monthly injections over several years. The treatment does not cure hay fever but is generally effective at reducing symptoms. However, inconvenience and discomfort limits patients’ willingness to try allergy shots.

Sublingual immunotherapy is an alternative and has become commonly used in Europe, where two tablet-based products against grass-pollen allergies are available: Grazax and Oralair. There are also a number of drop-based products. No sublingual immunotherapy products have yet been approved in the United States, however.

For the new study, reported in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Italian researchers combined the results of 19 clinical trials conducted since 1995 on the effectiveness of immunotherapy tablets and drops against hay fever caused by grass pollen.

The trials lasted anywhere from three months to three years.

Across the studies, which included a total of 2,971 adults and children with grass-pollen allergies, immunotherapy reduced symptoms by about 20 percent to 30 percent, on average. It also allowed patients to reduce their use of antihistamines and other medications.

The researchers, led by Dr. Gabriele Di Lorenzo of the University of Palermo, describe the benefits as “modest.”

In an email, Di Lorenzo told Reuters Health that the findings suggest that sublingual immunotherapy is “highly effective in many, but not in all patients.” He said that more work is needed to identify which patients might be most likely to benefit.

Dr. Harold Nelson, an allergist at National Jewish Health in Denver, said that the body of evidence indicates that sublingual immunotherapy beats antihistamines and other medications used to control hay fever symptoms.

In an interview, he noted that antihistamines reduce symptoms by about 12 percent to 15 percent, on average. Nasal steroids, another hay fever option, appear to cut symptoms by about 17 percent.

On the other hand, Nelson said, allergy shots appear to outperform the oral versions, with a symptom reduction about twice that of sublingual immunotherapy.

In addition, the long-term effectiveness of the grass-pollen tablets is not yet fully clear.

Like allergy shots, the oral immunotherapy takes time. Grazax, for instance, is taken daily, starting several months before the start of the next grass-pollen allergy season and continuing for three years thereafter.

Research so far suggests that the symptom relief persists in the year after patients stop taking Grazax. A study published earlier this year — and not included in the current analysis — found that during that post-treatment year, Grazax patients had one-quarter fewer hay fever symptoms than those who had been given a placebo for comparison.

But longer term data are not yet available. The benefits of allergy shots, by contrast, have been shown to persist for 10 years or beyond, Nelson noted.

The ultimate cost-effectiveness of sublingual immunotherapy has also yet to be determined; in the UK, for example, Grazax treatment costs about 2.25 pounds ($3.50) per day. In theory, that could pay off if long-term use of allergy medications was cut, but that has yet to be shown.

Still, Nelson said that if sublingual products do win approval in the U.S., they will likely boost the number of hay fever sufferers who want to use under-the-tongue immunotherapy. Even though the effectiveness is less than that of allergy shots, the convenience of an at-home version of immunotherapy is a plus, and the sublingual therapy tends to have fewer side effects than shots, according to Nelson.

The most common side effects include itchiness and irritation in the mouth, ears and eyes, swelling of the mouth or tongue, headache and gastrointestinal problems like stomach pain and heartburn.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml"/>1clip_themedata.thmx"/>1clip_colorschememapping.xml"/>



 
The story includes an interview with an allergist not affiliated with the research.  

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have developed a new HPV (human papilloma virus) vaccine which protects against nine types of the virus - seven of which cause most cases of cervical cancer. The new vaccine offers significantly greater protection than the current vaccine, which protects against only two cancer causing types of HPV.

A pivotal international clinical trial compared the safety and efficacy of the new vaccine, Gardasil 9, with the current vaccine, Gardasil, in more than 14,200 women aged between 16 and 26 years old. The findings indicate that if uninfected populations are vaccinated with Gardasil 9, approximately 90 per cent of all cervical cancers worldwide could be prevented.

Published in the New England Journal of Medicine, the study found that, among uninfected women, Gardasil 9 was 97 per cent effective at preventing high-grade cervical, vulvar and vaginal disease caused by HPV 31, 33, 45, 52 and 58, and was equally effective as the current Gardasil vaccine in preventing diseases caused by HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18.

Professor Jack Cuzick of Queen Mary University of London, who co-authored the report and participated in the design and analysis of the study, and served on the Trial Advisory Board, comments: "This is a significant achievement. The new vaccine, Gardasil 9, is not only safe but will offer greatly improved protection against cervical and other cancers. Eventually this will mean less screening is needed, as women will have greater protection from the outset.

"Gardasil 9 offers the potential to increase overall cervical cancer prevention from 70 to 90 per cent, nearly eliminating this cancer among vaccinated women. However, it's crucial to remember that vaccination must be done before exposure to the virus. Our focus for prevention must be on girls aged 12-13, as the current UK vaccine programme is doing, but the vaccine may also be appropriate for women 25-45 as part of a screening appointment."

Until late last year, there were two available vaccines to protect against HPV related disease (Cervarix and Gardasil). The UK currently uses Gardasil which protects against four HPV types and offers about 70 per cent protection against cervical cancer, and also significantly reduces the risk of other types of cancer and genital warts.

However, researchers have been trying to find methods to completely eliminate cervical cancer and other HPV related disease and by adding five more cancer related HPV types. The development of the new Gardasil 9 vaccine makes an important step in that direction.

HPV is the most common sexually transmitted virus. Many people infected with HPV clear it from their systems with no lasting health concerns and some types of the virus are low risk, causing warts or verrucas. However, other types are high risk, causing cervical cancer (and less commonly vulvar, vaginal, penile, anal, and throat cancers). Almost all cases of cervical cancer occur as a result of infection with high risk types of HPV.

Cervical cancer is still the fourth most common cancer in women, with over 500,000 cases and 250,000 deaths per year worldwide. In the UK around 3,000 women a year are diagnosed with cervical cancer and in 2011 there were around 970 deaths.

In the UK, all girls aged 12 to 13 are offered HPV vaccination as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme.

Professor Jack Cuzick concludes: "Following these important findings, this vaccine has been licenced in the USA and approval is currently being sought in the UK and other countries. It is encouraging that the Joint committee on Vaccines and Immunisation is reviewing Gardasil 9 in light of this new evidence."

This clinical trial was funded by Merck.

Charli Scouller 

PR Manager (School of Medicine and Dentistry) 

Queen Mary University of London 

c.scouller@qmul.ac.uk 

Tel: 020 7882 7943

Queen Mary University of London (QMUL) is one of the UK's leading universities, and one of the largest institutions in the University of London, with 20,260 students from more than 150 countries.

A member of the Russell Group, we work across the humanities and social sciences, medicine and dentistry, and science and engineering, with inspirational teaching directly informed by our research - in the most recent national assessment of the quality of research, we were placed ninth in the UK (REF 2014).

We also offer something no other university can: a stunning self-contained residential campus in London's East End. As well as our home at Mile End, we have campuses at Whitechapel, Charterhouse Square and West Smithfield dedicated to the study of medicine, and a base for legal studies at Lincoln's Inn Fields.

We have a rich history in London with roots in Europe's first public hospital, St Barts; England's first medical school, The London; one of the first colleges to provide higher education to women, Westfield College; and the Victorian philanthropic project, the People's Palace based at Mile End.

QMUL has an annual turnover of £350m, a research income worth £100m, and generates employment and output worth £700m to the UK economy each year.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release points out that the study was funded by the manufacturer of the vaccine and that Dr. Cuzick was a coauthor of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every healthy newborn in the United States should receive a new vaccine designed to protect against an intestinal germ called rotavirus, a federal advisory panel decided yesterday as it set aside theoretical concerns about the vaccine's safety.

The decision means that pediatricians are likely to recommend three doses of the oral vaccine for nearly every child at age 2 months, 4 months and 6 months, beginning almost immediately. The vaccine won approval from the Food and Drug Administration on Feb. 3, and some doctors have received supplies of it.

The recommendation for universal use of the vaccine was approved at a meeting of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, the federal panel that sets vaccination policy in the United States. It comes nearly seven years after an earlier rotavirus vaccine was withdrawn from the market for causing a potentially life-threatening form of intestinal blockage in some babies.

Vaccine-safety advocates are urging parents to be wary of the new vaccine because of that history. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the manufacturer, Merck & Co. Inc. of Whitehouse Station, N.J., have promised elaborate studies to catch any safety problems. Merck is selling the vaccine under the brand name RotaTeq.

Merck has tested the vaccine in about 70,000 babies in 11 countries, one of the biggest vaccine trials ever conducted. That test ruled out a safety problem similar to the one that felled RotaShield, an earlier rotavirus vaccine developed by Wyeth, a drugmaker in Madison, N.J. But doctors said it is impossible to design a test big enough to catch all possible side effects that might show up once the product is used in millions of children.

RotaTeq "generally appears to have a better safety profile than the earlier vaccine," said Umesh D. Parashar, a medical epidemiologist at the CDC. "But at the same time it's something we'll continue to look at, and hopefully confirm absence of risk."

RotaTeq is expected to be one of the most expensive vaccines ever marketed, with Merck listing it at $187.50 wholesale for the three-dose series. That means many doctors are likely to charge more than $300 retail, putting the Merck product in league with Prevnar, an expensive Wyeth vaccine that has been widely used in the United States for five years. Prevnar, which protects children against certain types of pneumonia, became the first vaccine to meet the pharmaceutical industry's standard for a blockbuster product, with sales exceeding $1 billion a year.

The development of such high-priced vaccines is causing strains, particularly in state-sponsored vaccination programs for certain low-income children. But it is also drawing new manufacturers into the vaccine market, which many drug companies had abandoned in the 1980s and 1990s, citing too little profit.

RotaShield appeared on the market in late 1998 but was pulled less than a year later after a handful of babies that received it developed a serious intestinal problem called intussusception, a type of bowel obstruction that occurs when the intestine folds in on itself, like a collapsing telescope.

The problem occurs naturally, albeit rarely; it showed up at a sharply elevated rate in babies who received RotaShield. Intussusception is life-threatening for some babies, though doctors can usually treat it.

Many people have never heard of rotavirus, but it is one of the most common causes of childhood illness -- many ailments that parents or pediatricians describe as "stomach flu" are caused by rotavirus infection. Virtually every child in the world contracts the virus repeatedly by age 5, gradually building immunity.

Most children get over rotavirus at home, but at least 55,000 American children are hospitalized every year after becoming dehydrated from vomiting and diarrhea associated with the infection. Fifty to 60 of them die, but it is a different story overseas, where babies often do not receive good medical care and hundreds of thousands die every year.

RotaTeq contains live, but weakened, strains of rotavirus designed to build immunity without causing illness.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The author does quote an independent source, an epidemiologist from the CDC.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 7, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Using an artificial breath-sensor system dubbed the "electronic nose," Italian researchers were able to spot more cases of asthma than with traditional diagnostic tools.

The electronic nose detected nearly 90 percent of people with asthma compared to about 70 percent who were accurately diagnosed in the traditional way with lung function tests, according to new research published in the April issue of the journal Chest.

When combined with another test, called the fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) test, the electronic nose did an even better job at detecting asthma, the study found.

"The electronic nose discriminates between patients with asthma and healthy subjects and its performance is increased when combined with FENO," wrote the Italian team led by Dr. Paolo Montuschi of the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Rome.

The device works by identifying volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in exhaled breath. These VOCs produce a unique smell print for each individual and specific patterns are seen in people with asthma.

The new study included 27 people with intermittent or mild persistent asthma and 24 healthy people. None of the study volunteers had a history of smoking. Those with asthma had a history of allergies, and none had been treated with corticosteroids for at least four weeks prior to the start of the study.

Currently, asthma is diagnosed "based on your medical history and symptoms, and with spirometry (lung function testing) and exhaled nitric oxide," said Dr. Thomas Leath, director of allergy and immunology at Scott & White Healthcare in Round Rock, Texas.

The Italian researchers wanted to compare the electronic nose to the other commonly used tests -- spirometry and FENO -- to see which test was best at confirming a diagnosis of asthma.

To do this, all of the study volunteers were given all three tests. Each test is non-invasive, requiring only the use of exhaled air.

The electronic nose was able to correctly differentiate healthy people from those with physician-diagnosed asthma in 87.5 percent of the cases. FENO was able to correctly identify asthma in 79.2 percent of the study volunteers and lung function testing (spirometry) discerned just 70.8 percent of the people with asthma.

When the electronic nose and FENO were combined, the two tests together correctly identified almost 96 percent of the asthma cases.

"This is potentially a great tool. It could be used for screening if it's affordable or for seeing the effect of anti-inflammatory medicines. But, it definitely needs more research," said Leath.

"This device is interesting and warrants a further look, but it still needs to be perfected and the researchers need to figure out its niche," said Dr. Jennifer Appleyard, chief of allergy and immunology at St. John Hospital and Medical Center in Detroit. "We need to know if it's good for diagnostics or for measuring improvements after treatment. In some diseases, you use blood markers to monitor treatment response. Could you use this to see if patients are responding? We also need to know if it's good for diagnosing all types of asthma."

Dr. David Rosenstreich, director of the division of allergy and immunology at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City, added: "An objective and fast test for diagnosing asthma would be helpful, and this test seems to be a non-invasive way of sampling for the underlying problem. This test seems relatively easy for patients and it does have potential, but they've only looked at a very narrow collection of people who have allergic asthma."

Both Appleyard and Leath noted that cost might initially limit the use of an electronic nose.

Learn more about how asthma is currently diagnosed from the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story cites two independent sources and identifies their affiliations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Study funded by Ivy Foundation shows PPF could help treat glioblastomas by sensitizing tumors to chemotherapy and radiation treatments

PHOENIX, Ariz. -- Nov. 12, 2015 -- In a significant breakthrough, the Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen) has identified a drug, propentofylline or PPF, that could help treat patients with deadly brain cancer.

In a study published today in the Journal of NeuroOncology, TGen researchers report that PPF works to limit the spread of glioblastoma multiforme, or GBM -- the most common primary tumor of the brain and central nervous system -- by targeting a protein called TROY.

In addition, TGen laboratory research also found that PPF increases the effectiveness of a standard-of-care chemotherapy drug called temozolomide (TMZ), and radiation, to treat glioblastoma.

"We showed that PPF decreased glioblastoma cell expression of TROY, inhibited glioma cell invasion, and made brain cancer cells more vulnerable to TMZ and radiation," said Dr. Nhan Tran, Associate Professor and head of TGen's Central Nervous System Tumor Research Lab.

An advantage of small-molecule PPF -- which has been previously used in clinical trials in an attempt to treat Alzheimer's disease and dementia -- is that it can penetrate the blood-brain barrier and reach the tumor. And, the FDA has already approved it.

"Our data suggests that PPF, working in combination with TMZ and radiation, could limit glioblastoma invasion and improve the clinical outcome for brain tumor patients," said Dr. Tran, the study's senior author.

This study was funded, in part, by The Ben & Catherine Ivy Foundation.

"GBM is one of the most aggressive of all cancers and it affects people of all ages," said Catherine (Bracken) Ivy, founder and president of The Ben & Catherine Ivy Foundation. "Funding research focused on helping patients survive longer is critical, and studies such as this advance our goal of not only improving treatments for brain cancer, but eventually finding a cure."

One of the primary treatments for glioblastoma is surgical removal of the tumor. However, because of the aggressive way glioblastomas invade surrounding brain tissue, it is impossible to remove all parts of the tumors, and the cancer eventually returns and spreads. This insidious cancer invasion also limits the effectiveness of chemotherapy drugs and radiation therapy.

TGen found that PPF works to limit the spread of glioblastomas by targeting and knocking down the expression of the TROY protein. TGen researchers have linked TROY to the cellular mechanisms that enable glioblastomas to invade normal brain cells, and resist anti-cancer drugs.

"New therapeutic strategies that target the molecular drivers of invasion are required for improved clinical outcome," said Dr. Harshil Dhruv, a TGen Research Assistant Professor and lead author of the study. "Propentofylline may provide a pharmacologic approach to targeting TROY, inhibiting cell invasion and reducing therapeutic resistance in glioblastomas."

One of the fundamental challenges in treating brain cancer with drugs is what is known as the blood-brain barrier that separates circulating blood from the brain extracellular fluid in the central nervous system. This barrier works to protect the brain from toxins. However, this security system is so effective at protecting the brain that it prevents many life-saving drugs -- all but some small molecules -- from being able to treat cancer and other diseases of the brain.

As a result, there has been little progress in recent decades in finding new effective treatments for GBM. Median survival for newly diagnosed GBM patients is only 14.6 months. Only 5 percent of patients survive more than 5 years.

"Clinical trials revealed that PPF can cross the blood-brain barrier, and has minimal side effects," Dr. Tran said. "PPF could be easily translated to the clinic as an adjuvant therapy in combination with standard of care treatment for GBM patients."

This study -- Propentofylline inhibits glioblastoma cell invasion and survival by targeting the TROY signaling pathway -- also was funded by the National Institutes of Health under grants NS86853 and P50 CA108961. To read the abstract, visit: http://link. .

The Ben & Catherine Ivy Foundation, based in Scottsdale, Ariz., was formed in 2005, when Ben Ivy lost his battle with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Since then, the Foundation has contributed more than $50 million to research in gliomas within the United States and Canada, with the goal of better diagnostics and treatments that offer long-term survival and a high quality of life for patients with brain tumors. The Ben & Catherine Ivy Foundation is the largest privately funded foundation of its kind in the United States. For more information, visit http://www. .

Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen) is a Phoenix, Arizona-based non-profit organization dedicated to conducting groundbreaking research with life changing results. TGen is focused on helping patients with neurological disorders, cancer, and diabetes, through cutting edge translational research (the process of rapidly moving research towards patient benefit). TGen physicians and scientists work to unravel the genetic components of both common and rare complex diseases in adults and children. Working with collaborators in the scientific and medical communities literally worldwide, TGen makes a substantial contribution to help our patients through efficiency and effectiveness of the translational process. For more information, visit: http://www. . Follow TGen on Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter @TGen.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the research was funded by the Ben & Catherine IVY Foundation and NIH grants.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A small U.S. study suggests daily hormone injections may boost mental agility in older people with and without mild cognitive problems.

People who got growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), as opposed to inactive injections, improved on tests of attention and concentration skills - what psychologists call executive function.

And participants who got the hormone shots also felt the effects in their daily life, said Laura Baker, a memory researcher at the University of Washington & VA Puget Sound Health Care System in Seattle.

“On self-report, many of the folks in the active group reported they felt better,” Baker, who led the study, told Reuters Health. “They wanted to know where they could get (the hormone) after the study was over.”

But that’s jumping the gun, she warned, because the treatment is still experimental and GHRH is not approved to treat mental decline. What’s more, the hormone, which was provided free by the manufacturer in the study, today costs $700 for a single shot, Baker said.

An expert who wasn’t involved in the research echoed the cautions.

“I think it’s potentially good news, but I don’t think it’s to the point where people should go out and start using it,” said Dr. Ronald C. Petersen, who heads the Mayo Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center in Rochester, Minnesota.

The new study, published Monday in the Archives of Neurology, included 152 people aged 55 to 87. Sixty-six had “mild cognitive impairment,” which falls somewhere between normal forgetfulness and dementia.

Baker said researchers have failed so far to come up with effective drugs to treat mild cognitive impairment, just as there is no known treatment to stave off the normal memory decline that comes with age.

But recent work by one of Baker’s co-authors hints that nasal sprays with the hormone insulin may have a positive impact on memory in people with Alzheimer’s disease - although that’s far from conclusive yet.

GHRH, a hormone produced by the hypothalamus in the brain, is linked to the insulin system, but also has a host of other effects. It dwindles naturally with aging, which has been linked to declines in memory and executive function.

“All you have to do is supplement that hormone and it then will result in a whole cascade of effects that then restore an aging system to a younger system,” said Baker.

In her study, people injected a synthetic version of GHRH or a placebo daily for five months. At the end, those who got the drug did better on psychological tests of executive function - whether or not they had mild cognitive impairment.

It’s unclear how the test differences will translate into real life, said Baker. One test, for instance, asked participants to name the color of a font - say, green - used to write the name of a different color - say, “red”. But Baker said people who got the hormone were more likely to report improvements in their ability to focus during the day.

The researchers found no serious side effects in the study, although people who got the hormone more often complained of symptoms like skin reactions and joint pain.

Still, both Baker and Petersen said more work is needed to gauge the long-term consequences of GHRH injections. It’s possible health problems could show up down the road, and the mental boost may be short-lived.

“Is it going to work in the long run and is it going to be safe? That is still unknown,” said Petersen.

Baker added that it’s too early to say whether the hormone could play a role in thwarting the development of Alzheimer’s, which may affect as many as five million Americans.

Still, she said, “There are things we can all do to postpone (mental) decline.” Keeping medical conditions such as diabetes under control and getting regular exercise are two examples.

“We recommend commonly that people start exercising when they are having mild cognitive impairment,” Baker said. “Our work and others’ has shown that exercise really does make a difference.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: A key independent expert was quoted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) It's a portable piece of technology providing seemingly bottomless access to a drug craved by more than 1 billion people worldwide -- nicotine. That craving is caused by smoking tobacco but is now being increasingly satisfied by e-cigarettes and the trend to "vape" instead of smoke.

The selling point is the clean image e-cigarettes purvey by removing the simultaneous exposure to the tar and thousands of chemicals found in the tobacco smoke of regular cigarettes -- removing the cause of lung diseases as well as other tobacco-related conditions.

Tobacco kills almost 6 million people each year, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), and a growing number of people are now "vaping" instead of smoking, resulting in industry worth $2.7 billion worldwide.

Since their introduction in 2006, e-cigarettes have become commonplace among smokers trying to kick their habit, with a third of smokers trying to quit in the United Kingdom turning to e-cigarettes to aid them, according to one study . But some critics argue these electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) are fueling a new addiction to nicotine -- particularly among young people experimenting with them.

"While ENDS may have the potential to benefit established adult smokers ... [they] should not be used by youth and adult non-tobacco users because of the harmful effects of nicotine and other risk exposures," says Tim McAfee, director the Office on Smoking and Health at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "Exposure to nicotine can harm adolescent brain development."

Studies conducted by the CDC through its Adult and Youth National Tobacco Surveys found increased experimentation by youth trying out e-cigarettes but not conventional cigarettes. The gadgetry and flavors associated with the devices is suggested as a reason behind this, with fears of them acting as a gateway into real tobacco smoking.

But others in the field of tobacco control disagree, stating that whilst people -- including youth -- may have tried e-cigarettes, the evidence is lacking for their regular use. "Kids like new technology and just experiment or use it once or twice," says Jean-Francois Etter, professor of Public Health at the University of Geneva.

Whilst Etter says that use among young people should be monitored, he believes the role of e-cigarettes in reducing global tobacco consumption is more important. "They are a gateway out of smoking," says Etter. The number of people using a combination of tobacco and e-cigarettes is on the rise, according to Etter, resulting in smokers switching and consuming less tobacco each day. "[They have] the same level of nicotine but people are less exposed to toxins ... nicotine is not a health problem," he says. However, further evidence on the long-term health effects of e-cigarettes or nicotine is needed.

"The vast number of people using e-cigarettes are using them to stop smoking; [they're] about 60% more effective than going cold turkey or buying nicotine replacement therapy over the counter."

Bauld's research hasn't identified a dependence on nicotine with e-cigarettes in the same way as the addiction resulting from regular cigarettes. "E-cigarettes are not the best nicotine delivery devices," she says referring to the fact nicotine is not seen to enter the bloodstream as readily when using e-cigarettes. That's backed up by Etter's research as well as a recent study by researchers at Penn State College of Medicine, in which e-cigarettes were found to be less addictive than tobacco cigarettes.

They do, however, provide nicotine more effectively than aids such as patches or gums, according to Bauld.

"Patches and gums are a very small market," says Etter about the quitting devices which first came onto the market 40 years ago. He fears too much restriction on e-cigarettes will limit their impact in achieving a world free of tobacco.

Both Bauld and Etter recognize the need to monitor the consumption of nicotine among teenagers but feel the value of e-cigarettes among adult smokers and their potential to save lives by reducing tobacco consumption should not be underestimated -- a sentiment recognized by the World Health Organization.

The greatest impact to date in reducing the number of smokers worldwide has been the taxation and legislation restricting tobacco advertising and increasing prices. "For every 10% increase in tax you have 4% reduction in tobacco consumption," says Peruga.

The growing fear is the increasing domination of big tobacco in the e-cigarette market, which was once seen as a competitor. Their ownerships of popular e-cigarette brands could push out smaller companies in the field, reminiscent of the original tobacco epidemic.

"The intent of big tobacco is to sell their product," concludes Peruga. "[They may] expand their market to other customers who didn't use cigarettes but might consider nicotine use."

But as it seems e-cigarettes are here to stay, most calls are for informed regulation rather than prohibition. "The majority of e-cigarettes -- especially when they are well regulated -- are likely to be less toxic than cigarettes -- and that for smokers is an advantage," says Peruga.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story showed good initiative in chasing down and quoting a variety of experts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - There is never a good time to have a stroke, but a new study suggests that a person who suffers a stroke on a weekend is more apt to get clot-busting therapy on arrival at the hospital than a person who suffers a stroke on a weekday.

Nonetheless, the odds of survival are about the same for weekend and weekday admission for stroke, the study found.

Stroke requires emergency treatment and for those suffering a stroke on a Saturday or Sunday, “waiting until Monday for aggressive treatment is not an option,” Dr. Abby S. Kazley and colleagues from the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston emphasize in a report released today.

“Anyone who thinks they are having a stroke should seek care at a hospital immediately. Individuals should not wait to seek care for stroke,” Kazley told Reuters Health by email.

The current study, she added, shows that “high quality (stroke) care is available in hospitals on the weekends and weekdays.” In fact, care might even be more aggressive on weekends.

Why? On weekends, even though hospitals have lower levels of staffing, stroke patients arriving at the hospital may have greater access to equipment and doctors who might be busier during the week than they are on weekends. Elective surgeries are not usually scheduled on weekends, leading perhaps to “decreased traffic and waiting times” for diagnostic equipment, culminating in quicker and more efficient diagnosis and determination of treatment.

With less road traffic and job obligations on weekends, stroke patients may get to the hospital quicker — within the three hour window when guidelines recommend that clot-busting drugs for stroke be given.

Kazley and colleagues analyzed data on 78,657 patients admitted to Virginia hospitals between 1998 and 2006 with acute ischemic stroke — the most common type of stroke, which is caused by a blood clot in the vessels supplying the brain. Of these, 20,279 were admitted on weekends and 58,378 during the week.

Patients admitted on the weekends were 20 percent more likely than those admitted during the week to get the clot-busting drug tissue plasminogen activator, or tPA — a drug that can improve patient outcomes following stroke. A total of 543 weekend stroke sufferers got the drug versus only 229 weekday stroke patients.

Yet stroke patients admitted on the weekends were no more likely to die than stroke patients admitted during the week: 1,420 patients admitted on the weekend died versus 3,993 patients admitted on a weekday, which worked out to roughly the same rate of death.

Putting those figures together could suggest that the clot-buster tPA wasn’t doing much good. In fact, that authors note that patients who received tPA were more likely to die in the hospital. Dr. Lawrence B. Goldstein, director of the Duke Stroke Center in Durham, North Carolina, and spokesperson for the American Heart Association said the results were not surprising, since “no clinical trials ever showed that treatment with a (clot buster) improves survival.”

But Kazley said that the additional deaths among patients who received tPA is likely because doctors are more likely to give the drug to those with severe strokes, who have a higher risk of death in any case.

Overall, Kazley added, this study offers “good news that indicates that the quality of care is similar regardless of when patients present at the hospital for treatment. This is an indication of the standardization of hospital care regardless of the time/day that patients seek care.”

Studies on the potential for a “weekender effect” in care and outcome for urgent conditions such stroke and heart attack have yielded mixed results.

For example, in one study examining stroke outcomes in Canada, researchers found that patients with stroke admitted to the hospital on weekends were at greater risk of dying than those admitted on weekdays. “Even in a country with universal health insurance coverage (such as Canada), disparities in resources, expertise, or the number of healthcare providers working during weekends” may affect the stroke mortality rate, the researchers concluded. (See Reuters Health report, March 8, 2007).

In a prior US study, researchers found that people who were admitted to the hospital on a weekend for a heart attack were less likely to receive potentially life-saving procedures than their peers who were admitted on a weekday. In this study, weekend admissions for heart attack were associated with much higher death rates, leading the researchers to conclude that more appropriate hospital staffing or regionalized care of heart attack patients may prevent some of these deaths. (See Reuters Health report, March 17, 2007).
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: As noted above, the story quotes an independent expert who does not appear to have a conflict of interest regarding this issue.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
HOUSTON, Feb. 23, 2017 - stroke patients receiving clot-busting medications before arriving at the hospital have a lower risk for disability afterward, according to research presented at the American Stroke Association's International Stroke Conference 2017.

Researchers analyzed results from 658 stroke patients who were treated with tPA - a drug that dissolves blood clots. About half of the participants received the clot-busting drug at the hospital, and half received it while still in the ambulance.

This preliminary study showed that three months after stroke, 182 out of every 1,000 patients treated before arriving at hospital were less disabled, including 58 patients who had zero disability, compared to people who received treatment after reaching the hospital.

"Time is brain in acute stroke after vascular collaterals fail, and faster treatment yields better outcomes," said May Nour, M.D., Ph.D., lead researcher, interventional neurologist and director of UCLA's Mobile Stroke Rescue Program. "Our study shows pre-hospital clot-busting is a promising, evolving approach to providing tPA stroke therapy. Its better outcomes could offset the increased costs of a mobile stroke unit."

Past research showed the sooner that a clot-busting tPA drug is given after an ischemic stroke - one in which a clot is blocking blood flow - the better patients fare. But tPA is not indicated and could hurt a patient's chances if they are having a hemorrhagic stroke, in which a blood vessel ruptures. That is why patients need a CT scan to confirm the type of stroke before receiving tPA.

Every second counts, in the current standard of care, patients who experience stroke-like symptoms and call 9-1-1 arriving to the hospital by ambulance are assessed by clinical examination and imaging (CT or MRI scan) in the Emergency Department. This takes a certain amount of time from the patient's symptom onset which prompted the 9-1-1 call.

In a mobile stroke unit, a specialized ambulance is equipped with a CT scanner, a paramedic, a critical care nurse, a CT technologist and a neurologist in person or by telemedicine. The ambulance arrives, does the CT on-site, gives the clot-busting drug if indicated and then transports the patient to the hospital.

Nour's team used data from Berlin's PHANTOM-S study, which took place from 2011 to 2015 and included 427 participants (median age 72) which were compared to 505 patients who received conventional care with in-hospital clot busting. Researchers analyzed information about patients' disabilities to determine how many needed to be treated in the mobile stroke unit to yield a greater benefit in disability outcomes when compared to patients who received tPA at the hospital.

The findings bordered on statistical significance, suggesting that future clinical trials with a greater number of patients are needed to show similar benefits.

"People should know the warning signs of stroke and call 9-1-1 as soon as they observe stroke signs," said Nour. "Treatment then needs to happen as quickly as possible, and a mobile stroke unit may allow that to happen."

Author disclosures are on the abstract.

The study was funded by the Arline and Henry Gluck Foundation.
• Any available downloadable video/audio interviews, B-roll, animation, graphics, and images related to this news release are on the right column of the release link http://newsroom. .
• Video clips with researchers/authors of the studies will be added to the release link as available.

Statements and conclusions of study authors that are presented at American Heart Association scientific meetings are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect association policy or position. The association makes no representation or warranty as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations are available at http://www. .

Note: Actual presentation is 8:12 a.m. CT/9:12 a.m. ET, Thursday, Feb. 23, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release explains the funding source and points to the abstract, which notes that one of the authors received a modest grant from a pharmaceutical company for a clinical trial for a clot-busting drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Why Tortillas May Hold The Key To Healthier Babies

One of the great public-health success stories of the past couple of decades can be found in your cereal bowl.

Since 1998, the Food and Drug Administration has required that breakfast cereals, breads, rice, pasta and other grain products made with enriched flour come fortified with folic acid. When consumed by women before and during early pregnancy, this B vitamin plays a critical role in preventing severe brain and spinal cord defects. Thanks to mandatory fortification, the number of babies born in the U.S. with neural tube defects has dropped by roughly 35 percent — or about 1,300 babies a year — since the 1990s.

"The story of folic acid is one of the great public health stories of — ever," says Dr. R.J. Berry, who works with the Division of Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

But there's one notable exception to this success story — Hispanic women — and researchers think the reason may lie in a staple of their diet: tortillas.

Under current FDA rules, tortillas, corn chips and other foods made with corn masa flour can't be fortified with folic acid. So a coalition of groups including the March of Dimes Foundation and the National Council of La Raza has petitioned the FDA to change its stance and allow corn masa flour to be fortified with folic acid.

According to the March of Dimes, about 3,000 pregnancies in the U.S. are affected by neural tube defects each year. The rates are highest among Hispanics: Latina women are roughly 20 percent more likely to have a baby with a neural tube defect compared to non-Latina white women.

The exact cause of this discrepancy isn't known. Researchers say there may be genetic factors that predispose the children of some Hispanic women to neural tube defects. But they suspect diet is also a factor: "Part of the reason was that these groups just weren't consuming the same level of wheat flour products. Instead, they were consuming corn masa flour products, because that was the staple grain in that diet," says Cynthia Pellegrini, senior vice president of public policy and government affairs at the March of Dimes.

Research has shown that women who consume at least 400 micrograms of folic acid daily have a significantly reduced risk of having a pregnancy affected by neural tube defects — including spina bifida, which can involve paralysis, and anencephaly, in which large parts of the brain are missing. The catch: Folic acid is only protective if consumed in the earliest weeks of pregnancy.

"Most women, by the time they know they're pregnant, they've already passed that critical window," says Dean Appling, a biochemistry professor at the University of Texas at Austin. "If they had a problem with folic acid, it would be too late at that point to prevent the birth defect."

Mandating fortification helps ensure that women are getting enough folic acid even before they know they need it. And studies suggest that fortifying corn masa with folic acid could prevent an additional 40 to 120 cases of neural tube defects among babies born to Hispanic mothers each year.

So why does the FDA currently ban dosing corn masa flour with folic acid? It all has to do with nixtamalization, the process by which tough corn kernels are softened by soaking in an alkaline solution, usually of slaked lime. The process, which hails from ancient Mesoamerica — what's now Mexico and Central America — dates back thousands of years. It renders the corn more pliable for grinding into masa flour and gives the masa its distinctive aroma and flavor.

But the FDA worries that this alkaline treatment could also "affect the stability of added folic acid," the agency told The Salt in a statement. "The FDA is concerned that the breakdown of folic acid in corn masa flour could yield a substance that raises concerns about safety."

The March of Dimes and others first petitioned the FDA to allow added folic acid in corn flour masa in 2012. As part of its review, the FDA asked the petitioning groups to study whether folic acid would stay stable in corn masa flour.

The petitioners filed the results of that study in October. Michael Dunn, the Brigham Young University food scientist who led the study, cannot comment on the test results while they're under FDA review, but he has previously called them encouraging. As The Seattle Times has reported, Dunn's early results suggested no loss of folic acid in fortified masa after three months of storage.

The March of Dimes' Pellegrini says she believes the FDA will respond to the results of Dunn's study later this month. But the FDA might have more questions related to the study before making a final ruling.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes independent sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dermatologists will soon get some high-tech help deciding which suspicious-looking moles should be removed and checked for melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer.

The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a first-of-its-kind device, called MelaFind, that makes detailed, digital images of skin growths and uses a computer to analyze them for signs of cancer, offering a sort of second opinion to doctors. The device is approved only for dermatologists and only for use on growths that don't have obvious signs of cancer but still have one or two worrisome traits.

The hope is to find more melanomas sooner. Nearly all patients diagnosed with early-stage melanoma can be treated and cured, but 85 percent of patients with late-stage melanoma die from it within five years.

More than 70,000 people in the U.S. will be diagnosed with melanoma this year, and 16 percent are diagnosed only after the disease has spread to other parts of the body, according to estimates from the National Institutes of Health.

To diagnose the disease, doctors decide which moles to remove and biopsy using an entirely visual set of guidelines involving size, shape and color. Most dermatologists easily spot late-stage lesions that have obvious signs of cancer, including irregular edges, uneven color and a width greater than 6 millimeters. But many others are tough calls.

"Every day patients come in with 20 moles on their back and the dilemma is, which ones are suspicious and need to be biopsied?" said Dr. David Pariser, former president of the American Academy of Dermatology. "The diagnosis of melanoma is the most serious one a dermatologist makes, and we have sleepless nights worrying about it," said Pariser, who consulted for the device's maker, Mela Sciences Inc. of Irvington, N.Y., on its presentation to FDA.

The device's handheld attachment, about the size of a blow dryer, emits light that penetrates below the surface of the skin, taking multicolored images that reflect the depth and shape of skin growths. A computer compares these to a database of 10,000 archived images and recommends whether a biopsy should be done.

In a company-sponsored study published last year involving around 1,300 patients, some with multiple growths, doctors reported that MelaFind correctly suggested biopsies on 125 of 127 melanomas that doctors had removed. MelaFind correctly identified about 10 percent of non-cancerous growths, which was better than doctors in the study who were correct less than 4 percent of the time, on average. The study was published in the Archives of Dermatology.

The company's study was not intended to show that screening with the device saves lives, only that it can help improve a doctor's ability to spot melanoma.

For now, experts say MelaFind will help dermatologists make better decisions on which moles to remove.

"There is no such thing as 100 percent certainty in medicine," said Dr. George Elias, a melanoma expert at Georgetown's Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center who had no ties to the company or the device.

"Ultimately it's the responsibility of the dermatologist to use his clinical judgment to make the best decision. This machine is there to help him, not replace him."

Elias voted with the majority of an FDA panel that narrowly endorsed the device last year.

Dermatologists say it's too early to tell whether MelaFind will lead to fewer unnecessary biopsies.

"A biopsy takes a few minutes in my hands, so if there's an issue with any lesion we will always biopsy, whether we have a MelaFind picture or not," said Dr. Leonard Goldberg, a dermatologist at the Texas Medical Center and vice president of the Skin Cancer Foundation, a disease awareness group that accepts donations from makers of sunscreen.

MelaFind underwent a contentious, years-long review by the Food and Drug Administration, which initially rejected the device and concluded it could "potentially cause more harm than good."

Regulators worried that the device could give physicians a false sense of certainty, leading to fewer biopsies. Another concern was that doctors could misinterpret the device's feedback, particularly error messages when a mole cannot be scanned. About 8 percent of growths scanned in the company study came back as "unevaluable."

At a meeting last fall, FDA scientists said Mela Sciences had not shown how its device would influence day-to-day decisions by doctors. The agency also worried about its use by general doctors not accustomed to identifying suspicious skin moles. Despite these concerns, the panel of advisers narrowly backed the overall safety and efficacy of the device in a 8-7 vote.

Regulators said this week that they ultimately approved the device after Mela Sciences agreed to limit its use to board-certified dermatologists who undergo a specialized training course.

"The device is only good for certain lesions, and that's why you have to be a dermatologist to be able to classify and categorize those lesions appropriately," said Christy Foreman, director of FDA's Office of Device Evaluation.

Foreman said an FDA-required follow-up study would help determine how much of a benefit MelaFind represents for patients.

"This device represents new technology. At the end of the day I don't know that this will be the best technology out there, but it is a step forward to allow continued innovation in this area," Foreman said.

Don't expect to see a MelaFind machine at your next doctor's appointment. The company plans to bring them next year to just 200 dermatologists on the East coast, all of whom must undergo company training before they can begin using the device.

Doctors will pay a one-time fee of $7,500 to lease and receive training on the device. Patients will pay $150 out of pocket for a MelaFind scan, which analysts say may limit use to more affluent patients who are willing to pay extra for the latest medical care. Mela Sciences does not plan to ask insurers to cover the device until several years from now, after it is more widely used.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story does not use a truly independent source because everyone appears to have some sort of conflict, but this is also one of the stories strengths. Rarely have we seen conflicts presented with this kind of detail. For example, the story says describes Dr. Leonard Goldberg as “a dermatologist at the Texas Medical Center and vice president of the Skin Cancer Foundation, a disease awareness group that accepts donations from makers of sunscreen.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
P-Cure (P-Cure, Ltd.), a leading provider of Patient-Centric solutions for proton therapy, has received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for its patented upright imaging solution. The P-Cure system is based on a diagnostic-quality computed tomography (CT) enabling treatment planning, positioning and treatment delivery for cancer patients in a seated position.

The P-Cure Patient-Centric solution is a paradigm shifting change from the current method of treatment with the patient in the horizontal position.

“The benefits of treating patients in a seated position include greater patient comfort, less internal organ movement, better saliva drainage and a better position for breathing for asthmatic and other patients experiencing impaired breathing. It may also deliver less collateral radiation to sensitive organs while enabling greater accuracy in proton beam delivery,” said Michael Marash, Ph.D., founder and CEO of P-Cure.

Adult and pediatric patients who will initially benefit from this clinical breakthrough will be those treated for cancers of the lung, breast, chest, the head and neck, and lower torso.

In addition to the clinical benefits of P-Cure’s solution, there are also significant economic advantages to treating patients in a seated position. With P-Cure, oncologists can develop a compact, gantry-less proton center for significantly less capital and operating costs, essentially making proton therapy more widely available and attainable. 

Because of the high capital costs, proton therapy is currently only available to less than one percent of patients who could potentially benefit from it. The P-Cure gantry-less system significantly reduces many factors associated with proton therapy including the capital cost of equipment and construction, the size of a single room center or multi-room expandable center and the time from center planning to treatment.

“We are excited to receive FDA clearance for our upright imaging technology. We are looking forward to demonstrating the clinical benefits of our Patient-Centric approach for treatment planning, immobilization, adaptive therapy and motion management. The P-Cure team is committed to enabling all oncology centers and hospitals globally to establish cost-effective proton therapy services for the best possible care and cure,” said Dr. Marash.

P-Cure is the innovative provider of image-guided solutions for better clinical effectiveness of proton therapy at a fraction of the current capital and operating costs. P-Cure continues to develop advanced patient-centric solutions with a focus on adaptive therapy and real time motion management. P-Cure’s first product was cleared by the FDA in 2010. (http://www.p-cure.com). P-Cure works both with the existing and new cancer centers to establish advanced proton therapy capabilities.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It is clear that the release comes from P-Cure, the company that is producing the proton therapy being touted in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Ali Andrew Li was born on Jan. 7, he was gently placed on his mother's chest, where doctors cleaned and examined him and covered him with a warm blanket.

"I just loved it," his mother, Salma Shabaik, a family physician who lives in Los Angeles, says. "It was really nice to have the baby right there beneath my eyes where I could feel him, touch him, kiss him."

That was different than the birth of her son Elias two years ago; he was whisked away to a bassinet to be examined. And unlike Elias, who cried a lot after delivery, Shabaik says Ali stopped crying "within seconds" after being placed on her chest.

Kangaroo mother care has been widely used worldwide to care for premature babies, and it's gaining popularity in caring for healthy full term babies like Ali as well. It is as it sounds: Like a kangaroo's pouch, mothers hold their naked newborns on their bare chest for the first few hours of life.

At Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center where Ali was born, the technique is routinely practiced for healthy mothers and newborns. The baby gets to know their mother immediately, says Dr. Larry Gray, behavioral and developmental pediatrician at Comer Children's Hospital, University of Chicago Medicine. "The baby gets landed in a trusting environment," he says, reassuring them that life outside the womb can also be "soft, comfortable and warm."

The benefits are many, according to Dr. Lydia Kyung-Min Lee, an ob-gyn at UCLA. Not only is the baby happier, she says, but his or her vitals are more stable. Body temperature, heart and breathing rate normalize more quickly. The close contact also allows the baby to be exposed to the same bacteria as the mother, which can protect against allergies and infection in the future. Infants who receive kangaroo care breast feed more easily, Lee says, and their mothers tend to breast feed for longer periods of time, which is "all good."

Babies also seem to suffer less pain. Almost 20 years ago, Gray studied how babies respond to a heel prick to draw blood, a procedure that screens newborns for genetic disorders. He found that when healthy newborns had kangaroo care, there was less facial grimacing and crying suggesting pain, compared to babies who had been swaddled and had the procedure in their bassinets, "sort of alone."

One of the first places to show how this technique can help preemies was Colombia in the 1990s. There, hospitals with no access to incubators and other equipment often sent home preemies with no expectation that they would live. But doctors were surprised to see that babies whose mothers carried them close, skin to skin, not only survived but thrived.

This was a "serendipitous magical finding," says Gray, suggesting that skin-to-skin contact acted something like a "natural incubator."

Gray also points to the work of Myron Hofer, a psychiatrist with Columbia University Medical Center who studies attachment between mother and infants. Hofer coined the term "hidden regulators" that pass between mother and baby. It's not just that mother and baby are together, Gray says, but also that the mother is in some way "programming the baby, the breathing, temperature and heart rate."

That "magic" can also happen between baby and father, too, says Gray, if there's skin-to-skin contact. And if mothers or babies are very sick and have to be isolated, Gray suggests mothers take any opportunity to hold their infant skin to skin. Even a little bit of kangaroo contact, he says, can be beneficial.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story appears to have at least one independent medical source, and there are no apparent conflicts of interest.
That said, the story would have benefited from an expert discussing research on kangaroo care. As we noted in our review of NBC News’s story on the follow-up study, there are some nuances worth pointing out to parents.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Jan. 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Americans suffering from muscle pain are used to taking a pill or rubbing in a cream to help soothe their aches.

But a new form of pain relief seems to be catching on: analgesics delivered through a medicated patch placed directly where it hurts.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the country's first over-the-counter, pain-relieving transdermal patches in 2008. But the patches, marketed under the brand name Salonpas, are nothing new. They've been sold in various countries in Asia since the 1930s, according to their manufacturer, the Japanese firm Hisamitsu Pharmaceutical.

"Salonpas is the Western world catching up with Asia," said Dr. Rick Rosenquist, a professor of anesthesia and director of pain medicine at the University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine and chairman of the American Society of Anesthesiologists' committee on pain medicine.

"If you are an Asian kid, you've had these placed on you since time immemorial," he said. "It's just now starting to hit more mainstream in the United States. They're gaining more acceptance."

Before the FDA action, pain-relieving patches were available in the United States only by prescription, said Dr. John Dombrowski, director of the Washington Pain Center in Washington, D.C. Their active ingredients include such medications as lidocaine, capsaicin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDs. The active ingredients in Salonpas are methyl salicylate and menthol, common components of pain-relieving gels and creams, such as Bengay.

Pain patches have a number of benefits, Rosenquist and Dombrowski said, not the least of which is convenience. With a patch, you "put [it] on and forget about it, rather than having to remember to take pills," Dombrowski said.

The patches also deliver their medicine directly to the site of a person's pain. This may eliminate some of the side effects that come with taking pills. For instance, some analgesics are likely to cause an upset stomach unless they're taken with food. "Obviously, patches get around that," he said. "It's a very clever way of getting the medications right where they need to be."

And, because patches release their medication slowly into the body through the skin, people also should get more consistent pain relief than they do with pills.

On the other hand, people have to be sure to carefully follow instructions for using the patches, to avoid overdose.

The main downside to pain patches, however, apparently comes from their effect on the skin. Some people may find themselves allergic to either the active ingredient in a patch or the adhesive used to keep the patch on the body.

"You need to pay attention when you put them on, to see if you have any kind of skin reaction to the compounds that are contained in the patch," Rosenquist said.

Both doctors said that they expect more over-the-counter pain patches to hit the market if the popularity of Salonpas continues to grow. Future over-the-counter options, they predicted, could include reduced-dosage versions of the NSAID-delivering patches now available through prescription.

"Success begets success," Dombrowski said. "If this does very well, other drug companies will say, 'I want a piece of this action.'"

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more about pain.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes some independent sources.  We just wish the story had made better use of these sources. Why not ask them to help quantify the benefits and harms?  Why not have them discuss some of the alternatives to sticking a patch on the affected area?  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - In a new study of middle-aged New Jersey men, taking cholesterol-lowering drugs was linked to a lower chance of dying from prostate cancer.

The findings don’t prove that the drugs, called statins, ward off aggressive cancer. But they jibe with previous studies suggesting that getting cholesterol levels under control might help reduce the risk of life-threatening disease, researchers said.

“People may be on these medications for their heart, but it may actually be doing them some good for their prostate,” said study author Dr. Stephen Marcella, from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in New Brunswick.

“If a person’s on the fence about taking a statin medication for their heart, this is another potential benefit they may have by taking one of these,” he told Reuters Health.

Marcella and his colleagues collected the medical records of 380 men who had died of prostate cancer and another 380 of the same age and race without prostate cancer or with non-lethal cancer.

Most of the men were white and in their mid- to late-60s, on average. Close to one in four of the men in both groups combined had ever taken a statin.

The researchers found that men who died of prostate cancer were half as likely to have taken a statin at any time, and for any duration, than men in the “control” group.

When they accounted for whether or not men were overweight and their other health problems and medications, it turned out that those with fatal cancers were 63 percent less likely to have ever taken a statin, according to findings published in Cancer.

But, Marcella added, “I would not tell a person if they don’t have a risk of heart disease, (if) they don’t have hypertension...to take a statin just to prevent lethal prostate cancer.”

The evidence that’s effective, he said, just isn’t there yet.

And even if statins do turn out to help prevent fatal prostate cancer, researchers said, previous studies have suggested they don’t lower a man’s risk of getting less aggressive forms of the disease.

According to the American Cancer Society, about one in every six men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer at some point, and one in every 36 men will die of the disease.

Marcella’s team didn’t have the data to figure out if taking a statin for longer, or starting one earlier, was more beneficial than more limited use of the drugs.

The researchers also couldn’t tell whether men started using statins before or after they were diagnosed with aggressive cancer.

But they did find that while high-potency, often newer statins were linked to a lower risk of fatal prostate cancer, lower-potency drugs were not. That suggests it’s something about the drugs themselves that lower men’s chances of dying from prostate cancer, Marcella said.

Statins may protect against fatal prostate cancer through their known cholesterol-lowering effects, said Dr. Stephen Freedland, who studies prostate cancer at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, but wasn’t involved in the new study.

He said that cholesterol is a “key nutrient” for cancer cells, so lower cholesterol levels in the body could prevent more aggressive forms of cancer from developing.

But it’s also possible that statins don’t prevent certain cancers at all, Freedland said, and it’s something else about men who take statins — for example, if they also change their diet and start exercising — that explains their lower risk of fatal cancer.

“It gets very, very tricky to sort out,” Freedland told Reuters Health.

To prove that statins protect against aggressive cancer would require a large study in which cancer-free men, or those with early-stage disease, are randomly assigned to take statins or not and then tracked for years to see how many of them die from cancer.

That type of study, especially involving healthy, disease-free men, would be very expensive and time consuming, said Dr. Nelly Tan, from the University of California, Los Angeles, who has studied statins and prostate cancer risk.

About one-quarter of adults age 45 and older in the U.S. take statins to lower cholesterol and protect against heart attacks. The drugs run anywhere from $11 to more than $200 per month, and sometimes cause side effects including muscle pain, nausea and gas and liver dysfunction.

Researchers agreed that until there’s clearer evidence for benefit, men with healthy hearts shouldn’t seek out statin prescriptions for the purpose of lowering their prostate cancer risks.

But Freedland said that other strategies for lowering cholesterol — such as eating better and exercising regularly — are ways almost everyone can lower their disease risks in the meantime.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Important perspective added by independent expert from Duke who was not involved in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATLANTA--Administering chemotherapy to African-American breast cancer patients prior to surgery could improve their prognosis and survival rates from the disease, according to a new study.

A research team led by Georgia State University found African-American breast cancer patients who receive chemotherapy prior to surgery exhibit trends of reduced regional (in lymph nodes) recurrence and distant (in remote organs, such as the liver, lungs and brain) recurrence of tumors, which may help diminish the inequality in breast cancer-related clinical outcomes between African-American and European-American patients.

There is a significant disparity in breast cancer mortality between African-American and European-American breast cancer patients. Despite a similar number of reported cases of breast cancer among African-American and European-American women, African-Americans experience a more aggressive clinical course and a 40 percent higher death rate than European-Americans among premenopausal and menopausal breast cancer patients.

Recurrent breast cancer has hindered the successful management of this disease for decades and is one of the primary factors for the racial disparity in prognosis and outcomes. Differences in recurrence rates and patterns between the races following various forms of treatment have not been thoroughly investigated.

This is the first clinical study to suggest that neoadjuvant chemotherapy (treatment prior to surgery) may improve breast cancer recurrence rates and patterns in African-Americans. The results are published in the journal PLOS ONE.

Researchers at Georgia State analyzed clinical data from a large cohort of breast cancer patients treated at Northside Hospital in Atlanta from 2005 to 2015. The patients' self-reported races were primarily African-American and European-American. The researchers studied rates and patterns of tumor recurrence after hormone, radiation and chemotherapy among African-American and European-American breast cancer patients.

"We found that, in general, African-American breast cancer patients exhibit increased likelihood for tumor recurrence, particularly to regional and distant sites, after receiving any combination of adjuvant therapy (treatment following surgery) compared to European-American breast cancer patients. This higher incidence of tumor recurrence can contribute to a poorer prognosis," said Nikita Wright, first author of the study and a senior Ph.D. student in Dr. Ritu Aneja's laboratory in Georgia State's Biology Department.

When breast cancer recurs, it is more challenging to treat regional and distant tumors than local tumors (in the breast), Wright explained.

"Interestingly, we found that neoadjuvant chemotherapy actually reversed these recurrence trends," Wright said. "We found that African-American breast cancer patients responded better to neoadjuvant chemotherapy than European-American patients. Among patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy, African-Americans exhibited trends of lower regional and distant tumor recurrence than European-Americans, but higher local recurrence, which is easier to manage clinically and is associated with a relatively better prognosis."

The researchers also found that among early stage patients (noninvasive or minimally invasive breast cancer), African-Americans displayed higher tumor recurrence than European-American patients.

Co-authors of the study include Jun Xia, Sergey Klimov, Pranay Neema, Dr. Dora Il'yasova, Dr. Padmashree C. G. Rida, Dr. Remus Osan and Dr. Aneja of Georgia State; Dr. Guilherme Cantuaria and Dr. Mildred Jones of the Northside Hospital Cancer Institute; Dr. Uma Krishnamurti, Dr. Xiaoxian (Bill) Li and Dr. Michelle D. Reid of Emory University; and Dr. Meenakshi Gupta of West Georgia Hospitals.

The study was funded by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states the funder: “The study was funded by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health.”
As far as conflicts of interest, one of the authors, Padmashree C. G. Rida, disclosed receiving a salary from Novazoi Theranostics, which is described in one business directory as a “Diagnostic Substances business / industry within the Chemicals and Allied Products sector.” It doesn’t appear that the tie represents a potential conflict relative to this study, but we think it’s always prudent to disclose such commercial affiliations in news releases.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By Amy Norton NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People with multiple sclerosis have long said that smoking marijuana helps ease their painful muscle cramping. And a new clinical trial suggests they are not just blowing smoke.

The study, published Monday, found that for 30 MS patients with muscle “spasticity,” a few days of marijuana smoking brought some relief.

But the big caveat, researchers say, is that it’s not clear that the downsides of pot smoking are worth it.

Some people with MS are already using medical marijuana to treat certain symptoms, including spasticity — when the muscles in the legs or arms contract painfully, in something akin to a “charley horse.”

There is some science behind the idea: The body naturally produces cannabinoids, the group of chemicals found in marijuana. And studies have suggested the cannabinoid receptors on our cells help regulate muscle spasticity.

But the evidence that pot smoking actually helps with spasticity has been anecdotal.

“We’ve heard from patients that marijuana helps their spasticity, but I think a lot us thought, ‘Well, it’s probably just making you feel good,’” said Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom, the lead researcher on the new study.

“I think this study shows that yes, (marijuana) may help with spasticity, but at a cost,” said Corey-Bloom, of the University of California, San Diego.

The cost, her team found, is that smoking caused fatigue and dizziness in some users, and generally slowed down people’s mental skills soon after they used marijuana.

But it’s not clear if that would have any long-term consequences, Corey-Bloom said.

About 400,000 people in the United States have MS, a chronic disease in which the protective coating around nerve fibers starts breaking down.

The new study, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, included 30 MS patients with muscle spasticity that had failed to get better with standard medication.

Corey-Bloom’s team had each patient smoke marijuana or “placebo” joints — which looked, smelled and tasted like the real thing, but lacked the active ingredient in marijuana, known as THC.

Each patient smoked marijuana once a day for three days and used the placebo cigarette once a day on three separate days. Before and after each treatment, an independent rater assessed the patients’ muscle spasticity.

Overall, the study found, measures of spasticity dropped an average of three points —about 30 percent — on a 24-point scale when patients smoked marijuana, but didn’t change after they smoked the placebo.

The issue of treating spasticity is “certainly an important one,” said Nicholas LaRocca, vice president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society.

“Spasticity is a big problem for many people with MS, and the current medications don’t necessarily work for everyone,” said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study.

“But smoking marijuana does not appear to be a long-term solution, because of the cognitive effects,” he told Reuters Health.

People with MS are already at some risk of “cognitive changes,” LaRocca pointed out, so the potential for lasting effects from long-term marijuana smoking is a concern.

However, LaRocca said, researchers are developing cannabinoid-based medications for MS. That includes a cannabinoid mouth spray called Sativex that has been approved in the UK, Canada, Spain and New Zealand to treat MS-related spasticity.

Research into cannabinoids and spasticity should continue, LaRocca said, because medications may be able to harness the benefits of specific cannabis compounds, without the side effects linked to smoking pot.

Both LaRocca and Corey-Bloom said there were limitations to the current study.

“Blinding” people as to whether they are on marijuana or a placebo is tough since the drug creates a “high” feeling.

In this study, 17 of 30 patients were able to correctly guess whether they were using marijuana or a placebo at each of their six visits with the researchers. And the rest often guessed correctly.

“It’s pretty clear that the patients were not really blinded,” LaRocca said. “What effects that might have had on the results is unclear.”

Corey-Bloom said that should not have influenced the spasticity findings, since an independent researcher (who didn’t know whether patients were smoking marijuana or the placebo) rated spasticity using a standard scale.

But another limitation, she pointed out, is that the study looked at the effects, and side effects, of marijuana over only a few days. “We can’t say anything about long-term effects,” Corey-Bloom told Reuters Health.

For now, LaRocca recommended that people with spasticity see a doctor experienced in treating MS. And if you’re on an anti-spasticity medication and it’s not working well enough, or the side effects are too much, tell your doctor, he said.

For some people, a change in the medication dose might help.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: One independent perspective was used in the story, and it contributed a great deal to the context and balance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The treatment is also gaining attention from mainstream researchers, including some former skeptics. The National Institute of Mental Health recently sponsored its first study of neurofeedback for A.D.H.D.: a randomized, controlled trial of 36 subjects.

The results are to be announced Oct. 26 at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. In an interview in the summer, the study’s director, Dr. L. Eugene Arnold, an emeritus professor of psychiatry at Ohio State, noted that there had been “quite a bit of improvement” in many of the children’s behavior, as reported by parents and teachers.

Dr. Arnold said that if the results bore out that neurofeedback was making the difference, he would seek financing for a broader study, with as many as 100 subjects.

John Kounios, a professor of psychology at Drexel University, published a small study in 2007 suggesting that the treatment speeded cognitive processing in elderly people. “There’s no question that neurofeedback works, that people can change brain activity,” he said. “The big questions we still haven’t answered are precisely how it works and how it can be harnessed to treat disorders.”

Russell A. Barkley, a professor of psychiatry at the Medical University of South Carolina and a leading authority on attention problems, has long dismissed claims that neurofeedback can help. But Dr. Barkley says he was persuaded to take another look after Dutch scientists published an analysis of recent international studies finding significant reductions in impulsiveness and inattention.

Still, Dr. Barkley cautioned that he had yet to see credible evidence confirming claims that such benefits can be long lasting, much less permanent.

And another mainstream expert is much more disapproving. William E. Pelham Jr., director of the Center for Children and Families at Florida International University, called neurofeedback “crackpot charlatanism.” He warned that exaggerated claims for it might lead parents to favor it over proven options like behavioral therapy and medication.

Neurofeedback was developed in the 1960s and ’70s, with American researchers leading the way. In 1968, M. Barry Sterman, a neuroscientist at the University of California, Los Angeles, reported that the training helped cats resist epileptic seizures. Dr. Sterman and others later claimed to have achieved similar benefits with humans.

The findings prompted a boomlet of interest in which clinicians of varying degrees of respectability jumped into the field, making many unsupported claims about seeming miracle cures and tainting the treatment’s reputation among academic experts. Meanwhile, researchers in Germany and the Netherlands continued to explore neurofeedback’s potential benefits.

A major attraction of the technique is the hope that it can help patients avoid drugs, which often have side effects. Instead, patients practice routines that seem more like exercising a muscle.

Brain cells communicate with one another, in part, through a constant storm of electrical impulses. Their patterns show up on an electroencephalogram, or EEG, as brain waves with different frequencies.

Neurofeedback practitioners say people have problems when their brain wave frequencies aren’t suited for the task at hand, or when parts of the brain aren’t communicating adequately with other parts. These issues, they say, can be represented on a “brain map,” the initial EEG readings that serve as a guide for treatment. Subsequently, a clinician will help a patient learn to slow down or speed up those brain waves, through a process known as operant conditioning. The brain begins by generating fairly random patterns, while the computer software responds with encouragement whenever the activity meets the target.

Dr. Norman Doidge, a psychiatrist at the Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research at Columbia and the author of “The Brain That Changes Itself” (Viking, 2007), said he considered neurofeedback “a powerful stabilizer of the brain.” Practitioners make even more enthusiastic claims. Robert Coben, a neuropsychologist in Massapequa Park, N.Y., said he had treated more than 1,000 autistic children over the past seven years and had conducted a clinical study, finding striking reductions in symptoms, as reported by parents.

Maureen and Terrence Magagnos of Lynbrook, N.Y., took their 7-year-old son, Peter, to Dr. Coben after he was given a diagnosis of pervasive developmental disorder in first grade. “He had classic symptoms of autism,” said Mr. Magagnos. “His speech was terrible, he made very little eye contact and he screamed for attention — literally screamed.”

Their exceptionally generous insurance covered neurofeedback, so they decided to give it a try, with sessions twice a week for the next five years.

At the start of the treatment, Dr. Coben said, he discovered that Peter had been suffering tiny, asymptomatic seizures. He says neurofeedback helped stabilize the child’s brain activity, eliminating the seizures. And within three months, said Mr. Magagnos, a retired police officer, Peter’s teachers were calling to report remarkable improvements.

“Today I’d say he has ‘autism light,’ ” he added. “He still has some symptoms, but he is much more manageable.”

Whether such results can be achieved with other children is a matter of debate. Still, as practitioners lobby for broader acceptance, including insurance recognition, a sure sign of neurofeedback’s increasing popularity is the number of companies selling supposedly mind-altering systems to use at home.

With names like SmartBrain Technologies and the Learning Curve Inc., they offer equipment purported, respectively, to “pump the neurons” and “make lasting changes in attention, memory, mood, control, pain, sleep and more.”

The Food and Drug Administration regulates all biofeedback equipment as medical devices. The only approved use, however, is for “relaxation.”

Peter Freer, a former grade-school teacher who is chief executive of a North Carolina firm called Unique Logic and Technology, says that since he began his business in 1994, he has sold several thousand of his “Play Attention” systems, advertised to improve a child’s focus, behavior, academic performance and social behavior.

The equipment, which costs $1,800, is advertised as “a sophisticated advancement of neurofeedback.” Mr. Freer says his clients include more than 600 school districts. (He adds that his system, as distinct from “clinical” neurofeedback, aims not to change brain waves but rather to put the user in an “attentive state” that makes it easier to learn skills.) Neurofeedback in general is a largely unregulated, with practitioners often devising their own protocols about where on the scalp to place electrodes. Results vary widely, and researchers caution that it is extremely important to choose one’s practitioner with care.

When it comes to to the actual devices, Dr. Kerson, at the International Society for Neurofeedback and Research, cautioned that they should never be used without experienced supervision.

“Oftentimes what people do is find a way to get one of these machines on eBay and use it at home,” she said, adding that unskilled use could interfere with medications or prompt an anxiety attack or a seizure.

“Neurofeedback is a powerful therapy,” she said, “and should be treated that way.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION:  The story included quotes from advocates as well as skeptics about benefit to be obtained through neurofeedback treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
No children in the study who were treated with the computer-assisted system experienced very low blood sugar overnight. But there were nine instances of very low blood sugar among children who had the standard treatment, according to the study, conducted by researchers in Britain at the University of Cambridge.

“This is an important step in diabetes control because it shows that, with this system, people can sleep safely with minimized risk of hypoglycemia,” said Dr. Eric Renard, a professor of diabetology at Montpellier University Hospital in Montpellier, France.

Dr. Renard, whose commentary accompanied the study in The Lancet, has been a consultant and speaker for several makers of diabetic products, he said.

Industry analysts have estimated that 10 to 15 percent of Americans with Type 1 diabetes — perhaps 400,000 of them — use either a continuous glucose monitor or an insulin pump, or in some cases both.

Over the last decade, the makers of medical devices have developed techniques that have widened diabetes management options beyond pricking the finger several times a day to test blood glucose levels. Companies like DexCom in San Diego now make small continuous glucose monitors whose sensors can be embedded in the skin. And Animas, a division of Johnson & Johnson, makes programmable pumps the size of a cellphone that administer insulin doses through a tiny implantable catheter.

These new-generation devices represent a significant advance over older products, said Aaron J. Kowalski, the assistant senior vice president of glucose control research at the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation in Manhattan, one of the largest nonprofit patient advocacy and research groups for diabetes.

Even so, Dr. Kowalski said, using separate devices that are not designed to work in concert poses limits to treatment, particularly overnight. If a diabetic person’s blood sugar drops during the night and the glucose monitor alarm goes off, for example, that person may not wake up and the preprogrammed pump, operating separately, could continue to deliver insulin, making the problem worse, Dr. Kowalski said. (His group was one of the sponsors of the Lancet study.)

Researchers in Europe and the United States have been racing to develop a fully automated system for Type 1 diabetes that would wirelessly connect an external glucose monitor with an insulin delivery device. Based on algorithms like the ones used in the Lancet study, the devices would continually monitor glucose levels, calibrate insulin dosages and then dispense insulin in real time — automating a delivery task performed by a nurse in the study.

Researchers call such a hypothetical integrated system an “artificial pancreas” because it would mimic the way a healthy pancreas works, sensing glucose and dispensing insulin in the right dose at the right time. The goal is a portable system that could be worn on a belt and would be no larger than a cellphone.

Last month, as part of an effort called the Artificial Pancreas Project, the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation announced an $8 million partnership with Animas to develop a first-generation combined system. Meanwhile the European Union has just started its own project, called Artificial Pancreas at Home, which involves a grant of 10.5 million euros to research teams across Europe to create a prototype combined device over the next four years, Dr. Renard said.

The new study in The Lancet, proponents say, represents a proof-of-concept milestone in the quest to develop such a system.

“The significance is in showing that the existing devices, which are available commercially, can be combined to create the first version of an artificial pancreas,” said Dr. Roman Hovorka, the lead author of the study.

Dr. Hovorka, a principal research associate in pediatrics at Cambridge, said he had been a consultant or speaker for several makers of diabetes products.

Although the Lancet study was small — only 17 children completed the entire protocol — it is significant because it demonstrated that a computer algorithm could safely interpret glucose data and calculate appropriate insulin doses for a pump, he said.

The study not only indicated that the algorithm system prevented very low glucose overnight, Dr. Hovorka said, but it also indicated that the experimental system was better able to keep blood glucose in an acceptable range.

After midnight, about 80 percent of the measured glucose levels fell in a target range in children treated with the computer-adjusted system — compared to only 35 percent in the target range for those treated with a standard preprogrammed pump system, according to the study.

Still, while the overall results were statistically significant, the study was not large enough to attain statistical significance in each of its separate arms. Those branches of the study examined how children fared after eating meals or after exercising — factors which can affect glucose levels.

And the experimental combined system itself was not fully automated. To ensure that the experimental algorithm did not recommend unsafe doses, a nurse read the computer-generated dosing suggestions and then adjusted the patients’ insulin pumps.

Indeed, even if device makers are able to develop fully automated prototypes of combination systems, they are likely to face regulatory hurdles, analysts said, and would have to factor in product liability concerns.

“This is something that companies have been striving to do for years, and as computer chip technology evolves, it gets closer,” said Rick Wise, an analyst at Leerink Swann, a health care investment bank. “But you have to appreciate how exquisitely reliable an artificial pancreas would have to be to read glucose correctly and dispense insulin correctly.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story includes quotes from interviews with one of the study investigators and another researcher, and identifies both as having ties to diabetes products manufacturers. It also quotes an analyst at an investment firm. It would have been better had they included one more source who didn’t have commercial ties to specific products.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This Test Can Determine Whether You've Outgrown A Food Allergy

An estimated 4 percent of Americans have food allergies, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has concluded that allergies are a growing public health concern. But diagnosing allergies can be tricky, and kids can outgrow them, too.

Now, a new study sheds light on the effectiveness of a test called a food challenge to determine whether a person can tolerate a food they once reacted to.

Jula Cieciuch, a fifth-grader who lives in Telluride, Colo., recently took a food challenge to find out if she was still allergic to eggs.

When she passed, she was ecstatic. After years of avoiding all foods with eggs, she was a bit shocked. "For so long, it was: You can't eat this. You can't eat this," Jula says. " I was very emotional!"

She's also outgrown allergies to walnuts and almonds. "It's a huge relief ... it has really opened up her diet — a lot," her mom, Kendall Cieciuch, told us. Once you can eat eggs, you can eat cakes and breads and frittatas, and lots of other baked goods.

Jula is still allergic to some foods, including milk and cashews, so she still needs to be careful. But Kendall says every time she's crossed a food off her allergy list, "it makes life a little easier."

Jula Cieciuch's story is not uncommon. About 70 to 80 percent of children with an egg allergy will outgrow it. And about 20 percent of kids outgrow peanut allergies.

In Jula's case, her allergists at National Jewish Health in Denver, Colo., repeated the standard allergy blood tests last summer. That's when they realized she may have outgrown her egg allergy. 

 

The blood test measures the levels of a certain type of antibody, immunoglobulin E (IgE). The higher the level, the more likely a person is to have an allergic reaction. Jula's blood revealed a drop in antibody count.

 

But the only way to confirm that it was safe for Jula to eat egg was to take the food challenge test. Basically, the test entails eating small quantities of the foods you've been allergic to. The testing is done under medical supervision.

"What they do is give you a really small dose, like a crumb, basically," explains Jula. Then after 20 minutes or so, if you don't have any reaction, "you can take a dose that's a little bigger." If you can eat an entire egg, you pass.

A new study published in the Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology illuminates just how many people come to find out they can eat foods they've long avoided. 

 

 Researchers studied the results of about 6,300 food challenges. The tests were done in adults and children whom doctors suspected had become tolerant to foods they'd once reacted to.

 

"We found that 14 percent of the patients challenged had mild or moderate allergic reactions," explains study author Carla Davis, an allergist and director of the Food Allergy Program at Texas Children's Hospital. "If the symptoms were treated with just Benadryl or another antihistamine, they were considered mild or moderate. She says 2 percent of the reactions were more serious, requiring treatment with epinephrine.

But the vast majority of patients, 86 percent, did not have an allergic reaction. In other words, they tolerated the food just fine. She says the results aren't that surprising, since allergists had classified these patients as low-risk for reacting to the foods they were being tested for.

 

"I think [the results] are very encouraging," Bruce Lanser, a pediatric allergist who directs the Pediatric Food Allergy Program at National Jewish Health in Denver, told us. He was not involved in the study, but he says the findings mirror what he sees in his clinical practice. "We know a certain percentage will outgrow [their] allergies," Lanser says. "And the last thing I want to miss is the opportunity to get a food into a kid's diet."

He says many of the patients in the study may have outgrown their allergy, just like Jula did. "But it's also possible [some of them] never truly had a food allergy." As we've reported, people sometimes misinterpret the symptoms of a condition such as lactose intolerance for a food allergy.

Lanser says it can be tricky to diagnose food allergies. That's because the two main tests doctors use — the blood test and the skin prick test — only reveal part of the story. "Both tests only measure sensitization," he explains. "All they can tell us is how likely you are to react when you eat the food."

 

And that's where the oral food challenge comes in. It's become the gold standard test to rule out an allergy.

 

So, if you or your child tested positive for a food allergy years ago, you may want to consider seeing an allergist again.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story cites one expert not involved in the research, and we could find no potential conflicts of interest that should have been disclosed. The independent source provided a quote that we wished had been explored more in-depth: “But it’s also possible [some of them] never truly had a food allergy.” This is an important point–how much did the study help actually overturn incorrect diagnoses?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new insomnia drug helped people get a bit more shut-eye in a lab study, researchers report.

The drug, known as suvorexant, is being developed by Merck Research Laboratories, which funded and conducted the study. The medication is not available yet, but the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reviewing it for possible approval, the researchers said.

In the United States, about 10 percent of people say they have chronic insomnia, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. There are sleep aids on the market, but they do not work for everyone and they can have side effects that include sleepwalking, daytime drowsiness and confusion.

Suvorexant works differently from those drugs, zeroing in on specific brain chemicals involved in the ability to sleep, explained study author Dr. William Herring, executive director of clinical research at Merck.

The study, published online Nov. 28 and in the Dec. 4 print issue of the journal Neurology, included 254 healthy adults with primary insomnia, which means it wasn't caused by an underlying physical or mental health problem.

All of the patients spent four weeks on one of four doses of suvorexant and another four weeks on placebo pills. They had their sleep monitored in a sleep lab on their first night with each treatment, and then came back again after four weeks.

Overall, Herring's team found, people slept better with the drug, although the improvement was not dramatic.

At the outset, when patients spent eight hours in bed, they were typically asleep for 66 percent of that time. One day on suvorexant boosted that by anywhere from 5 percent to 13 percent, relative to the placebo. Between 21 and 37 fewer minutes were spent awake during those sleep periods.

There was still a benefit four weeks later. One expert pointed out, however, that the benefit was small.

"The amount of additional sleep was not tremendous," said Dr. Carl Bazil, director of the division of epilepsy and sleep at New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center.

The effect was essentially comparable to what has been seen with other sleep medications, said Bazil, who was not involved in the research.

But, he said, suvorexant is seen as a potentially important development in the world of sleep medicine, because the drug blocks specific brain chemicals called orexins, which help keep people awake. Standard sleep medications work more widely throughout the brain, Bazil explained, which is why they can have a host of side effects.

"The way [suvorexant] works makes a lot of sense," Bazil said. "The hope is that it will help some people who haven't responded to [other drugs], and have fewer side effects."

It's promising news, Bazil added, that there were no serious side effects in this study.

The most common side effects were sleepiness (reported by about 10 percent of patients on the two higher doses of suvorexant), headache (reported by about 5 percent), dizziness and abnormal dreams (5 percent).

There are still many questions, including whether the drug would benefit people with insomnia due to a health condition, which doctors call secondary insomnia.

The study also excluded adults aged 65 or older -- an age group commonly affected by insomnia. But, Herring said, seniors were part of a larger, 12-month trial, and Merck has submitted those results to the FDA.

Another sleep specialist said the findings show "some potential benefit" from suvorexant, but he cautioned insomnia sufferers against relying completely on any drug.

"Medication can be important," said Dr. William Kohler, who directs the Florida Sleep Institute in Spring Hill. "But in the long run, the best methods for treating insomnia are behavioral techniques."

Kohler said cognitive behavioral therapy -- where people learn to change the thoughts and habits that affect their sleep quality -- is a proven way to manage insomnia. For most people, he said, medication should be a temporary treatment; behavior change is the long-term fix.

Bazil agreed: "I look at most people with insomnia as someone who developed bad sleep habits."

A drug, ideally used for a short time, may help encourage sleep and get people on the right track, Bazil said. "But those bad sleep habits -- you've got to address them too," he added.

"The problem," Kohler noted, "is that we don't want to make behavior changes. We want to pop a pill."

Learn more about insomnia and good sleep habits from the National Sleep Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two independent sources added needed balance up against the comments of Merck’s director of clinical research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Larry Holzman — avid mountain-biker, skier and guitarist in a band — plays hard. And he didn't want to give it all up due to a "spot of pain" in his elbow. "This wasn't a traumatic injury," explains Holzman. It came on gradually and escalated from annoying to excruciating over the course of a couple months.

His physical therapist quickly diagnosed it as tennis elbow. Turns out, lots of people who develop tennis elbow haven't played the game in years. And some have never even picked up a racket.

"If you're having pain on the elbow on the outside of your elbow when you grip a coffee mug or pick something up with your hands — that is almost always tennis elbow," says Barton Bishop, a physical therapist at Sport & Spine Rehab in Rockville, Md.

Pain from repetitive overuse of the tendons and muscle that run from the wrist to the elbow can come from all sorts of activities. It usually happens when people grip things too hard or too long.

In addition to tennis players, Bishop sees the injury in gardeners with their shovels and trowels; painters with brushes; and golfers with clubs. In Larry's case, it was a combination of all his hobbies: from squeezing the handlebars on his bike, to lifting weights and playing in a band.

"Gripping guitars and base drums ... can really affect people's elbows," says Bishop.

When Holzman came to Sport & Spine for help, Bishop put him through a series of traditional treatments including ultrasound, strengthening and stretching exercises, cross-friction massage, heat and ice.

He also added a series of eccentric wrist exercises using a rubber bar called the Thera-Band FlexBar — ideal for the injured muscle in tennis elbow. The exercises enable the muscle to lengthen and contract simultaneously. And the FlexBar makes it simple to do this kind of stretch.

"He's actually getting his muscle to work," says Bishop. "It's a perfect exercise."

Bishop says the benefit of the FlexBar, which costs between $16 and $33, over traditional hand weights is that it helps people strengthen without recreating the symptoms. He says weights can overwork the muscle and sometimes leads to more pain.

A study by researchers at the Nicholas Institute of Sports Medicine and Athletic Trauma, Lenox Hill Hospital in New York demonstrated this benefit. They found that adding the eccentric wrist extension exercises using the FlexBar was effective at improving strength and decreasing pain in patients with tennis elbow. (Performance Health Brands, maker of Thera-Band, provided the FlexBars for the study but did not fund it.)

Not all physical therapists are sold on the FlexBar. "There's a variety of methods you can use to achieve the strengthening technique," says Jason Grandeo, a physical therapist at Body Dynamics, Inc. in Arlington, Va.

But he understands the appeal: The FlexBar is easy to use and you can do it at home.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story notes the involvement of the FlexBar manufacturer in the study that is referenced. It also quotes an independent physical therapist who suggests there are other ways to achieve the effect attributed to the FlexBar.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A seaweed-based fiber supplement, taken daily before meals, helped people lose weight in a new study.

But that was only the case among people who stuck with the diet study over a few months. More than one-fifth of people dropped out when they couldn’t tolerate the supplement’s taste, texture and side effects.

Researchers have explored the potential of seaweed as an appetite suppressant, but so far products haven’t panned out.

“There have been problems in the past to develop something (that tastes) acceptable,” said Dr. Arne Astrup, one of the study’s authors from the University of Copenhagen and a member of the advisory board to S-Biotek, a Danish company that provided funding for the study.

Previous seaweed-based supplements were slimy and caused bloating, and they also had a fishy taste. The new supplement used in this study is less unpleasant — but there’s still room for improvement, said Astrup.

The supplement is based on the seaweed extract alginate, a thickening agent and a common ingredient in foods like soups and jellies. It’s also increasingly used by the weight-loss industry, marketed as an appetite suppressant.

Packaged in powder form and mixed with liquid, alginate expands in the stomach to form a thick gel, mimicking the effect of a large meal.

“This gel is really like a pudding that will last in the stomach for hours, gradually degrading and disappearing,” Astrup said.

For the study, the researchers randomly divided 96 generally healthy but obese people, aged 20 to 55, into two groups.

One group was given packets of the gel supplement, containing 15 grams of fiber, and the other got a seaweed-free placebo drink. Neither the researchers nor the participants knew who was receiving the seaweed supplement.

In terms of calories, flavor and appearance, the placebo and treatment drink were identical.

For three months, study participants drank the supplements, dissolved in two cups of water, 30 minutes before each meal. They were also told to cut back on calories. By the end of the trial, sixteen people had dropped out of the study, including 10 out of 48 from the seaweed group, according to findings published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

Among people who stuck with the trial, those on the fiber supplement lost 15 pounds, on average, compared to 11 pounds in the placebo group. But when all 96 original participants were included in the analysis, the researchers found no significant difference in weight loss between the two treatment groups.

Previous studies have shown eating a high-fiber diet can help reduce the hunger pangs that may lead to over-eating and derail a healthy diet plan.

Still, the new results should be treated with caution, according to Dr. Maria Vazquez Roque, who has worked on alginate-based gels at the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Florida, but was not involved in the study. Just looking at the effect of the supplement on people who finished the treatment can bias the findings, she said.

For Mette Kristensen, one of the study’s authors, the message seems clear: “If you actually comply with the treatment, you do have the improvement in weight loss.”

However, effects on blood pressure were less promising. Systolic blood pressure — the top number on a blood pressure reading — fell by almost six points on average in the placebo group over the 12-week study, but by just over one point in the treatment group. At times during the trials, systolic blood pressure increased in the alginate group by one to two points.

According to the researchers, the higher sodium content of the alginate drink — a little over one gram per dose, or about half a teaspoon of salt — could have offset any potential blood-pressure reducing effect of the supplement. The American Heart Association recommends that adults eat less than 1.5 g of sodium per day.

Questions remain about the safety of the fiber supplement over the long term. Five people taking the fiber gel left the study due to problems with stomach bloating, nausea and diarrhea. Two people taking a placebo supplement, which didn’t contain the seaweed fiber, experienced similar problems.

There are many different types of alginate, said Richard Mattes, who has studied the effect of alginate fiber on appetite at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana — so the trick is to find the right alginate in the right dose.

And just feeling less hungry due to a supplement won’t make you lose weight unless you eat fewer calories, said Mattes, who was not involved in the new study.

The research group is working on a new supplement that uses 80 percent less alginate, with less sodium, better taste and fewer side effects than the current formula, Astrup told Reuters Health.

Alginate as an aid to weight loss is already commercially available in pill form and costs around $45 for a seven-day supply. These supplements are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, said Vazquez Roque.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two independent sources were quoted.  Industry funding for the study was disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- DNA testing for the human papillomavirus should replace the Pap smear as the main way to screen women for cervical cancer, according to Italian researchers.

Their recommendation is based on a study that found that the human papillomavirus (HPV) test prevented more cases of cervical cancer than the conventional Pap smear. Results of the study were published online Jan. 19 in The Lancet Oncology.

The HPV test should become the screening tool of choice for women 35 and older, the researchers said. It could be done less frequently than the Pap test, which could be used only in women who have tested positive for HPV, they said.

The Pap smear, first introduced in the 1950s, looks for changes in the cervix that could lead to cervical cancer. The HPV test works a step further back in the process, looking to see if women are infected with HPV.

HPV causes cervical cancer, which remains a significant health problem, particularly in less resource-rich areas of the world.

DNA testing for HPV, though, does have drawbacks -- namely that it is less specific, meaning it is likely to pick up more false-positives, than a Pap smear. This results in many more callbacks for women to undergo further testing.

Using HPV as a primary screening tool results in a callback rate of about 25 to 30 percent, said Dr. Mark Einstein, a gynecologic oncologist and director of clinical research at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City. By contrast, Pap smears have a callback rate of about 5 to 7 percent, he said.

For their study, the Italian researchers compared HPV testing alone with HPV testing plus a Pap smear in 94,370 women aged 25 to 60 years old.

During the first phase of the study, women 35 to 60 who tested positive for HPV were given a cervical examination, called a colposcopy. Younger women got a colposcopy if their Pap smear was abnormal or if HPV results were positive several times, indicating that their body had not been able to clear the infection.

Screening for HPV DNA appeared more effective in older women, but the testing in younger women led to over-diagnosis of a particular type of cervical lesion, the study found.

Not all experts agree, though, that current practice would change based on the study's findings alone.

"I don't think this is going to change any strategies we do now, but I do think it's more evidence that HPV testing can predict who's going to develop cervical cancer," said Dr. Jay Brooks, chairman of hematology/oncology at Ochsner Health System in Baton Rouge, La. "HPV testing, in certain populations, can really predict who would benefit from treatment."

Einstein had a somewhat different take on the findings. "This shows that the strategy does work," he said. "It does make sense, it's cost-effective and effective. This is happening in single-payer health systems which have national screening. We're behind in the U.S."

The strategy makes particular sense in less-developed countries, where women could do an HPV test themselves with a "self swab" and then send the swab in for analysis, Einstein said.

In the United States, cervical cancer screening guidelines were changed in November. Women now are being told that they should get their first screening for cervical cancer -- including a Pap test -- at age 21. The previous recommendation was to start Pap tests three years after becoming sexually active or at age 21, whichever came first.

And, rather than have an annual Pap test, most women need to be screened every other year or less, depending on their age, according to the new guidelines.

Cervical cancer rates have dropped more than 50 percent in the last 30 years in the United States, according to the guidelines. That decline has been largely attributed to widespread use of the Pap test.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on cervical cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes several sources who provide valuable perspectives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- It may be possible to assess a man's fertility by checking his "anogenital distance," the gap between his scrotum and anus, a new study suggests.

Previous studies in animals have shown that anogenital distance is an important measure of genital development and may be shorter in males with abnormal development and dysfunction of the testicles, the Baylor College of Medicine researchers explained.

Furthermore, a study from the University of Rochester, published in March in Environmental Health Perspectives, found that men with shorter anogenital spans had lower sperm counts, poorer quality sperm, lower sperm concentrations and lower motility.

In the new study, the Baylor group investigated whether anogenital distance differed in fertile and infertile men. They measured the scrotum-anus distance as well as the penis length of 117 infertile and 56 fertile men visiting an andrology clinic.

The infertile men had a significantly shorter anogenital distance and penis length than the fertile men, the study found.

Dr. Michael Eisenberg, a male reproductive medicine and surgery fellow in the Baylor urology department and the study's lead author, said the study has two main implications. "First, this could represent a noninvasive way to test testicular function and reproductive potential in adult men," he said in a Baylor news release. "And second, it suggests that gestational exposures and development may impact adult testicular function."

Further research is needed to compare techniques for measuring anogenital distance and assess their accuracy, he and his colleagues said.

One expert who's done her own research in this area applauded the study.

"This is an important paper showing, once again, that anogenital distance is a strong predictor of semen quality," said Shanna H. Swan, vice chair for research in the department of preventive medicine at Mount Sinai Children's Environmental Health Center, New York City."This paper also provides new data on infertile men, who have shorter (less masculine) anogenital distance."

Swan said that she and her colleagues published similar findings last month. "Together the two studies make a strong case that this simple measure (the anogenital distance) reflects early genital development and predicts semen quality and fertility," she said.

But one urologist said the the finding is too preliminary to introduce into clinical practice, however.

"We would all like a simple, noninvasive way to predict potential problems with fertility in men, but unfortunately, this one is not ready for prime time," said Dr. Elizabeth Kavaler, a urology specialist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "We have a long way to go before we can use anogenital distance as a determinant of future fertility in men."

The study was published online May 11 in PLoS One.

The American Academy of Family Physicians has more about male infertility.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two independent experts were quoted – although one is identified as doing research in this field so her laudatory comments about the importance of this work might be understandable.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Children who eat fish at least once a week sleep better and have IQ scores that are 4 points higher, on average, than those who consume fish less frequently or not at all, according to new findings from the University of Pennsylvania published this week in Scientific Reports, a Nature journal.

Previous studies showed a relationship between omega-3s, the fatty acids in many types of fish, and improved intelligence, as well as omega-3s and better sleep. But they've never all been connected before. This work, conducted by Jianghong Liu, Jennifer Pinto-Martin and Alexandra Hanlon of the School of Nursing and Penn Integrates Knowledge Professor Adrian Raine, reveals sleep as a possible mediating pathway, the potential missing link between fish and intelligence.

"This area of research is not well-developed. It's emerging," said Liu, lead author on the paper and an associate professor of nursing and public health. "Here we look at omega-3s coming from our food instead of from supplements."

For the work, a cohort of 541 9- to 11-year-olds in China, 54 percent boys and 46 percent girls, completed a questionnaire about how often they consumed fish in the past month, with options ranging from "never" to "at least once per week." They also took the Chinese version of an IQ test called the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised, which examines verbal and non-verbal skills such as vocabulary and coding.

Their parents then answered questions about sleep quality using the standardized Children Sleep Habits Questionnaire, which included topics such as sleep duration and frequency of night waking or daytime sleepiness. Finally, the researchers controlled for demographic information, including parental education, occupation and marital status and number of children in the home.

Analyzing these data points, the Penn team found that children who reported eating fish weekly scored 4.8 points higher on the IQ exams than those who said they "seldom" or "never" consumed fish. Those whose meals sometimes included fish scored 3.3 points higher. In addition, increased fish consumption was associated with fewer disturbances of sleep, which the researchers say indicates better overall sleep quality.

"Lack of sleep is associated with antisocial behavior; poor cognition is associated with antisocial behavior," said Raine, who has appointments in the School of Arts and Sciences and Penn's Perelman School of Medicine. "We have found that omega-3 supplements reduce antisocial behavior, so it's not too surprising that fish is behind this."

Pinto-Martin, who is executive director of Penn's Center for Public Health Initiatives, as well as the Viola MacInnes/Independence Professor of Nursing and a professor of epidemiology in Penn Medicine, sees strong potential for the implications of this research.

"It adds to the growing body of evidence showing that fish consumption has really positive health benefits and should be something more heavily advertised and promoted," she said. "Children should be introduced to it early on." That could be as young as 10 months, as long as the fish has no bones and has been finely chopped, but should start by around age 2.

"Introducing the taste early makes it more palatable," Pinto-Martin said. "It really has to be a concerted effort, especially in a culture where fish is not as commonly served or smelled. Children are sensitive to smell. If they're not used to it, they may shy away from it."

Given the young age of this study group, Liu and colleagues chose not to analyze the details participants reported about the types of fish consumed, though they plan to do so for work on an older cohort in the future. The researchers also want to add to this current observational study to establish, through randomized controlled trials, that eating fish can lead to better sleep, better school performance and other real-life, practical outcomes.

For the moment, the researchers recommend incrementally incorporating additional fish into a diet; consumption even once a week moves a family into the "high" fish-eating group as defined in the study.

"Doing that could be a lot easier than nudging children about going to bed," Raine said. "If the fish improves sleep, great. If it also improves cognitive performance -- like we've seen here -- even better. It's a double hit."

Funding for this research came from the National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences grants R01-ES-018858, K02-ES-019878, K01-ES015877 and P30 ES013508, with additional support from the Intramural program of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We learn the connections between the funders of the research and the investigators and there is no sense that a conflict of interest exists here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Data from a clinical trial has shown that how people respond to treatment for Bipolar Disorder may be influenced by their weight and the overall quality of their diet, including whether they are eating a diet high in foods thought to contribute to general inflammation. These are early results, but if replicated may mean that treatment of some mental health problems could benefit from the inclusion of dietary advice. This is presented at the ECNP Conference in Barcelona.

Bipolar Disorder (which used to be called 'manic depression') is characterised by episodes of mood swings, between being very up or very down with periods in between the two extremes. The fact that there are two opposite sets of symptoms means that finding an effective treatment is difficult. While current medications are useful, they are better at targeting mania symptoms (the 'up' phase), leaving a lack of effective treatment for people experiencing depressive episodes. Now a group of Australian, German and American scientists have shown those who have a high quality diet, a less inflammatory diet, and/or a low BMI (Body Mass Index) may respond better to an add-on nutraceutical treatment provided as part of a clinical trial.

"If we can confirm these results, then it's good news for people with Bipolar Disorder, as there is a great need for better treatments for the depressive phase of Bipolar Disorder" said lead researcher Melanie Ashton of Deakin University in Australia.

A total of 133 participants were randomly assigned to take a combination of nutraceuticals (compounds derived from foods such as vitamins or minerals that treat or prevent a disease or disorder) including the anti-inflammatory amino acid n-acetylcysteine (NAC), or NAC alone, or a placebo (a dummy pill) for 16 weeks. Participants received the study medication in addition to any stable treatments they were already receiving. Researchers measured BMI at the beginning of the study, and then measured depression and how a person is able to function in their day to day life. Researchers also rated whether a participant was improving and, if so, how much, over the next 20 weeks. Participants filled in a questionnaire about what they usually eat over the year and researchers calculated a diet quality score, where good diets included a healthy diet with lots of fruit and vegetables, whereas poorer-quality diets had more saturated fat, refined carbohydrates and alcohol. These types of diets were then categorised as either anti-inflammatory or pro-inflammatory based on foods that affect inflammation.

Melanie Ashton continued, "We found that people who had a better-quality diet, a diet with anti-inflammatory properties, or a lower BMI, showed better response to add-on nutraceutical treatment than did those who reported a low-quality diet, or a diet including foods that promote inflammation, or who were overweight.

What this means, if these results can be repeated in a larger trial, is that treatment for Bipolar Disorder would need to take into account what a person eats and their weight.

There are some points we need to note about this study. This is a randomised, controlled trial, but what we found were exploratory outcomes; in other words, it wasn't the main result that we were testing. Our result is statistically significant, but because the study wasn't specifically designed to test the effect of diet quality,

inflammatory diets and BMI on drug response in general, it is necessary to see the work replicated in a larger study before any firm conclusions can be formed".

"This is interesting work, which holds out the possibility that patients with Bipolar Disorder may benefit from a balanced diet. However, it is an early study, and we need more research before we can think whether this might affect clinical practice".

Professor Vieta was not involved in this work, it is an independent comment.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Study funders are noted on the sidebar of the hosting service, EurekAlert! It would be helpful to include that information in the body of the news release as well.
Careful review of the author disclosures included in the study reveal no significant conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ROCHESTER, Minn. — A new type of blood test may help physicians identify which patients with and without evidence of coronary blockages are at risk for heart attacks and strokes. Even individuals with normal levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), known as the so-called “bad” cholesterol, but still at risk, seem to be identified, according to Mayo Clinic research being presented at the American College of Cardiology’s 66th Annual Scientific Session.

The test, released commercially by Mayo Medical Laboratories in August 2016, measures blood concentrations of plasma ceramides, a class of lipids that are highly linked to cardiovascular disease processes. The study found that individuals with the highest levels of blood ceramides were found to have a 3- to 4-times greater risk of having a cardiovascular event compared with those with the lowest ceramide score, regardless of their LDL cholesterol level or the presence of a blockage in the heart’s arteries.

“Our research suggests that evaluating ceramide levels in patients who are not at immediate risk for coronary artery disease events may help cardiologists decide who could benefit from proactive and preventive treatment, such as statins, or lifestyle changes to prevent a serious cardiac event down the road,” says Jeff Meeusen, Ph.D., a clinical chemist, co-director of Cardiovascular Laboratory Medicine at Mayo Clinic and the study’s lead author.

According to Dr. Meeusen, ceramides are different than cholesterol, which gathers and causes a clog in the arteries. Ceramides are more active, attracting inflammatory cells and promoting clotting.

In the study, 499 Mayo Clinic patients who were referred for coronary angiography to check for possible artery blockages were included and followed prospectively for approximately eighteen years. Patients were similar in age and with regard to blood pressure, smoking status and high-density lipoprotein (HDL), the “good” cholesterol; excluded were those who had diabetes or a previous heart attack, stroke or procedure to open narrowed coronary arteries. Researchers measured four different types of ceramides in the blood at baseline and combined the values into a 12-point scale. Patients were grouped into four risk categories according to their ceramide levels: low (0–2), intermediate (3–6), moderate (7–9) and high (10–12).

Over the eighteen years, researchers recorded occurrences of heart attack, stroke, revascularization and death. Overall, 5.1 percent of patients had a major cardiovascular event each year. But the risk of having an event became higher as ceramide level increased; for each 1-point increase in the ceramide risk score, the risk rose by 9 percent. The rate of events was double among people with the highest ceramide score compared with those with the lowest (8.1 vs. 4.1 percent, respectively).

In patients without coronary artery disease following angiography, the rate of cardiovascular events was only 3.1 percent, lower than the average overall. But when researchers examined cardiovascular disease in this population by ceramide scores, people with the highest levels of ceramides were four times more likely to have an event compared with those with the lowest (7.8 vs. 2.2 percent, respectively). A similar trend was seen among people with low LDL levels (<100 mg/dL), typically considered a good LDL target. In this group, the rate of heart attack, stroke and revascularization and death was 3.7 percent among those with a low ceramide score, but 16.4 percent in people with the highest ceramide levels.

“There is a need to identify patients at increased risk for cardiovascular events so that we can test strategies to prevent those events. This test seems to provide such information,” says Allan S. Jaffe, M.D., senior author of the study, cardiologist at Mayo Clinic and chair of the Division of Clinical Core Laboratory Services.

The trial was funded by Mayo Clinic. The new test is available to health care providers worldwide through Mayo Medical Laboratories, which offers laboratory testing and pathology services to more than 4,000 health care organizations in more than 70 countries. Mayo Medical Laboratories collaborated with some of the original researchers who established the role of ceramides in cardiovascular disease and Zora Biosciences Oy, a diagnostics discovery company based in Finland, to develop and refine the test. The present study is also the first to test its clinical utility in a U.S. population.

Co-authors are: Leslie Donato, Ph.D.; Sandra Bryant; Grant Spears; Peter Berger, M.D.; and Linnea Baudhuin, Ph.D., all of Mayo Clinic.

About Mayo Clinic

 Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization committed to clinical practice, education and research, providing expert, whole-person care to everyone who needs healing. For more information, visit http://www.mayoclinic.org/about-mayo-clinic or https://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that Mayo Clinic funded the trial and notes in the same paragraph that the ceramide test is available through Mayo Medical Laboratories, making the potential conflict of interest quite clear. It also notes that the study’s senior author is a Mayo Clinic cardiologist and chair of the “Division of Clinical Core Laboratory Services” and that Mayo Medical Laboratories collaborated with Finland-based Zora Biosciences to develop the test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
*****************************************Note: Video commentary from researchers and b-roll are available at http://bcove.me/tty4xtcl. A media teleconference with researchers and patients will also be held on Wednesday, Nov. 30, from 11 a.m. EST to 12:30 p.m. EST. To participate, U.S.-based media can call 855-698-2663; international media should dial 011-646-754-2524. The access code is 48330192. Phone lines open at 10:50 a.m., and all media should place speakers on mute unless posing a question. Reporters wishing to ask a question should e-mail their name and outlet to david.march@nyumc.org during the briefing, so they may be placed in a queue; the moderator will call on individual media to ask a question in the order names and outlets were received.******************************************

Newswise — When combined with psychological counseling, a single dose of a mind-altering compound contained in psychedelic mushrooms significantly lessens mental anguish in distressed cancer patients for months at a time, according to results of a clinical trial led by researchers at NYU Langone Medical Center.

Published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology online Dec.1, the study showed that one-time treatment with the hallucinogenic drug psilocybin — whose use required federal waivers because it is a banned substance — quickly brought relief from distress that then lasted for more than six months in 80 percent of the 29 study subjects monitored, based on clinical evaluation scores for anxiety and depression.

The NYU Langone-led study was published side by side with a similar study from Johns Hopkins. Study results were also endorsed in 11 accompanying editorials from leading experts in psychiatry, addiction, and palliative care.

“Our results represent the strongest evidence to date of a clinical benefit from psilocybin therapy, with the potential to transform care for patients with cancer-related psychological distress,” says study lead investigator Stephen Ross, MD, director of substance abuse services in the Department of Psychiatry at NYU Langone.

“If larger clinical trials prove successful, then we could ultimately have available a safe, effective, and inexpensive medication — dispensed under strict control — to alleviate the distress that increases suicide rates among cancer patients,” says Ross, also an associate professor of psychiatry at NYU School of Medicine.

Study co-investigator Jeffrey Guss, MD, a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at NYU Langone, notes that psilocybin has been studied for decades and has an established safety profile. Study participants, he says, experienced no serious negative effects, such as hospitalization or more serious mental health conditions.

Although the neurological benefits of psilocybin are not completely understood, it has been proven to activate parts of the brain also impacted by the signaling chemical serotonin, which is known to control mood and anxiety. Serotonin imbalances have also been linked to depression.

For the study, half of the participants were randomly assigned to receive a 0.3 milligrams per kilogram dose of psilocybin while the rest received a vitamin placebo (250 milligrams of niacin) known to produce a “rush” that mimics a hallucinogenic drug experience.

Approximately half way through the study’s monitoring period (after seven weeks), all participants switched treatments. Those who initially received psilocybin took a single dose of placebo, and those who first took niacin, then received psilocybin. Neither patients nor researchers knew who had first received psilocybin or placebo. Guss says, “The randomization, placebo control, and double-blind procedures maximized the validity of the study results.”

One of the key findings was that improvements in clinical evaluation scores for anxiety and depression lasted for the remainder of the study’s extended monitoring period — specifically, eight months for those who took psilocybin first.

All patients in the study — mostly women age 22 to 75 who are or were patients at the Perlmutter Cancer Center of NYU Langone — had either advanced breast, gastrointestinal, or blood cancers and had been diagnosed as suffering from serious psychological distress related to their disease. All patients, who volunteered to be part of the study, were provided with tailored counseling from a psychiatrist, psychologist, nurse or social worker, and were monitored for side effects and improvements in their mental state.

Co-investigator Anthony Bossis, PhD, a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at NYU Langone, says patients also reported post-psilocybin improvements in their quality of life: going out more, greater energy, getting along better with family members, and doing well at work. Several also reported variations of spirituality, unusual peacefulness, and increased feelings of altruism.

“Our study showed that psilocybin facilitated experiences that drove reductions in psychological distress,” says Bossis. “And if it’s true for cancer care, then it could apply to other stressful medical conditions.”

Bossis cautions that patients should not consume psilocybin on their own or without supervision by a physician and a trained counselor. He also says “Psilocybin therapy may not work for everyone, and some groups, such as people with schizophrenia, as well as adolescents, should not be treated with it.”

Both the NYU Langone and Johns Hopkins studies were principally funded by the Heffter Research Institute, a non-profit, scientific institution with the principal mission of helping to design, review and fund studies on the use of psilocybin for a wide range of ailments (Ross previously served as a board member). Additional funding for the NYU Langone study was provided by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, part of the National Institutes of Health (UL1 TR000038). The drug used in the study was manufactured by Organix Inc. in Woburn, Mass.

Besides Ross, Guss, and Bossis, other NYU researchers involved in this study are Gabrielle Agin-Liebes, BS; Tara Malone, MA; Alexander Belser, MPhil; Krystallia Kalliontzi, MSc; Barry Cohen, PhD; Sarah Mennenga, PhD; James Babb, PhD; Zhe Su, MS, MA; Patricia Corby, DDS; and Brian Schmidt, MD, PhD.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This is a strength of the release. It not only tells readers who funded the work, but that one of the funding organizations is focused specifically on research involving psychedelic drugs — and that one of the researchers previously served on that organization’s board.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 7, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers may have found an easy way to detect lung cancer in its early or even pre-cancerous stages, as well as a way to reverse the start of the deadly disease with a readily available, over-the-counter drug.

"It's incredibly, incredibly exciting," said Dr. Patrick Nana-Sinkam, a lung cancer expert with the Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, who was not involved with the new study. "This definitely has potential."

The minimally invasive procedure involves using a small brush to collect a smattering of cells from the windpipe (a bronchoscopy), explained study co-author Andrea Bild, an assistant professor of pharmacology and toxicology at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City.

Maybe one day, screening could be done using an even simpler nasal or sputum test, the researchers said.

Currently, there is no good way to detect lung cancer -- the number one cancer killer -- in its early stages when it's most treatable. By the time most lung cancers are diagnosed -- which usually involves an invasive examination of the lungs -- patients already have advanced malignancies. Only 15 percent of patients are still alive at five years, said Nana-Sinkam.

Cigarette smoking is responsible for 90 percent of all lung cancer cases in the United States.

Still, only 10 to 20 percent of smokers actually develop lung cancer, begging the question: Why do some smokers succumb to the disease and others don't.

Now genomics may have provided an answer.

Working on the theory that cigarettes harm not only the lungs but a "field of injury" extending to other areas of the respiratory tract, the study authors surmised that evidence of existing or soon-to-develop lung cancer might be available further up in the airway.

The researchers used so-called microarray genetic analysis to measure gene expression levels in the epithelial cells -- those cells lining the respiratory tract -- that they had captured with the bronchoscopy.

"We were looking at the activity of genes in the cells that we obtained from the windpipe or airways of smokers at risk for lung cancer," said study senior author Dr. Avrum Spira, a critical care physician at Boston Medical Center and associate professor of medicine, pathology and bioinformatics at Boston University School of Medicine.

It turned out that gene activity in the PI3K pathway was "off the chart" in smokers with lung cancer versus those without the disease.

"Obviously that's very exciting," Spira said. "We have identified a marker for an early risk of developing lung cancer."

And when treated with the compound myo-inositol, the gene pathway activity declined along with improvement in the troublesome lesions, the researcher noted.

"This drug inhibits the pathway that's activated in smokers. The drug is a natural compound. You can get it in health-food stores," Spira said.

"We're now in the midst of a large study to look at whether or not activity of this pathway can be used to pick those who could benefit from this as a treatment as opposed to just prevention," said Spira, who is a co-founder of Allegro Diagnostics Inc., a company that plans to market this biomarker.

The researchers also need to explore whether or not the PI3K pathway is active in non-smokers, as well as what other pathways might also trigger lung cancer.

The study findings were published in the April 7 issue of the journal Science Translational Medicine.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on lung cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Barely satisfactory.  One independent expert quoted – but one whose quote offered no analysis.  Financial interest of the lead investigator is mentioned.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New investigation advises doctors to recommend cranberry products as first line of defense against repeated urinary tract infections (UTIs)

CARVER, Mass., September 19, 2017 - A thorough review of dozens of studies led scientists to conclude that healthcare professionals should be telling their patients to have cranberry products as a first step in reducing recurrent UTIs. The comprehensive meta-analysis and assessment of human clinical trials, published in the official journal of the American Urological Association, The Journal of Urology®, assures practitioners and their patients that cranberry products are a low cost, low risk and effective way to help prevent recurrent UTIs.1

To answer the question, "Can Cranberries Contribute to Reduce the Incidence of Urinary Tract Infections?" a total of 28 studies showing results from nearly 5,000 patients were considered. Authors found a statistically significant risk reduction in repeat UTIs overall, but not significant for any particular subgroup. However, patients with recurrent UTIs who ingested cranberry products and had undergone gynecological surgery, experienced a significant reduction in UTIs.

"Our investigation supports that cranberry products can be a powerful tool to fight off frequent UTIs," explains lead author, Dr. Ângelo Luís. "While recommendations for dosage and duration of treatment require further study, the efficacy of the medicinal properties of cranberry products has been well-established."

The review explains that the medicinal properties of cranberries may be attributed to their unique polyphenol, proanthocyanidins - or PACs, for short. Their ability to keep infection-causing bacteria from sticking to the urinary tract walls may be the major reason for their effectiveness in limiting infection growth and recurrence.

According to the authors, scientists and practitioners continue to explore the use of alternative therapies in the prevention of common infections as part of the global movement to reduce antibiotic use and resistance. It is estimated that one third of women in the United States will get a UTI by the age of 24.2

"Findings like this," adds Dr. Luis, "give practitioners a viable, inexpensive, non-antibiotic option to help patients reduce the recurrence of an uncomfortable and potentially debilitating infection."

"As one of the oldest alternative therapies and U.S.-born berries, independent research such as this not only provides public health benefits, it revitalizes the enthusiasm for cranberry products year-round. The industry appreciates the efforts of these researchers and takes pride in the healthy attributes that cranberry products provide to consumers around the world," comments Terry Humfeld, executive director of the non-profit research and education-focused organization, The Cranberry Institute.

This review was funded by Universidade da Beira Interior and bank Santander/Totta protocol post-doctoral research fellowship BIPD/ICI-FC-BST-UBI 2016 (ÂL).

The Cranberry Institute is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1951 to further the success of cranberry growers and the industry in the Americas through health, agricultural and environmental stewardship research as well as cranberry promotion and education. The Cranberry Institute is funded voluntarily by Supporting Members that handle, process, and sell cranberries. Supporting Members are represented in national and international regulatory matters and research efforts are done on their behalf. For more information about the Cranberry Institute, along with the health benefits of cranberries and current scientific research, visit http://www. .

1. Luis A, Domingues F and Pereira, L. Can cranberries contribute to reduce the incidence of urinary tract infections? A systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of clinical trials. J Urol 2017; 614-21.

2. Foxman B, Barlow R, D'Arcy H, Gillespie B and Sobel JD. Urinary tract infection: self-reported incidence and associated costs. Ann Epidemiol 2000; 10:509-515.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: This is satisfactory, yet the release could have been more transparent about the organization that issued the release. The study itself was supported by a Portuguese university and a Portuguese bank, which is noted in the release. However, the release lists a PR firm as the contact but includes a quote from the director of the Cranberry Institute and a summary of the Institute as background, without ever mentioning the group’s relationship to the study.  After looking at the Cranberry Institute’s website it’s clear that the trade group has worked with the PR firm previously on news releases. Why not explain the Cranberry Institute’s interest in the research?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Dec. 7, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental antidepressant that targets the brain in a different way appears to both act fast and last long, researchers say.

The new drug -- called GLYX-13 -- is so far given in an intravenous form and was recently tested in patients who had not responded to other antidepressants. It began its work within hours and a single dose lasted about a week, Northwestern University researchers reported.

"We saw a robust, rapid-acting, long-lasting effect," said lead researcher Joseph Moskal, a research professor of biomedical engineering at Northwestern's McCormick School of Engineering and Applied Science and director of the school's Falk Center for Molecular Therapeutics. "In addition, we have shown little or no side effects with our compound."

One expert said the drug might prove a valuable tool against depression.

"It sounds like an exciting development," Dr. Bryan Bruno, acting chair of psychiatry at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City said. If it were a pill, the drug could change treatment for many patients, he added. "Because it's so quick it would be a huge advantage over our current medications all of which take six to eight weeks for the full effect and at least three to four weeks to start working for most people," Bruno said.

Currently, the most popular drugs to treat depression are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs. These include Prozac, Paxil, Zoloft and Lexapro. They work by improving levels of the hormone serotonin, which may be too low in people suffering from depression.

Although SSRIs are effective in many people, not all respond to the same drugs and some people don't respond well.

GLYX-13, the new drug, is still being studied and it isn't projected to be available before some time in 2016, Moskal said. Many unknowns remain about the drug, including its long-term effects, whether some people won't respond to it and the effects of stopping its use.

Moskal, however, said he is confident that this drug will be a breakthrough in treating depression. Given the results so far, he said, people won't need to take the drug every day, only once a week or less.

The GLYX-13 study is a phase 2 trial, which evaluates a drug's effectiveness while continuing to assess its safety.

The results were presented Thursday at the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology annual meeting in Hollywood, Fla. Findings from the team's animal research that led to the new method appeared online Dec. 3 in the journal Neuropsychopharmacology.

Moskal is the founder and chief scientific officer of the biotechnology firm Naurex Inc., which conducted the study. Northwestern University has licensed the intellectual property rights to certain therapeutics developed by Moskal to Naurex, according to a Northwestern news release.

The study received funding from the U.S. National Institutes of Health among others.

GLYX-13 targets parts of the brain linked to learning and memory. An advantage is that the drug doesn't have the side effects of other drugs that target these same areas, such as hallucinations and schizophrenia-like symptoms, the researchers noted.

Moskal's team developed a new way to target the brain's NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor to achieve these results. The clinical trial included about 120 patients, Moskal said. Patients were either given the drug or an inactive placebo.

Antidepressant effects of the drug were seen within 24 hours and lasted an average of seven days. The effect of the drug was substantially better than seen with other antidepressants, the researchers found. The drug was so well received by patients that many who were in the trial have called asking to be in any further trials, Moskal said.

A new trial that makes use of the drug in pill form is slated to get under way next year, Moskal noted.

Because the drug targets these areas of the brain it might also help people with other problems such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, anxiety and Alzheimer's disease, the researchers suggested.

For his part, Bruno cautioned that the long-term effects of the drug need to be studied before it can be used regularly in clinical practice.

Findings presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

To learn more about depression, visit the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Dr. Bryan Bruno is the independent expert in this story. It would have been helpful if he could have talked more about the study’s limitations, but he does mention that long-term effects of the drug need to be studied before it can be used regularly in clinical practice. The article does an excellent job in bringing up a potential conflict of interest. The study’s lead researcher is the founder and chief scientific officer of the biotechnology firm Naurex Inc., which “discover and develop compounds that modulate the NMDA receptor in a new way,” according to the firm’s website. Naurex conducted the clinical study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Allergy treatments haven’t advanced much in decades, even as hundreds of millions around the world suffer from wheezing, itches, and rashes — and in severe cases, risk death — from exposure to allergens ranging from eggs to pollen to dog dander.

But hope may be on the way.

Scientists who study the immune system are beginning to understand the root cause of allergies — and are starting to work on next-generation therapies that could stop allergies in their tracks, rather than simply treating symptoms. Private investors and corporations are pouring money into the field.

Sean Parker, the internet mogul of Napster fame, donated $24 million to set up an allergy research center at Stanford University. Nestlé this month invested $145 million in a startup aimed at tackling peanut allergy. And the Broad Institute of Cambridge, Mass., recently launched a new initiative to unravel the basic biology of food allergy.

The potential market is huge: It’s estimated that 50 million Americans have allergies. As many as 10 percent of children suffer from hay fever, nearly 12 percent have skin allergies, and 5 percent have food allergies, most commonly peanuts, dairy, and shellfish, according to the 2014 National Health Interview Survey.

“I foresee that a lot of allergy therapies will become more and more specific and targeted, and more customizable to the individual patient,” said Andrew Long, the lead investigational drug pharmacist at Stanford’s Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy & Asthma Research.

The experimental treatment that may be closest to market is also one of the simplest. Bay Area startup Aimmune, backed in part by Nestlé with that $145 million investment, is creating a methodical peanut desensitization pill that slowly weans patients away from allergy.

The company has identified the peanut proteins that trigger allergic reaction and is filling little capsules with the stuff. Patients start out by taking half a milligram of peanut protein, and gradually work their way up — over the course of about six months — to the equivalent of eating a single peanut.

“The people who need it the most are the people who have the most profound and potentially life-threatening reaction,” said Dr. Daniel Adelman, chief medical officer of Aimmune.

The capsules are science’s answer to previous efforts from allergists, who would concoct “home brews” of peanut protein to desensitize patients under the table. Aimmune’s peanut powder is in Phase 3 trials — and, despite its relative simplicity, is still considered something of a trailblazer in allergy science.

Researchers at Stanford University are building on the concept of desensitization.

One of the drugs Long is excited about: omalizumab, a biologic drug made by Genentech under the trade name Xolair.

To understand how it works, you have to back up and look at why you get all itchy and wheezy when you encounter an allergen. Such responses make sense from an evolutionary standpoint: They initially came into being to protect our bodies against toxins, like snake venom, or to ward away parasites. But they can be deadly in the modern era.

Two types of immune cells — called mast cells and basophils — are the biggest culprits behind allergic reactions. When a person encounters an allergen, let’s say peanut protein, a type of antibody called immunoglobulin E, or IgE, gets activated. This stimulates the mast cells and basophils to release a storm of chemicals that provoke an allergic response to help exorcise peanut protein from the body.

Genentech’s drug is an engineered antibody that binds to human IgE, blocking it from triggering that chemical storm.

It was approved by the FDA in 2003 to treat a form of asthma often triggered by allergens, but Stanford researchers are now testing it on patients with food allergies — and finding that it might help speed along classic allergy desensitization therapy, in which patients are slowly introduced to escalating quantities of the allergen, via allergy shots or those “home brew” concoctions.

“Right now, the process of immunotherapy is painstakingly long — it takes not just weeks or months, but years, to treat a single allergy this way,” said Dr. Toshi Kawakami, a researcher at the La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology.

This timeline becomes untenable for patients with multiple allergies — and about 70 percent of people who have an allergy to one type of food will also be allergic to another, Long said.

So Stanford has paired Xolair with desensitization therapy to treat up to five different food allergens at any given time. Instead of taking years to gird a patient’s body against peanuts, they’re able to help her control her reactions to, say, hazelnuts, fish, dairy, and wheat as well.

Looking at IgE from a different angle, Harvard statistical geneticist Liming Liang has been hunting for new drug targets that might modulate how, exactly, the antibody is expressed. In a paper published last year in Nature, Liang’s team found 30 genes that are involved in kicking off the allergic response.

“We think we’ll be able to identify a potential drug target here for allergy reaction — but, of course, it’ll take quite a long time to turn that into a medicine used by patients,” Liang said.

Another compelling approach is being taken by Japan’s Astellas Pharma, which is developing a DNA vaccine meant to protect the body from cedar pollen. (Hay fever has been called a “national affliction” in Japan, affecting a quarter of the population.)

The underlying research, from Immunomic Therapeutics and Johns Hopkins University, involves attaching a fragment of DNA from, say, cedar pollen to a template vaccine that can embed itself inside the cell. Once there, it revs up an aggressive immune response and imprints an “immunological memory,” which means the immune system will respond even more quickly to future exposures to the allergen.

The idea is to create resistance to an allergen without ever having to expose the patient to that substance. If it works, it’d be fairly easy to swap out the cedar pollen DNA for a different allergen — for instance, the genetic material that codes for peanut or cat antigens — and tack it onto this vaccine template.

“The beauty of this is that, unlike food desensitization or skin patches, patients aren’t exposed to the circulating antigen,” Long said. “That hypothetically decreases the risk for adverse events.”

For all the research on allergies, none of the drugs in the pipeline is a sure thing.

For a cautionary tale, look no further than Circassia Pharmaceuticals, which has been working on an experimental immunotherapy drug to forestall cat allergies. Interest in Circassia had been sky-high — the small biotech’s market value had shot up to $1 billion earlier this year on speculation that its drug would prove effective.

But in a Phase 3 study, it turned out that the placebo effect was as effective as the drug itself. The company’s stock plummeted on that news this past June.

It’s not just that solving allergies is hard. Current medications — such as Benadryl, Claritin, and epinephrine (best known for powering the EpiPen) — do a decent job controlling symptoms in most patients, so there’s little incentive to innovate.

“There’s a dearth of new allergy products because antihistamines work so well,” said Dr. Todd Brady, CEO of Aldeyra Therapeutics, a startup in Lexington, Mass., that’s developing a drug to reduce eye irritation from allergies.

“They’re generic, they’re cheap, they’re safe, and easy to use — but unfortunately, a lot of patients suffer because of that phenomenon, because not everyone responds to antihistamines,” Brady said.

Another reason for the hesitancy: liability concerns. It’s a risky proposition to give patients the foods they’re deathly allergic to — inducing anaphylactic reactions simply to test drugs in clinical trials.

“At the end of the day, it’s a fairly 19th-century approach,” said Dr. Wayne Shreffler, a researcher at Massachusetts General Hospital who is working on the Broad Institute’s Food Allergy Science Initiative. “There’s really no doubt that there have been cold feet in the industry about this issue.”

But investigators around the world have shown they can carry out these “food challenge” trials safely — which could help hasten the development of new drugs.

“In school, we didn’t learn anything about allergy treatment, except antihistamines and epinephrine,” Long said. “But now, we’re seeing this whole new spectrum of treatments. It’ll be interesting to see how this translates into making it into a pharmacy, and into the hands of patients.”

Correction: A previous version of the story misstated some aspects of Aimunne’s work on peanut allergies.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article casts a pretty wide net of sources, including interviews with allergy researchers at Stanford and at Mass General Hospital in Boston, as well as investigators with drug companies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (AP) -- A medical implant that slowly dissolves into the body could be the answer to long-standing safety concerns with devices used to treat clogged arteries.

But not so fast, say experts.

Abbott Laboratories' newly approved Absorb stent comes with one important caveat: it hasn't yet been shown to be safer than older metal implants.

The Food and Drug Administration approved the device Tuesday for patients with coronary artery disease, the artery-narrowing condition that causes about 370,000 U.S. deaths each year, according to government figures. The new stent is designed to gradually dissolve over three years.

Currently-available stents are permanent, mesh-wire tubes that hold open arteries after a procedure used to clear fatty plaque.

Experts describe Abbott's device as an important step in finding a better approach to treating the leading cause of death in the U.S.

"This is presumably a better technology going forward, at least that's the theory, but it will take years to prove," said Dr. George Vetrovec, professor emeritus at Virginia Commonwealth University. Vetrovec was part of an FDA advisory panel of cardiologists who overwhelmingly endorsed the device in March.

The Absorb stent, already sold in Europe and Asia, is made of a degradable material that's designed to stay intact for one year then break down over the next two years.

Use of metallic stents surged in the early 2000s as a treatment for people who suffered a heart attack or experienced chest pain caused by clogged arteries that restrict blood flow. They are still implanted in about 850,000 U.S. patients annually.

But doctors have scaled back their use due to safety concerns, insurance cost-cutting and evidence that they are overused. Studies in 2007 and 2008 suggested that stented arteries faced a higher risk of blood clots, potentially triggering heart attack a year or more down the road. Results of another five-year study showed that patients who received stents to treat chest pain fared about as well as those treated with drugs.

Amid these concerns, Abbott and others began developing dissolving stents that would slowly melt away like stitches, presumably reducing complications.

In the company study submitted to the FDA, patients who got Absorb fared about as well as those receiving Abbott's older metal stent after one year. But heart-related complications were actually slightly higher with Absorb - 7.8 percent of patients, versus 6.1 percent of patients with the metal stent. That 1.7 percent difference is not considered statistically significant.

Other complications with the new device include allergic reactions, infections and internal bleeding.

Doctors who studied Absorb said it may take several years before its advantages become clear. Long-term safety results aren't expected until 2020.

"We have good theoretical reasons to believe that by getting rid of the stent, and allowing the coronary artery to restore its normal shape, that will prevent many of those late events," said Dr. Gregg Stone, of Columbia University Medical Center, who helped conduct the pivotal trial of Absorb. Stone was not paid by Abbott for his work on the trial.

Some Wall Street analysts are betting that products like Absorb will allow companies to raise prices and boost revenue.

"The key for the stent market will be whether pricing returns to rational levels and the success of the new bio-absorbable stent platforms," states Evercore ISI analyst Vijay Kumar, in an investment note. He says a "perfect storm of events," including safety concerns and the economic downturn led Abbott and competitors Medtronic Inc. and Boston Scientific Corp. to slash prices in recent years.

Stent sales fell roughly 30 percent to $4.1 billion in 2014 from 2006 levels, according to Evercore.

Abbott said it does not disclose the price of its stents. Hospitals often bill $30,000 for stenting procedures, which includes the costs of the stent, medical staff and other equipment and services.

Chicago-based Abbott controls a little more than a third of the U.S. stent market. More than a dozen medical device makers are working on their own dissolving stent technologies.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Both of the sources—one who conducted the research testing the stent and one who advised the FDA—are clearly identified, as is Abbott Labs as the creator and presumed funder of the stent. A financial analyst is also included.
This is sufficient for a Satisfactory rating, though none of these sources represent the ideal of what we’re looking for–a medical expert who is independent of the research and the stent’s FDA approval process.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
-- Avoid what are commonly called simple carbohydrates and "sugary stuff" at that meal or at bedtime. Such foods will bump up insulin production. "When our insulin is very high, we can't get to sleep," he says. Instead, choose whole-wheat crackers, which can control insulin. Or eat turkey or bananas, both of which contain tryptophan, which is believed to trigger sleepiness. Lettuce, too, has a "long history of helping people get to sleep," Aziz says.

-- Avoid caffeinated coffee, tea and soda. And alcohol, which Aziz says "can make us go to sleep, but it's not the deep sleep" that we need to produce growth hormone (which in turn helps regulate insulin).

-- Practice good sleep hygiene. That means turning off all electronics, including the TV, and creating as quiet a sleep space as you can. Lower blinds and turn off lights so your room is as dark as possible. Make sure the room temperature is comfortable. Consider taking a warm bath or doing some gentle stretches -- but not heart-pumping exercise -- before turning in.

Okay, so just how long are we supposed to stay asleep?

Robert Vorona, a sleep researcher at Eastern Virginia Medical School in Norfolk, says adults should aim for 7 to 7 1/2 hours a night, while teenagers need a whopping 9 to 9 1/4 hours. (Fellow parents, let's do the math. If your teen has to get up at, say, 6:30 to be at school by 7:30, that means bedtime's at 9:15 or 9:30 p.m.)

Vorona says he'd like to delve deeper into the sleep-obesity question. He applied for funding of the research a few years ago, to no avail. "It's a shame," he says. "It's such an intriguing idea. If sleep extension could have a salutary effect on helping people lose weight," he says, we'd have another tool in the fight against obesity.

On the other hand, Vorona says, "The last thing I want readers to think is that Dr. Vorona thinks we're facing this obesity epidemic because we're sleep deprived. I suspect it's part of the picture, along with lack of exercise and dietary indiscretion."
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The author cites three independent sources and identifies each of their affiliations. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hoping to reduce her thighs and midsection without the risks and inconvenience of liposuction, she paid $2,300 for six treatments from a chiropractor in the Denver area. Even though she continued to diet and work out, she had no change in her thighs, belly and hips. Her doctor offered her three more sessions at no cost. Still, no change.

Since most aesthetic medicine is elective, and not covered by insurance, marketing plays a major role in capturing the minds and wallets of consumers. The concern is that promoting innovations for indications that the Food and Drug Administration hasn’t approved will fuel patient expectations that clinical data may not substantiate.

Zeltiq Aesthetics, based in Pleasanton, Calif., is a cautious wallflower that aims to get the data behind its device approved by the F.D.A. before it makes too rowdy an entrance to the party. Its slogan is “More Science. Less Fat.”

Meanwhile, Erchonia Medical, based in McKinney, Tex., has aggressively marketed its Zerona laser as “the first non-invasive body contouring procedure to effectively remove excess fat” even though it has yet to receive F.D.A. clearance to promote this use. (In general, the F.D.A. must sanction a medical device for a specific use before a company can market that use. But doctors are free to use devices off label. )

Nonetheless, a brochure for Zerona states patients can collectively “lose up to 9 inches without the pain or down time of surgery.” Nationwide, medical spas, chiropractors, cosmetic surgeons, plastic surgeons and dermatologists now offer Zerona for $1,700 to $3,800 for six sessions. Part of the reason the device has made inroads during these strapped times is that doctors don’t buy it outright, but pay per use.

So how is Zerona supposed to work? The low-level laser causes “fat to seep out of a cell, almost like a balloon being struck by a needle,” said Ryan Maloney, medical director for Erchonia Medical. The fat enters the lymphatic system, and is eventually used as energy, Dr. Maloney said.

Zeltiq uses controlled cooling to target and eliminate fat cells, a process called selective cryolipolysis. Skin isn’t damaged, but subcutaneous fat, which is more sensitive to targeted cold, begins a two-month death march soon after exposure to Zeltiq.

Doctors on the advisory board for Zeltiq Aesthetics have put the word out about it on television news segments. But at this stage, the company itself has been careful not to promote its device directly to consumers since its F.D.A. clearances for, say, pain reduction during dermatologic treatments don’t encompass fat reduction. Gordie Nye, the chief executive, sent an e-mail message declining to be interviewed for this article.

The company has clinical data that has been submitted to the F.D.A. for approval, according to a few doctors who were principal investigators. Data relayed at a meeting of the American Society of Dermatologic Surgery showed a 22 percent reduction of the fat layer as measured by ultrasound.

Erchonia Medical has published the results of its clinical trial in Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. Thirty-five patients in the treatment group lost an average of 3.5 inches total in hips, thighs and their midsection according to the company’s clinical trial. The company has promoted Zerona as “a new body-sculpting procedure designed to remove fat and contour the body without invasive surgery.” But the F.D.A. has not sanctioned marketing this use. It has cleared the Zerona laser for pain reduction 24 hours after breast augmentation or as a way to decrease the pain associated with recovering from liposuction.

In general, Karen Riley, a spokeswoman for the F.D.A., said “it is considered off-label promotion if you are marketing to the public a use that has not been cleared.” Steven Shanks, the president of Erchonia Medical, said, “Since we use the exact same power for liposuction and breast augmentation, we self-certified the device.” He said that in January 2009, the company had applied for a 510K clearance — which is based on the notion that an older device is substantially equivalent to a new one — and had yet to receive it. (Such a delay is atypical, Ms. Riley said, adding, “most 510Ks are cleared within six months.”)

Last month, Dr. Robert B. Seltzer, a dermatologist in Pasadena, Calif., ran an advertisement in The Los Angeles Times for an informational seminar that called Zerona “the holy grail.” In a phone interview, however, he said, “I’m not 100 percent convinced” and planned to return his Zerona if he didn’t continue seeing results in his patients. (So far 5 out of 6 have been pleased.)

After reviewing Erchonia Medical’s clinical study, Dr. Brian M. Kinney, a plastic surgeon in Los Angeles, said, “I can’t prove that it works.” His concerns are that the tape measure method of gauging circumferential changes “isn’t consistently reliable.” What’s more, study participants and the placebo group were assessed only two weeks after their last treatment, not long enough to measure adequately whether results last.

Dr. Kinney doesn’t have a Zerona or a Zeltiq cooling device, though in the case of the latter, he said, “it is well documented that freezing fat tissue aggressively enough can lead to fat necrosis,” or, fat dying, over a few months.

Patient selection for any body contouring procedure is crucial, said Dr. Jeffrey M. Kenkel, vice chairman of plastic surgery at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. Dr. Kenkel, who recently replicated results of Zerona’s clinical trial in 12 of his patients, doesn’t offer Zerona to obese patients, or to ones who have had surgery in the area they want treated. “It’s critical to be evaluated by a doctor,” he said.

Success is also dependent on diet and exercise, he said. If you’re sedentary and not eating healthy food, he said, then once fat is leaked after Zerona treatments, “your body will just store it again.”

How the body rids itself of fat, and how quickly, after any noninvasive body slimming procedure is unclear, said Dr. Lawrence S. Bass, a plastic surgeon in Manhattan who started using a Zeltiq device last July. That includes, he said, forthcoming devices like UltraShape and LipoSonix, which employ ultrasound waves to single out fat. It’s a “sticking point with the F.D.A. with all these things,” he said. Dr. Bass was not a clinical investigator for Zeltiq, but he said, “I’m convinced both on the science and clinical experience, it’s able to eliminate fat noninvasively.”

Nadine Tosk, a publicist for Zeltiq, explained that the rollout of the device was “very limited right now.” Dr. Jeffrey Dover, a dermatologist in Chestnut Hill, Mass., who advises Zeltiq and participated in its clinical trial, said a few board-certified plastic surgeons and dermatologists were “handpicked” because “we know they do good work.” Restraint is key, he said, because a doctor could apply Zeltiq to “the same spot” in the same day, which isn’t how it’s meant to be used. Hourlong treatments are best spaced out by two months, said Dr. Dover, who charges $700 per spot.

That said, a doctor with a Zeltiq device isn’t hard for patients to find. More than five dozen “Zeltiq specialists” can be found by ZIP code at body-contouring.com, which is a patient guide not sponsored by manufacturers of body-slimming devices. Dr. Jason N. Pozner, a plastic surgeon in Boca Raton, Fla., appears topless in a YouTube.com video that shows his left flank being suctioned and cooled as he reads his Kindle. (His partner, Dr. David J. Goldberg, was an investigator for Zeltiq.)

Ms. Bonvouloir hasn’t given up on Zerona. Recently, she paid $2,100 for six treatments at Parker Day Spa in Parker, Colo. This time, each session is followed by a massage that supposedly speeds the release of fat. “I still have three more sessions,” Ms. Bonvouloir wrote in an e-mail message. “Again, they are convinced I will lose some inches. I’d like to know when!!!”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The reporter interviewed ten sources–two patients [one with good results, one with poor], one federal spokesperson, and seven doctors. Six of those doctors are not objective due to financial interest in the devices’ efficacy. But one is fully independent. 
With a story like this, which features new technologies, it’s hard to find sources who know the devices well enough to understand them but have no interest in them. The reporter did a good job with sourcing under these circumstances.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, March 20, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Tiny pellets could treat arthritic knee pain, delaying the need for knee replacement surgery, a small study has found.

Microparticles inserted into small blood vessels around the knee helped reduce the pain and improve function in eight arthritis sufferers, according to clinical trial results. The results were presented Monday at the Society of Interventional Radiology's annual meeting, in Los Angeles.

"Patients overall were able to improve their physical function in the knee after the procedure, and there were no adverse events related to this treatment," said lead researcher Dr. Sandeep Bagla.

Bagla is director of interventional radiology at the Vascular Institute of Virginia in Woodbridge. Boston Scientific, maker of the microparticles, funded the study.

Much of the pain that comes from knee arthritis actually stems from inflammation in the lining of the knee joint, also called the synovium, Bagla said. In fact, small blood vessels created by degenerative arthritis feed this inflammation by increasing blood flow to the lining.

To treat this, Bagla and his colleagues decided to try blocking those tiny blood vessels using microparticles -- spheres about a tenth of a millimeter in size made from a synthetic gel-like material.

The microparticles are inserted using a catheter run through a pinhole-sized incision, in a procedure that lasts between 45 and 90 minutes, Bagla said.

"It's an outpatient procedure, and no physical therapy is required before or after this procedure," he said.

The small pilot study -- the first U.S. clinical trial of this procedure -- involved 20 patients with moderate to severe arthritis pain. Only 13 had undergone the procedure by the time of Monday's annual meeting, and only eight had made it to the one-month follow-up, Bagla said.

Those eight patients averaged a 58-point decrease in pain, as measured on a 100-point visual scale used to estimate pain, Bagla said. They started with an average baseline of 72, which means their pain was brought down to manageable levels, he said.

Physical function of their knee also improved, based on an index used to judge the effects of osteoarthritis, Bagla added.

Overall, the two scales represented an 80 percent improvement in function, the researchers concluded.

Bagla said no side effects are expected because the procedure only blocks additional blood flow to the knee, rather than cutting it off altogether.

"You don't normally have this degree of increased blood supply to this lining. We're not blocking normal blood vessels to the knee or leg or bone or cartilage," he said.

Final results from this clinical trial are expected to be released this summer. Researchers are already kicking off a second, larger trial to better understand how the procedure works and which patients it might benefit, Bagla said.

They think it will be most appropriate for people between ages 40 and 70 who aren't ready to go through knee replacement, or people who are on chronic pain medication for their knee arthritis, Bagla said.

"Perhaps we can demonstrate and prove patients do not need to be on these medications and can alternatively go through a minimally invasive procedure like this to reduce their knee pain," Bagla said.

Dr. Suresh Vedantham, president of the Society of Interventional Radiology, called the new procedure "very promising," given that it focuses on the inflamed knee lining that causes the pain.

"This therapy is very well-targeted to that particular mechanism, and certainly it should be investigated further," said Vedantham, who wasn't involved with the study. He's a professor of radiology and surgery at the Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology at Washington University in St. Louis.

Research presented at medical meetings is typically considered preliminary until it is published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Arthritis Foundation has more about knee pain.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story stated that Boston Scientific, maker of the microparticles, funded the study.
It also had one independent source, Suresh Vedantham, MD, a professor of radiology and surgery at the Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology at Washington University in St. Louis. We did not detect any conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About 28 million Americans have sleep apnea, which causes repeated awakenings and pauses in breathing during the night, sometimes resulting in loud snoring and gasps for air. For decades, the standard treatment has been “continuous positive airway pressure.” A mask worn at night pushes air into the nasal passages, enabling easier breathing. C.P.A.P. reduces and in some cases completely prevents episodes of apnea.

But the mask is like something from a bad science fiction movie: big, bulky and obtrusive. Many patients simply refuse to wear it or rip it off while asleep. Studies show that about half of all people prescribed C.P.A.P. machines stop using them in one to three weeks.

“For a lot of people out there, the C.P.A.P. machine turns into a doorstop,” said Dr. Joseph Golish, the former chief of sleep medicine at the Cleveland Clinic and now a professor with the MetroHealth System in Cleveland. “C.P.A.P. is very effective in the sleep lab. But when people go home, there’s a good chance they won’t use it, and the success rate of an unused C.P.A.P. machine is absolutely zero.”

Now an alternative form of C.P.A.P. is gaining popularity: a patch that fits over the nostrils. Called Provent, the patch holds two small plugs, one for each nostril, that create just enough air pressure to keep the airways open at night. It is far less intrusive than the traditional C.P.A.P. machine. It is also more expensive, and it doesn’t work for every patient.

Approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2008, Provent has spread mostly by word of mouth. But it has caught on fast. Its manufacturer, Ventus Medical, says it has shipped one million of the devices in the past 12 months, up from a half million total in the two years prior. Doctors say it has given them a new weapon in the battle against sleep apnea, and many patients who struggled with C.P.A.P. call it a godsend.

Bob Bleck, who owns a computer networking firm in Ohio, struggled with poor sleep and chronic fatigue for decades. But it was only a year and a half ago that he finally went to a sleep clinic, prodded by his wife, who worried about his heavy snoring.

The diagnosis was severe sleep apnea. Tests showed that in a typical night, Mr. Bleck, 47, awoke or stopped breathing 42 times an hour.

His doctor prescribed a C.P.A.P. machine, and Mr. Bleck hated it.

“I had this constricted feeling,” he said. “It would be incorporated into these dreams where I was tied up, like in the movie ‘Alien.’ It was more difficult to sleep with that thing on than to just get through the night with the apnea.”

Mr. Bleck got rid of the machine after he discovered Provent. “After I started using it, I noticed a difference right away,” he said. “My symptoms subsided dramatically.”

Provent works like a traditional C.P.A.P. machine but is only a fraction of the size. When people with apnea fall asleep, their throat muscles collapse, constricting the airway and causing the body to fight for air. C.P.A.P. machines use mild air pressure to keep the airway from constricting.

Provent does too, but in a different way. The device contains two pinhole-size valves, one over each nostril. The valves let air in easily — most people breathe through their nostrils while asleep — but there is resistance as the user exhales. That resistance creates a backpressure in the airways, dilating the muscles that would otherwise collapse in the middle of the night. In the morning, the patch is removed; a new one is used every night.

Last year, in a large study of 250 apnea sufferers published in the medical journal Sleep and subsidized by Ventus, researchers found that those who used Provent devices over a three-month period saw their apnea episodes fall sharply, compared with people who were given a sham, or placebo, device. A follow-up study tracked people over the course of a year and had similar results.

But not everyone finds that Provent alleviates their apnea. In interviews, sleep specialists said that a third or more of patients do not end up using it.

“It works like a champ in some people and doesn’t work on other people,” said Dr. Nancy Appelblatt, an ear, nose and throat surgeon in Sacramento who has prescribed it to about 100 patients. “All sleep apnea is not created equal.”

Some people, for example, breathe through the mouth at night, not the nostrils. In those people, Provent typically doesn’t work. Nor will it work very well in someone who has severe nasal allergies and has a blocked nose at night, said one of the leaders of the Provent studies, Dr. Meir H. Kryger, a professor at Yale Medical School and founder of the National Sleep Foundation.

Unlike C.P.A.P., Provent is not covered by Medicare and most major insurers, though some doctors say they expect that will change in the near future. In the meantime, a 30-day supply of the patches costs $65 to $80.

Dr. Lee A. Surkin, a cardiologist and sleep medicine specialist in Greenville, N.C., said patients typically start with a 10-day trial pack that costs $27.50. He has prescribed Provent to about 300 of his patients.

“The No. 1 reason people don’t continue it is the out-of-pocket expense,” he said.

For now, Dr. Kryger and others say that C.P.A.P. will continue to be the gold standard, and certainly the first option for patients with severe apnea. But for the roughly 50 percent of patients in whom C.P.A.P. fails, Provent may be a reliable alternative.

Dr. Surkin said some patients use C.P.A.P. at home, but take their pocket-size Provent patches with them when they travel to avoid the hassle of lugging a machine through airports.

“To me, it’s a miracle,” said Joyce Nemoga, 64. Ms. Nemoga, who lives in Baldwin Harbor, N.Y., has moderate apnea that caused her to snore and gasp in her sleep. She tried C.P.A.P. but could not sleep comfortably with the device.

“Every time you turn over, you have to take the hose with you,” she said. “I tried it for six months, and I don’t think I had one full night of sleep the whole time.”

“I’m just so happy that I found it,” she said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes from a range of sources, and we give it high marks for that. We are a little troubled that one of the most outspoken boosters of this product is Dr. Joseph Golish, who works for another medical device company, CleveMed. He was also quoted raving about Provent in The Plain Dealer. A mention of his device company work would have been good context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The test has the potential to help curb overtreatment in cancer care.

A new genetic test to gauge the aggressiveness of prostate cancer may help tens of thousands of men each year decide whether they need to treat their cancer right away or can safely monitor it.

The new test, which goes on sale Wednesday, joins another one that recently came on the market. Both analyze multiple genes in a biopsy sample and give a score for aggressiveness, similar to tests used now for certain breast and colon cancers.

Doctors say tests like these have the potential to curb a major problem in cancer care — overtreatment. Prostate tumors usually grow so slowly they will never threaten a man's life, but some prove fatal and there is no reliable way now to tell which ones will. Treatment with surgery, radiation or hormone blockers isn't needed in most cases and can cause impotence or incontinence, yet most men are afraid to skip it.

"We're not giving patients enough information to make their decision," said Dr. Peter Carroll, chairman of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. "You can shop for a toaster" better than for prostate treatment, he said.

A study he led of the newest test — the Oncotype DX Genomic Prostate Score — is set for discussion Wednesday at an American Urological Association meeting in San Diego.

The results suggest the test could triple the number of men thought to be at such low risk for aggressive disease that monitoring is a clearly safe option. Conversely, the test also suggested some tumors were more aggressive than doctors had believed.

Independent experts say such a test is desperately needed but that it's unclear how much information this one adds or whether it will be enough to persuade men with low-risk tumors to forgo treatment, and treat it only if it gets worse. Only 10 percent who are candidates for monitoring choose it now.

"The question is, what's the magnitude of difference that would change the patient's mind?" said Dr. Bruce Roth, a cancer specialist at Washington University in St. Louis.

One man may view a 15 percent chance that his tumor is aggressive as low risk "but someone else might say, 'Oh my God, let's set the surgery up tomorrow,'" he said. "I don't think it's a slam dunk."

Also unknown: Will insurers pay for the expensive test without evidence it leads to better care or saves lives?

The newest test was developed by Genomic Health Inc., which has sold a similar one for breast cancer since 2004. Doctors at first were leery of it until studies in more groups of women proved its value, and the same may happen with the prostate test, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, the American Cancer Society's deputy chief medical officer.

The company will charge $3,820 for the prostate test and says it can save money by avoiding costlier, unnecessary treatment. Another test for assessing prostate cancer risk that came out last summer — Prolaris by Myriad Genetics Inc. — sells for $3,400.

Both companies can sell the tests without Food and Drug Administration approval under separate rules that govern lab diagnostics. Myriad Genetics has published nine studies on Prolaris involving more than 3,000 patients. Genomic Health has not published any results on the prostate test, another thing that makes doctors wary. Yet it has a track record from its breast cancer test.

About 240,000 men in the U.S. are diagnosed with prostate cancer each year, and about half are classified as low risk using current methods. Doctors now base risk estimates on factors such as a man's age and how aggressive cells look from biopsies that give 12 to 14 tissue samples. But tumors often are spread out and vary from one spot to the other.

"Unless you can be sure your biopsy has hit the most aggressive part that's in the prostate, you can't be sure" how accurate your risk estimate is, explained Dr. Eric Klein, chief of urology at the Cleveland Clinic, who led early development of the Oncotype prostate cancer test.

For one study, researchers used prostates removed from 440 men. They measured the activity of hundreds of genes thought to be involved in whether the cancer spread beyond the prostate or proved fatal. A second study of biopsies from 167 patients narrowed it down to 81 genes, and researchers picked 17 that seemed to predict aggressiveness no matter the location in the tumor.

A third study used single needle-biopsy samples from 395 UCSF patients scheduled to have their prostates removed. The gene test accurately predicted the aggressiveness of their cancer once doctors were able to see the whole prostate after surgery.

Using one current method, 37 of the 395 men would have been called very low risk and good candidates for monitoring. Adding the gene test put 100 men into that category, said another study leader, Dr. Matthew Cooperberg of UCSF. The gene test shifted about half of the men into either a lower or a higher risk category.

"It went both ways — that was the remarkable thing. In any category of risk it added independent information compared to the standard criteria we use today," Carroll said. "More work needs to be done, but, in my opinion, this is a very good start."

However, Dr. Kevin McVary, chairman of urology at Southern Illinois University School of Medicine and a spokesman for the Urological Association, said the test must be validated in more men before it can be widely used.

"It's not there yet," he said.

UCSF just got a federal grant to see how men choose treatments and whether this test might sway them.

"We throw all these numbers at them. Are they really going to make a better decision?" Cooperberg said.

Dean Smith, 60, a retired marketing executive from Mill Valley, Calif., is following his doctor's advice to monitor the cancer he was diagnosed with in March. He said a gene test may have made him more comfortable with that decision.

At least six of his friends suffered side effects ranging from urinary leakage to inability to have sex after having their prostates removed.

"I would suspect that having cancer and having to live with it would be very difficult for them," but it doesn't bother him, Smith said. "I will die from something other than prostate cancer, I guarantee you."

Copyright 2013 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag.
Multiple sources were interviewed – which was admirable.
The story could have explained that two of the experts quoted either had paid consultant arrangements or received research funding from one of the companies mentioned in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have transformed one type of fully developed adult cell directly into another inside a living animal, a startling advance that could lead to cures for a variety of illnesses and sidestep the political and ethical quagmires

Through a series of painstaking experiments involving mice, the Harvard biologists pinpointed three crucial molecular switches that, when flipped, completely convert a common cell in the pancreas into the more precious insulin-producing ones that diabetics need to survive.

The experiments, detailed online yesterday in the journal Nature, raise the prospect that patients suffering from not only diabetes but also heart disease, strokes and many other ailments could eventually have some of their cells reprogrammed to cure their afflictions without the need for drugs, transplants or other therapies.

"It's kind of an extreme makeover of a cell," said Douglas A. Melton, co-director of the Harvard Stem Cell Institute, who led the research. "The goal is to create cells that are missing or defective in people. It's very exciting."

The work was hailed as a welcome development even by critics of research involving embryonic stem cells, which can be coaxed to become any tissue in the body but are highly controversial because they are obtained by destroying embryos.

"I see no moral problem in this basic technique," said Richard Doerflinger of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, a leading opponent of embryonic stems cell research. "This is a 'win-win' situation for medicine and ethics."

Researchers in the field, who have become accustomed to rapid advances, said they, too, were surprised by the advance.

"I'm stunned," said Robert Lanza, chief scientific officer of Advanced Cell Technology in Worcester, Mass., a developer of stem cell therapies. "It introduces a whole new paradigm for treating disease."

Melton and other researchers cautioned that many years of research lay ahead to prove whether the development would translate into cures.

"It's an important proof of concept," said Lawrence Goldstein, a stem cell researcher at the University of California at San Diego. "But these things always look easier on the blackboard than when you have to do them in actual patients."

Although the experiment involved mice, Melton and other researchers were optimistic that the approach would work in people.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story did include interview material from individuals not directly connected with the study reported on. And the story did include a comment from a stem cell researcher indicating that it is likely not a quick, straight shot from these results to use in people. The other sources interviewed provided a modicum of balance. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The common antibiotic doxycycline can disrupt the formation of negative associations in the brain, according to new research from UCL and the University of Zurich.

The study, published in Molecular Psychiatry, was a pre-registered, placebo-controlled, double-blind randomised controlled trial in 76 healthy volunteers.

In the first session, participants were given either doxycycline or a placebo and learnt to associate a certain colour with an electric shock. A week later they were shown the colours again, accompanied by a loud sound but no shocks, and their fear responses were measured.*

The fear response was 60% lower in participants who had doxycycline in the first session compared to those who had the placebo, suggesting that the fear memory was significantly suppressed by the drug. Other cognitive measures including sensory memory and attention were not affected.

"When we talk about reducing fear memory, we are not talking about deleting the memory of what actually happened," explains lead author Professor Dominik Bach (UCL Wellcome Centre for Neuroimaging, Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research and University of Zurich Division of Clinical Psychiatry Research). "The participants may not forget that they received a shock when the screen was red, but they 'forget' to be instinctively scared when they next see a red screen. Learning to fear threats is an important ability for any organism, helping us to avoid dangers such as predators. Over-prediction of threat, however, can cause tremendous suffering and distress in anxiety disorders such as PTSD."

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a term for a broad range of psychological symptoms that can develop after someone experiences or witnesses a traumatic event. PTSD is caused by an overactive fear memory, and the new research shows that doxycycline can reduce the fear memory response in healthy volunteers.

"We have demonstrated a proof-of-principle for an entirely new treatment strategy for PTSD," explains Professor Bach. "The theory is based on the recent discovery that our brains need proteins outside nerve cells, called matrix enzymes, to form memories. Matrix enzymes are found throughout the body, and their over-activity is involved in certain immune diseases and cancers. To treat such diseases, we already have clinically approved drugs that block these enzymes, including the antibiotic doxycycline, so we wanted to see if they could help to prevent fear memories from forming in the brain. Our results support this theory, opening up an exciting avenue of research that might help us to find treatments for PTSD.

"Using drugs to prevent PTSD would be challenging, since in the real world we don't know when a traumatic event is about to occur. However, there is growing evidence that people's memories and associations can be changed after the event when they experience or imagine similar situations. This is called 'reconsolidation', and we now plan to test the effect of doxycycline on reconsolidation of fear memories. If this is successful, we would hope to apply the technique to more clinically realistic models of PTSD within a few years."

The work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation, University of Zurich and Wellcome.

*In the first session, participants were given either doxycycline or a placebo and put in front of a computer. The screen would flash either blue or red, and one of the colours was associated with a 50% chance of receiving a painful electric shock. This happened 160 times, with the colours appearing in random order, so that participants learnt to associate the 'bad' colour with the shock.

A week later, under no medication, participants returned to repeat the experiment. This time there were no electric shocks, but a loud sound played after either colour was shown. Participants' fear responses were measured by tracking their eye blinks, as this is an instinctive response to sudden threats. The fear memory response was calculated by subtracting the baseline startle response -- the response to the sound on the 'good' colour - from the response to the sound when the 'bad' colour was showing.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release notes the funding sources and the study stated that there were no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LANSING, Mich. August 7, 2018 - Montmorency tart cherries may play a role in improving gut health, suggests a first-of-its kind human trial of nine adults combined with a parallel laboratory study published in the Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. An international team of scientists found that Montmorency tart cherries helped to positively impact the gut microbiome - a collection of trillions of bacteria and other microbes that live in the intestinal tract.

The microbiome has been the focus of multiple studies in recent years due to its potential role in maintaining digestive health, as well as its impact on immunity, heart health, blood sugar control, weight management and even brain health. The gut microbiome holds great promise, especially related to personalized nutrition, although the research is still evolving and larger, long-term human intervention studies are needed. However, the new study does suggest that Montmorency tart cherries can be added to the list of gut-friendly foods.

While previous studies on Montmorency tart cherries have ranged from heart health and exercise recovery to sleep, this is the first study to explore the potential gut health benefits. The researchers speculate that it may be due to the polyphenols (anthocyanins and other flavonoids) in Montmorency tart cherries, the varietal of tart cherries grown in the U.S. Polyphenols in plant-based foods are broken down by microbes to stimulate growth of good bacteria.

"Montmorency tart cherries were a logical food to study due to their unique composition of polyphenols, including chlorogenic acids," said principal investigator Franck Carbonero, PhD, assistant professor in the Department of Food Science at the University of Arkansas. "Our results suggest that the unique polyphenol mixture in tart cherries may help positively shape the gut microbiome, which could potentially have far-reaching health implications."

Researchers conducted both human and laboratory experiments to determine the impact of Montmorency tart cherries on the microbiome. In the human trial, nine healthy adults, 23-30 years old, drank 8 ounces of Montmorency tart cherry juice (from concentrate) daily for five days. These individuals were non-smokers and had not taken antibiotics (which can affect the microbiome) in the 12 weeks prior and during the study. Using stool samples, the participants' microbiome was analyzed before and after the dietary intervention, and food frequency questionnaires were used to evaluate their overall diet.

The laboratory experiments were set up to mimic the conditions within the human digestive system, specifically the stomach, small intestine and three regions of the colon, to study how polyphenols are broken down and absorbed. This process of breakdown and absorption can have a significant impact on the body's ability to use the beneficial bioactive compounds in plant-based foods. The researchers tested U.S.-grown Montmorency tart cherries, European tart cherries, sweet cherries, apricots and isolated polyphenols in each simulated region of the digestive tract. They analyzed changes in the mix of bacteria and how these bacteria helped digest the polyphenols over time.

In the human trial, the microbiome was positively altered (primarily measured by the increase in good bacteria) after just five days of drinking Montmorency tart cherry concentrate, although there were strikingly different responses due to the participants' initial microbiome composition. Individuals who ate a more Western diet (low in fruits, vegetables and fiber) potentially had a lower ability to metabolize polyphenols, thereby reducing bioavailability and any potential health benefits in the tart cherries. Remarkably, in these subjects, instead of Bifidobacterium, Collinsella were the beneficial polyphenol-degrading bacteria stimulated. The individuals who ate a more plant-based diet, with higher intakes of carbohydrates and fiber, responded with an increase in Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium, presumably because of the specific combination of polysaccharides and polyphenols.

While more research is needed, these results suggest individuals consuming a more plant-based diet may have a mix of gut bacteria that responds more positively and/or rapidly to tart cherry consumption. Individuals consuming a more Western diet that is lower in carbohydrates and fiber may have a lower/different ability to metabolize polyphenols, thereby altering bioavailability and any potential health benefits.

The laboratory experiments found that pure polyphenols characteristics of tart cherries increased the amount of Bifidobacterium. However, when concentrated juices were fermented, this bifidogenic effect appeared to be leveled out by the larger increase of polysaccharides utilizing bacteria. Somewhat surprisingly, Carbonero said, chemistry analyses showed that tart cherries polyphenols were not completely converted to smaller phenolic metabolites, suggesting that the full diversity of bacterial species in the human gut is required for efficient breakdown of the polyphenols in tart cherries.

While the dietary intervention was based on a limited number of human volunteers and more research is needed to support these conclusions, the results help build the foundation for future research and suggest Montmorency tart cherries can play a role in positively shaping the microbiome and maintaining gut health.

Montmorency tart cherries are the most common variety of tart cherries grown in the U.S., and are available year-round in dried, frozen, canned, and juice forms - including juice concentrate, which was the form used in this human trial. Montmorency tart cherry juice concentrate can be mixed with water or other juices. It can also be consumed straight from the bottle or used as an ingredient in recipes, such as smoothies and other beverages.

This study was made available online in April 2018 ahead of peer-review and publication this month.

Mayta-Apaza AC, Pottgen E, De Bodt J, et al. Impact of tart cherries polyphenols on the human gut microbiota and phenolic metabolites in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry. 2018;59:160-172.

The Cherry Marketing Institute, a not-for-profit organization funded by U.S. tart cherry growers and processors, provided financial support for the study. The funders had no role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. CMI's mission is to increase the demand for Montmorency tart cherries through promotion, market expansion, product development and research.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It’s mentioned that The Cherry Marketing Institute “provided financial support for the study.”
It’s not clear if any of the researchers involved have financial ties to the institute.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Research at Group Health points to bupropion (Wellbutrin) as first choice for overweight and obese patients with depression

SEATTLE--Group Health researchers have found that bupropion (marketed as Wellbutrin) is the only antidepressant that tends to be linked to long-term modest weight loss.

Previously, Group Health researchers showed a two-way street between depression and body weight: People with depression are more likely to be overweight, and vice versa. These researchers also found that most antidepressant medications have been linked to weight gain.

Prior research on antidepressants and weight change was limited to one year or shorter. But many people take antidepressants--the most commonly prescribed medications in the United States--for longer than a year. So for up to two years the new study followed more than 5,000 Group Health patients who started taking an antidepressant. The Journal of Clinical Medicine published it: "Long-Term Weight Change after Initiating Second-Generation Antidepressants."

"Our study suggests that bupropion is the best initial choice of antidepressant for the vast majority of Americans who have depression and are overweight or obese," said study leader David Arterburn, MD, MPH. He's a senior investigator at Group Health Research Institute (GHRI), a Group Health physician, and an affiliate associate professor in the University of Washington (UW) School of Medicine's Department of Medicine. But in some cases, an overweight or obese patient has reasons why bupropion is not for them--like a history of seizure disorder--and it would be better for them to choose a different treatment option.

"We found that bupropion is the only antidepressant that tends to be linked to weight loss over two years," Dr. Arterburn said. "All other antidepressants are linked to varying degrees of weight gain."

After two years, nonsmokers lost an average of 2.4 pounds on bupropion--compared with gaining an average of 4.6 pounds on fluoxetine (Prozac). So those who took bupropion ended up weighing 7 pounds less than did those on fluoxetine.

Unsurprisingly, that difference wasn't seen in people who smoked tobacco. Bupropion is often used to help patients stop smoking. So smokers who take bupropion are likely to be trying to quit--and coping with the weight gain that often accompanies attempts to quit smoking.

"A large body of evidence indicates no difference in how effectively the newer antidepressants improve people's moods," said Dr. Arterburn's coauthor Gregory Simon, MD, MPH, a Group Health psychiatrist, GHRI senior investigator, and research professor in psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the UW School of Medicine. "So it makes sense for doctors and patients to choose antidepressants on the basis of their side effects, costs, and patients' preferences--and, now, on whether patients are overweight or obese."

Bupropion should be considered the first-line drug of choice for people who are overweight or obese, Dr. Simon said. But patients should consult their doctor about which medication is right for them, before making any changes, including starting, switching, or stopping medication.

Grant R01 MH083671 from the National Institute of Mental Health funded this research.

Drs. Arterburn and Simon's coauthors are GHRI Senior Investigator Denise M. Boudreau, PhD, Research Project Management Director Emily O. Westbrook , Programmer Analyst Mary Kay Theis, and Andy Bogart; Tamar Sofer, PhD, a biostatistician at the UW School of Public Health and post-doctoral research fellow at Harvard University; and Sebastien Haneuse, PhD, an associate professor of biostatistics at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, who used to work at GHRI.

Group Health Research Institute does practical research that helps people like you and your family stay healthy. The Institute is the research arm of Seattle-based Group Health Cooperative, a consumer-governed, nonprofit health care system. Founded in 1947, Group Health Cooperative coordinates health care and coverage. The Institute has conducted nonproprietary public-interest research on preventing, diagnosing, and treating major health problems since 1983. Government and private research grants provide its main funding. Follow Group Health research on Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, LinkedIn, or YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: That’s pretty well covered, with lots of information about Group Health and the grantors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every year in Europe, three million people are admitted into hospitals for suspected mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) cases. Yet 90% of these patients will be able to return home safely, as no trauma has been detected. Today, the only reliable diagnosis is the CT Scan, which is only available in some hospitals and, in addition to being expensive, exposes patients to radiations. Researchers from the University of Geneva (UNIGE), in collaboration with the Hospitals of Barcelona, Madrid and Seville, have developed a small device - Point-of-Care Test (POCT) - that analyses the level of proteins in the blood and allows, using a single drop of blood, to diagnose the possibility of a mild traumatic brain injury. This discovery, described in PLOS ONE, will not only relieve emergency departments, free patients from often long waits, but also save on costly medical examinations.

Falling whilst skiing, tumbling down the stairs or getting hit on the head can cause symptoms such as blurred vision, vomiting, loss of consciousness or memory for about 30 minutes. There is then a risk of mild cerebral trauma, which represents more than 90% of brain injuries admitted to hospitals. But is there really a brain lesion? Or are these symptoms merely the consequence of the violence of the shock, of which will ultimately only leave a bump behind?

Today, the injured patients have to go to the emergency rooms of hospitals equipped with a CT Scan, an expensive examination that sends X-rays to the brain to detect the presence or absence of brain trauma. As their case is not a priority, it often takes a long time for the majority of patients to return home without risk of sequelae, except for bad memories.

"We wondered if it was possible to isolate certain proteins whose presence in the blood increases in the event of mild traumatic brain injury,» explains Jean-Charles Sanchez, professor at the Department of Internal Medicine of Specialties and the Biomarkers Centre of the Faculty of Medicine of the UNIGE. "Our idea was to find a way to do a quick examination that would allow, during a boxing or American football match for example, to determine whether the athlete can return to the field or if his condition requires hospitalization. The opposite of the CT Scan, an exam that lasts a long time and cannot be done anywhere," he adds.

During a shock on the head, some brain cells are damaged and release the proteins they contain, increasing their level in the blood. Scientists at UNIGE and Spanish hospitals then compared the blood of patients admitted for mild traumatic brain injury but diagnosed as negative with that of patients actually suffering from a brain lesion. Using proteomic analyses, which can quantify thousands of proteins simultaneously and observe variations in their levels in the blood, they gradually isolated four molecules indicating the presence of a brain injury: H-FABP, Interleukin-10, S100B and GFAP. "We have noticed that the H-FABP level alone makes it possible to confirm that there is no risk of trauma in one third of patients admitted after a shock," enthuses Jean-Charles Sanchez. The rest of the patients will have to undergo a CT scan to confirm the diagnosis.

It was still necessary to develop a device that could be used everywhere, quickly and simply, and that could be available in pharmacies or sports halls. "When a person has an accident in the mountain, few practices can do a CT Scan," notes the Geneva researcher. His team has developed a rapid diagnostic test (POCT) called TBIcheck, inspired by the principle of pregnancy testing: by placing a single drop of blood on the well of a small 5cm plastic case, the patient knows within 10 minutes whether there is a risk of mild trauma, namely whether or not his H-FABP level is higher than 2.5 nanograms per millilitre of blood. "If a lane appears, the injured person must go to a hospital for a CT scan, if there is nothing, he can go home safely!" Jean-Charles Sanchez says. In case of doubt when reading the result, a small reader, the Cube Reader, can be installed on TBIcheck. It will display the word "positive" or "negative" and send the result to the patient's or caregiver's smartphone via Bluetooth. No more doubts!

These results, patented by UNIGE and awarded the Prix de l'Innovation Academy in December 2017, will be marketed from 2019 by ABCDx, a start-up founded four years ago by Jean-Charles Sanchez of UNIGE and Joan Montaner of Vall d'Hebron Hospital in Barcelona, co-authors of this study. "Today, our research shows that the results are even more accurate when we combine H-FABP and GFAP levels," continues Jean-Charles Sanchez. "We are currently preparing an even more effective TBIcheck, which will allow 50% of patients to be sent home, but which requires an increase in the sensitivity of the test that receives the blood." ABCDx's ultimate goal is to bring to market biomarkers capable of diagnosing brain trauma, stroke and aneurysms. "Biomarkers are a mine of information on patients' state of health, it is up to us to decode them," concludes the Geneva researcher.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release stated that the test sponsor, the University of Geneva, holds a patent on the test which was developed by two of the study’s authors who founded the company that will sell the test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 14, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Eating three or more servings of blueberries and strawberries each week may help reduce a woman's risk of heart attack, a large new study suggests.

The study included nearly 94,000 young and middle-aged women who took part in the Nurses' Health Study II. The women completed questionnaires about their diet every four years for 18 years.

During the study period, 405 participants had heart attacks. Women who ate the most blueberries and strawberries were 32 percent less likely to have a heart attack, compared to women who ate berries once a month or less. This held true even among women who ate a diet rich in other fruits and vegetables.

This benefit was independent of other heart risk factors such as advancing age, high blood pressure, family history of heart attack, body mass index, exercise, smoking, and caffeine and alcohol intake. The findings appear online Jan. 14 in the journal Circulation.

The study can't say specifically what about the berries seemed to result in a lower risk of heart attack among these women, or that there was a direct cause-and-effect link between eating the berries and lowered heart attack risk. But blueberries and strawberries contain high levels of compounds that may help widen arteries, which counters plaque buildup, the researchers said. Heart attacks can occur when plaque blocks blood flow to the heart.

"Berries were the most commonly consumed sources of these substances in the U.S. diet, and they are one of the best sources of these powerful bioactive compounds," said study lead author Aedin Cassidy. "These substances, called anthocyanins -- a flavonoid -- are naturally present in red- and blue-colored fruits and vegetables, so they are also found in high amounts in cherries, grapes, eggplant, black currants, plums and other berries."

Men are likely to benefit from eating berries as well, although this study included only women, said Cassidy, who is head of the department of nutrition at Norwich Medical School at the University of East Anglia, in England.

Although more research is needed to confirm these benefits, "these data are important from a public health perspective because these fruits can be readily incorporated into the habitual diet," the study concluded.

Dr. Suzanne Steinbaum, a preventive cardiologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, noted that this was a "huge study that followed women for a long period of time. Women who ate three or more servings of strawberries and blueberries per week decreased their heart attack risk by one-third. This is pretty compelling."

Steinbaum's advice to both women and men is to include berries in their diet, and make them part of their daily fruit and vegetable fill.

One serving of blueberries or strawberries equals about one cup.

Dana Greene, a nutritionist in Boston, regularly tells her patients to consume more fruits and vegetables, including berries.

"They are so good for you," Greene said. Besides flavonoids, berries also are loaded with other nutrients, including vitamin C, potassium and folate.

"I tell all patients to make sure that half of their plate is filled with fruits and vegetables, especially richly colored ones like blueberries and strawberries," Greene said. "Berries can also help people lose weight and maintain that loss because they feel fuller faster. There is no downside."

The study was funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health and the U.K. Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.

What does a heart attack look like in women? Find out at the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes two independent experts, preventive cardiologist Dr. Suzanne Steinbaum and nutritionist Dana Greene. We wish that the experts were quoted on a more analytical view of the study, instead of talking so much about berry diets. Greene is even quoted as saying, “[Berries] are so good for you,” and “There is no downside” to eating berries. Again, too much of anything could become more of a harm than a benefit, as mentioned above. It’s interesting that Steinbaum was also interviewed in the competing TIME story.  Why?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study from Karolinska Institutet in Sweden shows that short-course preoperative radiotherapy combined with delayed surgery reduces the adverse side-effects of rectal cancer surgery without compromising its efficacy. The results are presented in the journal The Lancet Oncology.

Rectal cancer affects some 2,000 men and women in Sweden every year. Preoperative radiotherapy was gradually introduced in the early 1990s, with a consequent improvement in prognosis for people with rectal cancer and reduction in the risk of local recurrence.

"Back then we showed that preoperative radiotherapy reduces the risk of local recurrence by over 50 per cent for patients with rectal cancer," says principal investigator Anna Martling, senior consultant surgeon and professor at Karolinska Institutet's Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery. "Thanks to our results, radiotherapy is recommended to many rectal cancer patients."

However, radiotherapy can cause adverse reactions and the optimal radiotherapeutic method and the interval between it and the ensuing surgery have been mooted. The study now presented in The Lancet Oncology is based on the claim that the adverse effects of rectal cancer treatment can be reduced by administering more but lower doses of radiation for a longer time, or by increasing the interval between radiotherapy and surgery. These hypotheses have now been tested in a study in which rectal cancer patients were randomly assigned to three different treatment arms:
• Delayed surgery with short-course (5x5 Gy) radiotherapy followed by surgery after 4-8 weeks.
• Delayed surgery with long-course (25x2 Gy) radiotherapy followed by surgery after 4-8 weeks.

The results of the study show that patients with delayed surgery develop fewer complications with equally good oncological outcomes. It also showed that there is no difference between long-course and short-course radiotherapy other than that the former considerably lengthens the time for treatment.

"The results of the study will give rise to improved therapeutic strategies, fewer complications with a sustained low incidence of local recurrence, and better survival rates for rectal cancer patients," says Professor Martling. "The results can now be immediately put to clinical use to the considerable benefit of the patients."

Eighteen Swedish hospitals took part in the study, which was financed by the Swedish Research Council and the Cancer Society in Stockholm, and through the regional ALF agreement between Stockholm County Council and Karolinska Institutet. Researchers from the universities in Lund, Uppsala and Linköping also contributed to findings.

Publication: 'The Stockholm III Trial on optimal fractionation of preoperative radiotherapy and timing to surgery for rectal cancer - a randomised controlled trial' Johan Erlandsson, Torbjörn Holm, David Pettersson, Åke Berglund, Björn Cedermark, Calin Radu, Hemming Johansson, Mikael Machado, Fredrik Hjern, Olof Hallböök, Ingvar Syk, Bengt Glimelius, Anna Martling
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the study was financed by the Swedish Research Council and the Cancer Society in Stockholm, and through the regional ALF agreement between Stockholm County Council and Karolinska Institutet. According to the study, there are no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Science doesn’t just help to invent new products, it can push existing ones.

Look no further than the beauty industry. It does lots of testing and flaunts products with scientific terms like microbeads, enzymes and rejuvenating serums. But what are the data behind them? And what if the company selling the product did the tests?

Take Inneov Sun Sensitivity, a nutritional supplement “clinically proven” to protect your skin from the sun’s harmful UV rays while leaving you with a nice tan, according to its maker Laboratoires Inneov, a joint venture between L’Oreal and Nestle.

The pill combines lycopene and beta-carotene — the red and orange substances in tomatoes and carrots, respectively — with a probiotic reported to impact the skin’s response to UV light.

“The efficacy of our nutritional supplement was demonstrated by rigorous studies,” said Nathalie Piccardi, of Laboratoires Inneov, who worked on the study.

“The next step is to present this product to dermatologists,” she told Reuters Health, noting it has already been launched in Europe and South America.

But a closer look reveals some shaky science, said Dr. Peter Schalock, a dermatologist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston who isn’t affiliated with Laboratoires Inneov.

“Scientifically there are no data there,” he said about one of the company’s experiments. “It sounds like opinion and nothing more.”

The only published data on the tanning pill’s ability to reduce sunburns came out last month in the British Journal of Dermatology. To test the pill, scientists had dozens of women expose their behinds or backs to strong UV light. They found an effect on immune cells in the skin, but the question was, would the women also get fewer sunburns and better tans?

To answer that, Laboratoires Inneov conducted a so-called randomized controlled trial — the most powerful kind of study in the scientific toolbox — in which women were randomly assigned to take Inneov Sun Sensitivity or a placebo pill.

But the researchers never compared the response directly between the two groups, the whole point of a randomized controlled trial. Instead, they used a weaker method comparing the before-and-after differences within each group.

While Piccardi said she thought this method was appropriate, it means the company can’t claim women taking their product had a higher threshold for sunburns than those taking a placebo pill. The same goes for the tan.

As a result, said Schalock, the company’s claim that women taking their product can sunbathe with less concern of getting burned might be a stretch.

Schalock told Reuters Health he has a “hard time seeing that statistically or scientifically they have proven it.”

The fact that the company did the testing itself could also raise a red flag.

“There is some evidence to indicate that we are right to be concerned about the quality of research when there is a conflict of interest,” said Josephine Johnston, a bioethicist at the Hastings Center in Garrison, New York.

Johnston, who said she could not speak to the scientific merits of the Inneov report, said other studies had shown industry-funded research is more likely to have positive outcomes, and that people could be influenced by financial interests even if they didn’t realize it.

“The major problem,” she told Reuters Health, “is that it has an impact of trustworthiness.”

Branding personal care products with clinical claims is a very common strategy, an expert who studies consumer marketing told Reuters Health.

“Claiming that kind of a benefit is certainly something people respond to,” said the expert, a professor at an East Coast university who asked to remain anonymous because his institution receives funding from the cosmetics industry.

While some people will want to see and feel an impact, he said, for many the clinical claim alone suffices. “The key question is, will the consumer view as credible that ingesting a pill will prevent (sun) damage?”

In another experiment, Laboratoires Inneov scientists gave the tanning pill to 80 women and asked them to sunbathe as they normally would over the summer, applying sunscreen at their discretion.

Then they asked dermatologists, recruited by a company paid by Laboratoires Inneov, a series of questions about how these women fared. According to the report, the dermatologists told Laboratoires Inneov the product prevented sunburns.

“We truly believed that this kind of study, taking into account consumers’ opinion, complements experimental and control studies,” said Piccardi.

But the study did not answer a number of questions: How did the women usually do in the summer? Did they end up like boiled lobsters or were they careful not to get burned? Might they have been extra cautious because they were part of a skin protection study?

“It would have been nice to really know that it worked, and that it’s not just a placebo effect,” Schalock said.

He pointed out it was hard to draw any conclusions from this part of the study because it didn’t include any data. What kind of evaluations did the dermatologists do? What exactly did they tell Laboratoires Inneov?

Of more than a dozen researchers and dermatologists contacted about the quality of this study, only Schalock agreed to comment.

Dr. Tobias W. Fischer, a dermatologist at the University Lubeck in Germany, offered this rationale for why he didn’t: “I don’t give interviews, criticizing other researchers’ work, even if industrial.”

The editor of the journal that published the study, Dr. Tanya Bleiker, said it had been reviewed by experts before acceptance, as are all the journal’s reports.

While there had been some concerns about the methods, “on balance there was enough interest to publish it,” she told Reuters Health.

The journal does ask researchers if they have financial ties to the products they are studying. According to Bleiker, “the authors stated very clearly that there was no conflict of interest.”

However, more than half of the authors work for Laboratoires Inneov, as indicated on the cover page of the report.

“It wasn’t being hidden that they worked for the company,” Johnston told Reuters Health. “The journal knew it.”

“The question for the journal, given that the authors worked for the company, is, ‘Do we publish something like that?’”

Johnston said there was an ongoing debate about whether or not scientists who review studies should know about potential industry interests.

The question then becomes what, if anything, to do when there is a conflict of interest.

“The reader can’t do anything,” said Johnston. “It needs to be done by people higher up in the food chain.”

Whether or not Inneov Sun Sensitivity has been “clinically proven” to protect against sunburns, “We have to deal with the fact that the scientific literature contains research from people with financial conflicts,” Johnston said.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story identified conflicts of interest that even a publishing journal did not – and it showed how this happened.  And it quoted several skeptical expert sources. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For at least 2,000 years Chinese healers have used acupuncture to treat pain and other ailments. Now Western doctors want proof that it works.

There is little dispute that people feel better after receiving the treatment, in which thin needles are inserted deeply into the skin at specific points on the body. But are they benefiting from acupuncture itself, or just getting a placebo effect?

The debate was fueled last week by a study in the journal Arthritis Care and Research. Researchers from MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston found that among 455 patients with painful knee arthritis, acupuncture delivered no more relief than a sham treatment.

Actually, patients got significant pain relief from both treatments — an average reduction of one point on a scale of 1 to 7. And critics contend that the study was poorly designed.

For one thing, they note, patients in both groups received treatment with needles and electrical stimulation; the main difference was that in the sham group, the needles were not inserted as deeply and the stimulation was far shorter in duration.

In the real world, however, a trained acupuncturist would customize the treatment to a patient’s specific symptoms. But in this study, the patients in the “real” acupuncture group all received needles inserted in the same way.

Rather than proving that acupuncture does not work, in other words, the study may suggest that it works even when administered poorly. But the real lesson, acupuncture supporters say, is how difficult it can be to apply Western research standards to an ancient healing art.

“People argue that there really are no inactive acupuncture points — pretty much wherever you put a needle in the body is an active point,” said Dr. Alex Moroz, a trained acupuncturist who directs the musculoskeletal rehabilitation program at New York University. “There is a body of literature that argues that the whole approach to studying acupuncture doesn’t lend itself to the Western reductionist scientific method.”

But the study’s lead author, Dr. Maria E. Suarez-Almazor, notes that the sham treatment was developed with the help of trained acupuncturists. In a drug study, an equal response in the treatment and placebo groups would prove the drug does not work, she says.

“We really worked with acupuncturists who are trained in the Chinese traditional style and asked them to come up with a sham that could be credible,” Dr. Suarez-Almazor said. “We didn’t plan a study trying to show that acupuncture didn’t work. The results came out with no difference between the groups.”

The MD Anderson research and other recent acupuncture studies have fueled speculation that the prick of a needle, whether from real acupuncture or a sham version, can influence the way the body processes and transmits pain signals. A 2007 study of 1,200 back-pain patients, financed by insurance companies in Germany, showed that about half the patients in both real and sham acupuncture groups had less pain after treatment, compared with only 27 percent of those receiving physical therapy or other traditional back care.

When the German researchers tracked how much pain medicine the patients used, they detected a noticeable difference between real acupuncture and the sham treatment. Only 15 percent of patients in the acupuncture group required extra pain drugs, compared with 34 percent in the sham group. The group receiving conventional back therapy fared even worse than those receiving fake acupuncture: 59 percent of those patients needed extra pain pills.

The researchers, who published their findings in Archives of Internal Medicine, speculated that inserting needles in or around an area of pain may have caused a “super placebo” effect, touching off a series of reactions that changed the way the body experienced pain.

Still another study, this one financed by the National Institutes of Health and published in 2004, found that acupuncture significantly reduced pain and improved function in knee arthritis patients compared with a sham treatment or routine knee care.

But that result has been called into question because the patients in the sham group probably figured out they were not getting the real thing. They received only two needle insertions in the abdomen, while a needle was simply pressed along nine areas of the leg and taped to the skin to mimic acupuncture. A mock electrical stimulation machine whirred and blinked nearby, but didn’t deliver any current to the body.

This year, researchers at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit solved the problem of creating a sham acupuncture treatment: they didn’t have one. Instead, they compared acupuncture to a proven remedy — the drug Effexor, an antidepressant that has been shown to significantly reduce hot flashes in breast cancer patients.

The results were striking. Acupuncture relieved hot flashes just as well as Effexor, with fewer side effects. The acupuncture recipients reported more energy and even an increased sex drive, compared with women using Effexor.

“There are some things you can’t study the same way we do with drugs,” said Dr. Eleanor M. Walker, director of breast radiation oncology at the Henry Ford Health System. “The thing that can’t be argued in my study is the duration of the effect. It lasts, and the placebo effect doesn’t last once you stop a treatment.”

But acupuncture believers say it doesn’t really matter whether Western scientific studies find that the treatment has a strong placebo effect. After all, the goal of what they call integrative medicine, which combines conventional and alternative treatments like acupuncture, is to harness the body’s power to heal itself. It doesn’t matter whether that power is stimulated by a placebo effect or by skillful placement of needles.

“In general in integrative medicine, when patients are involved in their healing process, they have a tendency to do better,” said Angela Johnson, a practitioner of Chinese medicine at Rush Children’s Hospital in Chicago who is conducting a pilot study of acupuncture to relieve pain in children. “I believe that’s part of the reason why they get better.”

A version of this article appeared in print on August 24, 2010, on page D5 of the New York edition of The Times.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article quotes many sources – most of them involved in the research in question.  One interviewee appeared to be independent of any of the studies being discussed. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TOKYO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Hitachi, Ltd. (TSE:6501, “Hitachi”) today announced that Johns Hopkins Medicine has selected Hitachi to provide its proton beam therapy (PBT) system at Sibley Memorial Hospital located in Washington, D.C. This collaboration, which includes a 10-year maintenance service, marks the first multi-room PBT application in the nation’s capital. This will be Hitachi’s fifth PBT system in North America.

The next-generation system “PROBEAT”, which comes with IMPT (Intensity Modulated Proton Therapy) and cone-beam CT, will have improved spot scanning capability in all 3 gantry-type treatment rooms, along with a fixed irradiation room dedicated to cancer research.

Toshiaki Higashihara, President & COO of Hitachi, Ltd. stated that, “We are greatly honored that Johns Hopkins selected Hitachi as their proton partner. As one of the leaders in cancer research and treatment, the Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center’s philosophy of being at the leading edge of cancer treatment through research and development is very similar to our Social Innovation concept which supports a healthy and secure society through innovative technologies, systems, solutions and services. The proton center at Sibley Memorial Hospital will be an impressive demonstration of industry and academic medicine collaborating to bring a new technology and new cancer treatment modality to Washington, D.C. and the surrounding communities. Thus, we foresee an exciting, long term relationship that will benefit cancer patients and cancer research.”

In December 2007, Hitachi was the first company in the U.S. to clear FDA Premarket Notification Special 510(k) for the “PROBEAT” system with its spot scanning irradiation technology. Hitachi has delivered the first hospital based spot scanning system in May 2008 and has treated over 1,500 patients to date. The same spot scanning system has already been installed at Nagoya Proton Therapy Center and Hokkaido University in Japan. In fiscal year 2015 (ending March 2016), one of Hitachi's new PBT site is planning to start treatment of patients. Hitachi has shown great stability in the proton market through continued investment in research and development, track record for high clinical availability of over 98%, along with a commitment to a long term partnership with all of its clients.

Given the growing demand for technical and clinical advancements in the treatment of cancer, interest in proton therapy is on the rise, with more and more hospitals and cancer treatment facilities venturing into this area. Hitachi will continue to globally expand the healthcare business where proton therapy is its flagship solution, and contribute to cancer treatment around the world.

Proton Beam Therapy (PBT) is an advanced type of cancer radiotherapy. Protons from a hydrogen atom are extracted and accelerated up to 70% the speed of light. Its energy is concentrated directly on the tumor while avoiding radiation dose to the surrounding healthy tissues. PBT improves the quality of life for cancer patients since the patient experiences no pain during treatment and the procedure has very few side effects compared with that of traditional radiotherapy. In most cases, patients can continue with their normal daily activities while undergoing treatment. Because there are fewer side effects, PBT is expected to expand, especially for pediatric treatment.

Unlike conventional scattering technology, spot scanning technology delivers narrow beams to the tumor and the complex tumor shape can be irradiated through repetitive beam delivery with quick position change. Spot scanning technology has been achieved by advancing the uniform quality beam extraction technology from the accelerator and beam control technology with high accuracy. Three primary benefits are: (1) more accurate irradiation which reduces the side effects to healthy tissues surrounding the tumor compared with irradiation from conventional double scattering irradiation; (2) patient-specific collimators and boluses become obsolete, shortening set up times for patients; and (3) high proton beam usage factor reducing unnecessary secondary radiation.

Hitachi, Ltd. (TSE: 6501), headquartered in Tokyo, Japan, delivers innovations that answer society’s challenges with our talented team and proven experience in global markets. The company’s consolidated revenues for fiscal 2014 (ended March 31, 2015) totaled 9,761 billion yen ($81.3 billion). Hitachi is focusing more than ever on the Social Innovation Business, which includes power & infrastructure systems, information & telecommunication systems, construction machinery, high functional materials & components, automotive systems, healthcare and others. For more information on Hitachi, please visit the company's website at http://www.hitachi.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: It’s clear that the release comes from Hitachi, the PBT system manufacturer and marketer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The blood test is also part of a larger debate about who should be treating allergy sufferers. Blood testing would allow pediatricians and other primary care doctors to diagnose allergies and treat many patients. But allergists contend that these generalists are not qualified to assess the laboratory results.

Dr. Dean Mitchell, an allergist in Manhattan, has virtually abandoned the skin-prick test. He was converted, he says, after taking a patient to the emergency room for a severe reaction to his skin test. Dr. Mitchell began to imagine a nearly needle-free office.

“There’s been a longstanding fear of skin testing, and it turns off a lot of allergy sufferers from getting help,” said Dr. Mitchell, the author of “Allergy and Asthma Solution” (Marlowe, 2006), which advocates oral immunotherapy, or allergy drops, instead of shots.

For that reason, he and other experts say, most sufferers never even see an allergist. (And many sufferers of seasonal and pet allergies know what they’re allergic to, so they don’t need a diagnosis.) For them, care has focused on treating symptoms with antihistamines and decongestants, not diagnosing the allergy and avoiding its triggers.

“The question is, why aren’t we identifying more children and adults suffering from allergic rhinitis and asthma to help them?” Dr. Mitchell said.

In Europe, 60 percent of asthma patients are tested for allergies, compared with only 5 percent to 10 percent in this country. A lack of diagnosis may contribute to the worsening of symptoms in children — the so-called allergy march.

It begins with eczema in infants and toddlers, and progresses to respiratory problems and asthma in preschoolers and beyond. Half of babies who have eczema in the first two years of life will develop asthma in childhood, said Dr. Thomas A. E. Platts-Mills, president of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology.

In skin testing, a practitioner makes rows of pricks on a patient’s back or forearm so allergen-containing extracts can seep into the skin. If the antibody IgE is bound to the immune system’s mast cells in the skin, the patient will get an itchy, hivelike wheal surrounded by redness. The size of the wheal and the diameter of the redness help determine if the patient is allergic.

A patient typically gets 15 to 20 skin pricks, but sometimes many more. Because the test comes with a small risk of a serious reaction, it should not be performed in very young children and pregnant women, among others.

The blood test, which is not without its own ouch factor, measures levels of circulating IgE. The lab sends the physician a report with these figures and the patient’s risk of a reaction.

The first generation of blood tests were developed in the 1970s. Because they were not considered very sensitive, physicians were left with a lasting impression that blood testing was inferior to skin testing.

A more sophisticated test with improved sensitivity, called ImmunoCAP, became available in 1992. It has performed equally well in comparison studies with skin-prick testing, said Dr. Jay M. Portnoy, chief of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology at Children’s Mercy Hospital in Kansas City, Mo.

Still, most allergists prefer skin testing. “Skin testing is more sensitive and tells you more,” said Dr. Dean D. Metcalfe, chief of the laboratory of allergic diseases at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. With blood tests, he went on, “you’re not really measuring an allergic reaction, but a potential for a reaction.”

Skin testing produces an answer in about 20 minutes, compared with 48 hours for a blood test. The quick turnaround allows doctors to offer a diagnosis and immediate advice.

But skin-testing results can vary from one allergist to the next, and most allergists don’t rely on a prior allergist’s results when a patient switches practices.

Some experts contend that allergists resist blood testing in part to protect their revenue. “A barrier to allergy testing in the states has been the economics in our system,” said Dr. Richard G. Roberts, professor of family medicine at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health. If an allergist does an in-office skin-prick test, he gets the fees for those tests. If he requests a blood test, the laboratory gets the fee.

But others say allergists are simply more familiar with skin testing. “They have been trained to do skin testing, they’re comfortable with it, and they get an answer in 20 minutes,” said Dr. Portnoy.

Allergists say some patients previously treated by primary care physicians were taken off foods like peanuts, though they never had an allergic reaction to them. Diagnosing requires a thorough medical history and interpreting the test results within that context; generalists may lack the time to do a complete history, especially under the pressures of managed care.

Dr. Roberts says that if primary-care physicians used the blood test, many more patients would be treated appropriately. While most allergy patients are seen by these generalists, he says, many allergies are not adequately diagnosed.

“Could we do a better job collectively?” he asked. “Absolutely.”

Some allergists have made the switch to blood testing — especially in the area of food allergies, where blood testing is replacing the so-called food challenge test, a two- to six-hour procedure in which patients are given increasing amounts of suspect foods like egg or milk to determine whether they will have an allergic reaction.

Dr. Hugh Sampson, a food allergy expert at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, is seeking to add a level of precision to diagnosis. He correlates levels of specific IgE with a probability that the person is allergic to a food — a technique, he says, that reduces the need for food challenge testing by half.

Dr. Mitchell, the Manhattan allergist, called that approach promising. “A lot of academic allergists are very conservative,” he said. “But Hugh Sampson’s work may turn the tide.”

As for Sarah Marcus, starting last summer she was weaned from allergy shots so she would no longer need them when she went away to college, at the University of Pennsylvania. She has been shot-free and allergy-free since Thanksgiving.

“All in all,” said her mother, “if I could go back, if I had a 2-year-old now, I’d never put her through the skin testing.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes multiple experts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A simple blood test may help gauge prognosis and tailor treatments for women who have been diagnosed with early stage breast cancer.

The test, described in the June 6 online edition of The Lancet Oncology, measures how many tumor cells are circulating in the blood. In the new study, if even one cell was detected in the bloodstream, a woman had a greater chance of her cancer recurring and of dying.

"This may help with prognosis and staging of the cancer and, in the future, with targets for breast cancer treatments," said study lead author Dr. Anthony Lucci, a professor of surgery at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, in Houston.

Commenting on the findings, Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, said, "We are moving into a state where we're looking at a person's individual tumor and this is another way to do that, potentially leading to treatment."

Whether or not cancer has spread to the lymph nodes is currently the best way to predict survival in women with breast cancer. Even so, a substantial number of patients whose cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes will have a recurrence while some of those who do have lymph-node involvement won't relapse.

Blood tests similar to the one investigated in this study have been found to be useful to gauge how well patients who already have metastatic cancer will do.

For this study, researchers counted circulating tumor cells in 302 breast cancer patients who were about to undergo surgery but who hadn't yet received chemotherapy.

Circulating tumor cells were detectable in about one-quarter of the participants, the investigators found. Fifteen percent of these individuals had a relapse and 10 percent died during a five-year follow-up, compared with 3 percent and 2 percent, respectively, of patients who did not have circulating tumor cells.

The more tumor cells a woman had in her bloodstream, the higher the likelihood of relapsing or dying, according to the report.

Although the test may not be far off in terms of clinical practice, "we need additional studies," Lucci said.

One area for study is how well these circulating cells predict recurrence and death in patients who have already had chemotherapy.

Currently, the American Society of Clinical Oncology does not recommend that clinicians measure circulating tumor cells in patients.

And in an accompanying comment article, Justin Stebbing, a professor in the department of surgery and cancer at Imperial College in London, said that "despite increasing evidence supporting the use of [circulating tumor cells] as biomarkers, how this information can be integrated into present practice is uncertain."

According to Bernik, though, "it makes sense that women who have circulating tumor cells would potentially be at higher risk of distant disease at some later date."

The problem is that just having circulating tumor cells may not be enough information to foretell the future, she noted.

"The cells also need to have a propensity to grow elsewhere," she said. "Not every cancer cell becomes a metastatic cancer cell. Hopefully, gaining the ability to tell which cells are more likely to spread potentially could guide therapy," Bernik added.

According to Lucci, circulating tumor cells are also showing promise in predicting melanoma prognosis, so the method may be "effective in several different tumor systems."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Two experts not connected with the study are quoted.  Both provide valuable perspective on the clinical usefulness of the blood test to current patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Washington, DC (May 17, 2017) - Pasta is a convenient, nutritious, easy-to-prepare meal for families. Pasta pleases even the pickiest of young eaters. And now, even more good news: new research shows that pasta consumption in children and adolescents is associated with a better diet quality than that of children who do not eat pasta. The research, which was presented at the 2017 Experimental Biology conference at the end of April in Chicago, demonstrated that young pasta-eaters have greater intakes of important vitamins and minerals and lower intakes of saturated fat and total fat in the diet compared to their peers who do not consume pasta.

The research, "Pasta Consumption in American Children and Adolescents is Associated with Greater Daily Intake of Shortfall Nutrients as Defined by the 2015 Dietary Guidelines, Improved Diet Quality and Lower Added Sugar Intake," was conducted by Nutritional Strategies, Inc. on behalf of the National Pasta Association. The study examined associations between pasta consumption, shortfall nutrient intakes as defined by the 2015 Dietary Guidelines (2015 DG) and diet quality in comparison to non-pasta consumption in U.S. children and adolescents (ages 2-18). Pasta consumption was defined as all dry domestic and imported pasta/noodle varieties made with only wheat and no egg. The data review did not look at any health outcomes associated with pasta consumption except for the ones specified below.

From the analysis, researchers identified a number of key positive nutritional dietary patterns associated with children and adolescents who eat pasta as part of their diet compared to those who don't eat pasta. They are:

-Better overall diet quality (as measured by USDA's Healthy Eating Index-2010 scale) -Greater intake of key shortfall nutrients like dietary fiber, folate, iron, magnesium and vitamin E -No significant associations were seen with body weight, waist circumference and body mass index

Pasta has long been celebrated as one of America's favorite foods and is advocated by nutritionists for its good nutrition.

"Good nutrition is critical to the developing minds and bodies of children and adolescents. Certain grain foods, like pasta, are a great complement to a healthy well-balanced meal and provide plenty of opportunities for improving the diet," explains registered dietitian Diane Welland, Nutrition Communications Manager for the National Pasta Association. "Think of pasta as a canvas from which you can add nutrient-dense, fiber-rich foods like fresh vegetables, fruits, cheese, lean meats and legumes, when creating meals for your family."

For more information, recipes and facts about pasta, please visit http://www. . To learn more about the research, please contact Kara Yacovone at kyacovone@kellencompany.com.

NPA is the leading trade association for the U.S. pasta industry. The association provides leadership to the industry on public policy issues, serving as its voice in Washington, D.C. NPA also forges alliances with key organizations, monitors and addresses technical issues and conducts nutrition and food safety research on behalf of the U.S. pasta industry.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states that an industry financed association paid for the research. Readers should be able to take the hint (without being told explicitly) that the association has a financial interest in selling more pasta.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - When the results of a test wouldn’t change how doctors manage a patient’s care, most say it’s not worth doing. But new tests for breast cancer risk mutations beyond the well-known BRCA genes would offer actionable information for many women and their doctors, a new study finds.

The BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations put women at high risk for breast, ovarian and other cancers, but mutations of other genes are believed to confer extra risk as well.

Earlier this year, 17 genetic experts argued against testing for a wider panel of breast cancer-related gene mutations until they are proven to be valid and useful in clinical practice (see Reuters story of May 27, 2015 here: reut.rs/1TvOoDf).

“There’s a lot of controversy even among experts,” said the senior author of the new study, Dr. Leif W. Ellisen of Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center in Boston.

For 15 years, at-risk women have only been tested for BRCA1 and 2, but many companies now offer multi-gene panels for 20, 25 or 30 other genes, Ellisen told Reuters Health.

“Are patients better off getting these much broader tests?” he said. “Does it actually change what you would tell them to do in terms of screening, prevention, or risk management?”

According to the new results, at least for some women, it would change their clinical management, he said.

Several of the authors of the new paper disclosed that they receive research funding, consult for or are employed by genetic testing companies like Myriad Genetics and Invitae Corporation.

Between 2001 and 2014, the study team did panel tests for 25 or 29 genes on 1,046 women who were referred for hereditary breast or ovarian cancer gene testing, but had tested negative for BRCA mutations. Most of the women had a personal history of breast or ovarian cancer already.

The researchers found that 40 women, or 4 percent of the total group, did have potentially harmful mutations in other genes. Of those 40 women, 26 had mutations carrying low to moderate risk of breast or ovarian cancer, eight had mutations associated with Lynch syndrome, which increases colon and ovarian cancer risk, and three had high-risk breast cancer genes.

Including another 23 patients who were referred into the study at a late stage, there were 63 women positive for non-BRCA mutations. Of those, the researchers decided that 33 would have been considered for additional screening or prevention measures based on their results. And for many, family testing would be recommended for first-degree relatives, according to the report in JAMA Oncology.

Even among all appropriate candidates who are sent for genetic testing, only nine percent will test positive for the BRCA mutations, so an additional four percent who have non-BRCA mutations is a significant number, Ellisen said.

Often these additional women do not have a high risk of breast or ovarian cancer, but some do have a high risk of colon or uterine cancer, and would be referred for additional screening, he said.

Multigene testing is not more expensive than testing for the BRCA mutations alone, he said.

Though these results indicate that additional genetic screening is clinically useful, some genetic test results will be uncertain, and it can be psychologically difficult for patients to deal with this uncertainty, Ellisen said.

“We do not advocate for broad population-based screening,” he said. “The interpretation of these tests is not a simple color-by-numbers thing.” The vast majority of uncertain genes will be benign, but a misinterpretation could lead a patient to a drastic, unnecessary surgical procedure, he said.

“Many cancer genetics experts have again urged caution, characterizing the use of multigene testing in the clinical setting as premature,” Dr. Elizabeth M. Swisher of the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle writes in a commentary accompanying the new paper.

“Yet thousands of women and their physicians are ignoring this advice, ordering a wide selection of multiplex tests daily,” Swisher writes. “The train has left the station and is unlikely to return,” so it is important to assess how useful this additional testing can be, she concludes.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions that several of the study’s authors have links to the industry and to companies that produce the genetic test panels. The story also quotes from an editorial written by an expert who wasn’t involved with the study. Conducting an interview with an outside expert might have unearthed additional useful context, but the story is pretty solid here as it stands.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A common blood test could help diagnose cancer earlier, according to research suggesting a high platelet count is strongly associated with the disease.



Platelets are tiny blood cells that circulate in the body, helping wounds to clot. But in some individuals too many platelets are produced – a condition known as thrombocytosis, thought to affect about half a million people in the UK over the age of 40.

Researchers say that raised platelet counts are as good a predictor of getting any cancer as a lump in the breast is for breast cancer.

“This is a clue which can be used in practice by GPs to help them select patients for further investigation … most excitingly in some patients who may not already have other symptoms of cancer to achieve earlier diagnosis,” said Sarah Bailey, co-author of the research from the University of Exeter.

Previous studies have suggested a link between thrombocytosis and various cancers, with recent guidelines from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence advising high platelet counts could be a sign of cancer of the oesophageal, stomach, lung or uterus.

But it remained unclear whether the condition could signal an increased risk of all cancers, and how it ties in with factors such as age and sex.

Writing in the British Journal of General Practice, Bailey and colleagues report how they examined data from almost 50,000 individuals aged 40 or over who had been given a blood test by their GP. The patients were selected at random from a national database.

In total, over 31,000 patients found to have a raised platelet count, and nearly 8,000 without, were included in the analysis.

Within a year of the blood test, the team found that cancer was more common among those who had thrombocytosis: 11.6% of men and 6.2% of women were found to have cancer compared to 4.1% of men and 2.2% of women without a raised platelet count. In the general population about 1% of individuals over the age of 40 develop cancer each year.

For comparison, among women aged between 50 and 59 who have discovered a breast lump, the proportion who are found to have breast cancer is 8.5%.



“We found cancer was more commonly diagnosed in men with raised platelet counts than it was in women with raised platelet counts and we believe that is because there are more causes of raised platelet counts in women that are not cancer,” said Bailey.

The team add that cancer was more common among for those who had thrombocytosis for longer. Of the men who had a raised platelet count of the same value or higher six months after being diagnosed with thrombocytosis, 18.1% developed cancer, while for women the figure was 10.1%.

While many different types of cancer were present in both groups, the team found that breast and prostate cancers were less common among those with thrombocytosis than in the general population, while lung and colorectal cancers were more common.

For about a third of cases of lung and colorectal cancer in patients with thrombocytosis, there had been no other symptoms that raised the suggestion of cancer. That, say the researchers, makes testing for raised platelet count a valuable tool, and could speed up cancer diagnosis by at least three months for thousands of patients a year.

Richard Neal, professor of primary care oncology at the University of Leeds who was not involved in the research, welcomed the study.

“This is an excellent study that demonstrates the potential for a commonly used blood test to identify some patients with cancer earlier,” he said.

“This work should begin to change practice, so that GPs should be testing patients with raised platelet counts for cancer, especially those without other potential cancer symptoms,” he added.

Dr Jasmine Just, Cancer Research UK’s health information officer, said more research was need to confirm whether further tests following a high platelet count would save lives.

“There are lots of possible reasons a person’s platelet count might be high, and in most cases it won’t be down to cancer,” she added.

“Measuring platelet count in patients who don’t otherwise warrant a blood test is not necessarily a good idea. But if a patient has a blood test for another reason and a high platelet count is found, then one of the possible diagnoses doctors should consider is cancer.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story used information and quotes from those not associated with the study, and we detected no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Boosting the activity of a protective gene and giving patients 'good' gut bacteria could help prevent or slow progression of colorectal cancer, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital scientists have found

Memphis, Tenn., JUNE 19 -- Scientists at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital have discovered how an immune system protein, called AIM2 (Absent in Melanoma 2), plays a role in determining the aggressiveness of colon cancer. They found that AIM2 deficiency causes uncontrolled proliferation of intestinal cells. Surprisingly, they also discovered that AIM2 influences the microbiota -- the population of gut bacteria -- apparently fostering the proliferation of 'good' bacteria that can protect against colon cancer.

The team, led by Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti, Ph.D., a member of the St. Jude Department of Immunology, published their findings in a recent issue of the journal Cell. She said that the findings could have important applications for prevention, prognosis and treatment.

'Since reduced AIM2 activity in colorectal cancer patients is associated with poor survival, it might be useful to detect the level of AIM2 expression in polyps taken from colonoscopy and use this as one of the biomarkers for prognosis,' Kanneganti said.

Kanneganti and her team believe that it might be possible to prevent the disease or reduce its risk by treating susceptible people to increase AIM2 activity and give them healthy donor bacteria. 'In people who already have colorectal cancer, therapies that boost the expression of AIM2, such as interferons, might reduce tumor progression. Also, transferring healthy microbiota or a group of 'good' bacteria to patients with colorectal cancer at the early stage of disease may prolong survival,' Kanneganti said.

Cancer researchers had known that mutations in AIM2 were frequently found in patients with colorectal cancers. And a study by other researchers had found that more than half of small bowel tumors had AIM2 mutations.

However, AIM2's established function in the cell was not in the machinery of cancer, said one of the paper's first authors Si Ming Man, Ph.D., a postdoctoral fellow in Kanneganti's laboratory. Rather, he said, AIM2 was known to work in the immune system to detect invading bacteria and viruses and help 'alert' the immune system to battle them.

'When we found that the intestine expressed high levels of AIM2, we hypothesized that this gene may also play a role in regulating gut health,' Man said. 'This was how we became interested in AIM2 and colorectal cancer.'

In their experiments with mice, the scientists used chemicals to trigger the process mimicking the development of colorectal cancer. They found that the mice showed drastically reduced AIM2 function, confirming the finding in humans with the cancer. They also found that mice genetically altered to have reduced AIM2 function, when treated with the chemicals, showed significantly more tumors than normal mice.

The scientists' studies also showed that AIM2 played a role independent of its immune role, in suppressing abnormal expansion of intestinal stem cell populations. Conversely, malfunction of AIM2 unleashes abnormal stem cell proliferation. Stem cells are immature cells that differentiate into adult cells such as intestinal cells. These cells continuously proliferate to replace old and dying cells in the intestine.

'Many previous studies have indicated that AIM2 contributes to the immune system by acting as a pathogen sensor,' Man said. 'However, our work is the first to identify AIM2's role in controlling proliferation of intestinal stem cells. This work is truly exciting to us because we have found a new role for AIM2 in regulating colorectal cancer, and it does so by inhibiting excessive proliferation of stem cells in the large intestine.' The researchers also pinpointed the specific cellular machinery regulated by AIM2.

They decided to explore whether AIM2's protective role might involve gut bacteria, based on studies from Kanneganti's lab and others indicating that microbial sensors similar to AIM2 contributed to healthy gut microbiota. Indeed, the comparison of gut bacteria in normal and AIM2-deficient mice showed a different 'microbial landscape' in the two types of mice.

To test whether gut bacteria might influence the progression of colon cancer, the researchers housed normal and AIM2-deficient mice together, to enable the exchange of gut bacteria. The scientists found a striking reduction in colon tumors in the AIM2-deficient mice and an increase in tumors in the normal mice.

'What this might suggest is that transfer of some of the 'good' microbiota from wild-type mice to replace the 'bad' microbiota from mice lacking AIM2 offers increased protection against colorectal cancer,' Man said. 'We believe that this finding has important clinical relevance because we can potentially prevent or decelerate the progression of colorectal cancer in humans, especially in those who have mutations in the AIM2 gene, by simply giving them 'good' microbiota.'

'We have only scratched the surface of the role of AIM2 in controlling stem cell proliferation and the maintenance of a healthy gut microbiota,' Kanneganti said. 'How exactly AIM2 does both of these functions is an exciting research area to pursue.'

The paper's other authors are Qifan Zhu, Liqin Zhu, Zhiping Liu, Rajendra Karki, Ankit Malik, Deepika Sharma, Liyuan Li, R.K. Subbarao Malireddi, Prajwal Gurung, Geoffrey Neale, Scott Olsen, Robert Carter, Daniel McGoldrick, Gang Wu, David Finkelstein, Peter Vogel and Richard Gilbertson, all of St. Jude.

The research was funded in part by grants (AR056296, CA163507, AI101935) from the National Institutes of Health and ALSAC.

St. Jude Children's Research Hospital is leading the way the world understands, treats and defeats childhood cancer and other life-threatening diseases. It is the only National Cancer Institute-designated Comprehensive Cancer Center devoted solely to children. Treatments developed at St. Jude have helped push the overall childhood cancer survival rate from 20 percent to 80 percent since the hospital opened more than 50 years ago. St. Jude is working to increase the overall survival rate for childhood cancer to 90 percent in the next decade. St. Jude freely shares the breakthroughs it makes, and every child saved at St. Jude means doctors and scientists worldwide can use that knowledge to save thousands more children. Families never receive a bill from St. Jude for treatment, travel, housing and food -- because all a family should worry about is helping their child live. To learn more, visit stjude.org or follow St. Jude at @stjuderesearch
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release identifies the primary funding sources as the National Institutes of Health and ALSAC (though readers have to do their own searches to learn that ALSAC stands for the  American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities). However, the release fails to mention that Genentech supplied the Aim2-deficient mice. And neither the release nor the original article in Cell tell readers whether or not there are any financial or other ties between the researchers and Genentech… or whether any of the researchers hold any patent or royalty rights that are relevant to this work.
We’ll give the benefit of the doubt since we did not see any evidence of conflicts of interest, although we would encourage all news releases to make a clear statement regarding the presence or absence of such conflicts. Readers should not be left in the dark to guess about potential conflicts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 10, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental Alzheimer's disease drug, gantenerumab, may help lower levels of amyloid plaque in the brains of people with the disease, an early clinical trial indicates.

The new study, which appears online Oct. 10 in the Archives of Neurology, is among the first to show the effects of an anti-amyloid drug in humans with Alzheimer's disease, but experts caution that while promising, more research is needed before this drug can be deemed safe or effective.

And, in what may turn out to be an equally important caveat, experts also say that it's by no means certain that reducing levels of amyloid plaque would stave off memory loss and the other mental declines associated with the disease because the role of the plaque in Alzheimer's isn't fully understood.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia. Symptoms including serious memory loss, confusion and mood changes develop gradually and worsen with time. Recently, many strides have been made in diagnosing Alzheimer's disease earlier, but doctors have been stymied by a lack of effective treatments to stop or slow the course of the disease.

It's long been known that a protein fragment called beta-amyloid builds up in the spaces between nerve cells in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease. The new drug, gantenerumab, targets these amyloid proteins by priming the body's immune system to recognize them as invaders.

Of 16 people with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease, those who received two to seven infusions of the experimental drug every four weeks showed marked reductions in the amount of plaque in their brains via imaging tests that were conducted several months after their treatments.

By contrast, amyloid load increased among people who were randomized to receive the placebo. The new drug was given at either 60 or 200 milligrams (mg) doses. The higher dose yielded greater reductions in amyloid levels, the study showed. People who were given the 60 mg doses saw a nearly 16 percent reduction in the amount of amyloid, and those given the 200 mg doses saw a 36 percent reduction. The new study was conducted and funded by the drug's manufacturer, F. Hoffmann-LaRoche Ltd., in Basel, Switzerland.

The big question is whether or not reducing amyloid levels has any effect on the symptoms or progression of Alzheimer's disease, said Dr. Patrick Lyden, chief of neurology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. "There is a growing concern that amyloid is a guilty bystander, but not the actual culprit in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease, and taking away the bystander may not help the patient," he said.

There are approximately one dozen therapies, including vaccines, for Alzheimer's disease that are currently in the pipeline, Lyden noted. "They are all extremely exciting and promising in animals," he said. "This is the first one to show a preliminary result in people, but we have a huge way to go to make sure it is safe and improves symptoms."

Many in the Alzheimer's research community are awaiting these drugs with bated breath, but "none are ready for prime time," he said.

The leading theory of Alzheimer's disease is that an imbalance in the production or clearance of the amyloid plaque in the brain initiates a cascade of events that lead to dementia, explained Dr. Neelum Aggarwal, an associate professor of neurological sciences at Rush Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago.

"Accumulation of the plaques cause a variety of cellular responses: inflammation, neuronal death, and thus any potential treatment that can alter these processes would be beneficial," she said. The hope is that gantenerumab or other drugs like it will not only prevent amyloid from accumulating in the brain, but also slow down the cognitive impairment that occurs in people with Alzheimer's disease, she added.

That said, these experimental drugs carry the potential for serious side effects, including causing the immune system to go haywire. "The main issue that remains for this type of drug development is managing the immune response," Aggarwal said. Other side effects include a potentially fatal fluid build-up in certain areas of the brain. "This is problematic in that use of these treatments may carry a very high risk for neurologic complications, thus necessitating heightened monitoring, and diminishing its applicability as a treatment for a larger patient population such as the Alzheimer's disease population," she said.

If any of these drugs make it through the pipeline, it also needs to be determined who will get them, including whether the drugs will be given to prevent Alzheimer's in patients at high-risk of the disease or to treat it once it's started.

The need for a drug to delay the onset or slow progression of Alzheimer's disease can't be underestimated, Aggrawal said. In the United States alone, there are 5.4 million people with Alzheimer's disease, and the numbers are expected to increase to 13 million by 2050, when approximately three of every five people over the age of 85 will have Alzheimer's disease, she said.

For more information about Alzheimer's disease signs, symptoms and treatments, visit the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: Independent experts perspectives were helpful.  Funding by the drug’s manufacturer was disclosed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Health officials say influenza is circulating unusually early this year with cases in every state – and nearly all the infections are swine flu.

The highest concentrations of flu cases are in the Southeast and a few other states. The report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Friday also came with good news: Testing of vaccines for swine flu show that they work with a single dose and take effect rapidly.

Supplies of swine flu vaccine are expected to be available in mid-October. But the seasonal flu vaccine is available now, and officials are encouraging people to get it.

Dr. Anne Schuchat of the CDC says the swine flu broke out in the spring and "never went away." Currently 98 percent of the flu viruses circulating are swine flu. Schuchat says cases are mainly in children and young adults.

THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below.

WASHINGTON (AP) – Fighting the swine flu may have gotten more manageable.

Australian and U.S. researchers said Thursday that one dose of the new swine flu vaccine looks strong enough to protect adults – and can begin protection within 10 days of the shot.

Australian drug maker CSL Ltd. published results of a study that found 75 percent to 96 percent of vaccinated people should be protected with a single dose – the same degree of effectiveness as the regular winter flu shot. That's remarkable considering scientists thought it would take two doses.

U.S. data to be released Friday confirm those findings and show the protection starts rapidly, Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institutes of Health told The Associated Press.

"This is quite good news," Fauci said.

The dose question has an important ramification: It means people will have to line up for influenza vaccinations twice this year instead of three times – once for the regular winter flu shot and a second time to be inoculated against swine flu, what doctors call the 2009 H1N1 strain.

Thursday's swine flu vaccine reports center on adults; studies in children aren't finished yet.

But scientists had feared that people of all ages would need two shots about a month apart because the new H1N1 strain is so genetically different from normally circulating flu strains that most of the population has little if any immunity.

Chinese manufacturers gave the first hint a week ago that one dose could be enough. But different manufacturers make different formulations of the vaccine, so more evidence was needed.

Thus the CSL study, rushed out by the New England Journal of Medicine late Thursday, is welcome news. In a study of 240 adults, half younger than 50 and half over, one shot prompted the same kind of immune response indicating protection that is seen with regular flu vaccine. And a standard 15-microgram dose – not the double dose that also was tested – was enough.

CSL, which is one U.S. vaccine supplier, found the same side effects in its study that people experience with regular flu vaccine, which is no surprise since this shot is merely a recipe change from the annual standby. About 45 percent of recipients had mild reactions such as a headache, sore arm or redness at the shot site.

On Friday, the NIH is set to release results of its own studies of hundreds of adults that confirm that one shot works, Fauci said. Plus, the U.S. work shows that people are protected eight to 10 days after that inoculation, he said.

One dose means tight supplies of H1N1 vaccine won't be stretched so thin after all. The U.S. has ordered 195 million doses, based on the hope that 15 micrograms was indeed the right dose. Had it taken twice that dosage, or two shots apiece, half as many people could have received the vaccine.

The winter flu vaccine is widely available now, and U.S. health authorities urged people to get it out of the way now before swine flu shots start arriving in mid-October.

Despite all the headlines about swine flu, which has become the main influenza strain circulating in the world, doctors do expect some garden-variety flu to hit this fall too – the kind that every year kills 36,000 Americans and hospitalizes 200,000.

"Take some individual responsibility to stay healthy during the flu season," said Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, who scheduled her own seasonal shot for Friday. Waiting to get the first inoculation out of the way "is not in anybody's best interest," added Dr. Nancy Nielsen, past president of the American Medical Association. She said busy doctors need to have completed regular vaccinations by the time they have to deal with H1N1 shots.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 


This story points out that several of the trials were done by vaccine manufacturers. It quotes government officials who were not directly involved in those trials. However, as noted above, the story is a primarily summary of official statements. There are no quotes from independent experts in infectious diseases.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But a number of new controlled trials and meta-analyses like Dr. Moore’s suggest that topical Nsaids are as effective as their oral counterparts for treating osteoarthritis in the knee and hand as well as musculoskeletal injuries like soreness and tendinitis.

The main advantage of a skin cream is that it bypasses the stomach and much of the bloodstream, theoretically minimizing serious side effects. Oral Nsaids can be toxic to the kidneys, and they increase the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. And some, including Vioxx and Bextra, were taken off the market after they were linked to heart attacks and strokes.

“The turning point for topical Nsaids was the fright over heart problems with Vioxx,” Dr. Moore said. “Suddenly there were tons of folks who thought topical Nsaids were a good idea.”

Dr. Roy D. Altman, a rheumatology professor at the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, said the drugs might be especially helpful for “the elderly or those taking multiple medications, who were not getting treated but who can now use topical Nsaids and get some benefit.”

Another leading pain researcher, Dr. Roger Chou, an associate professor of medicine at Oregon Health and Science University, noted that the skin creams delivered “very high joint concentrations of the topical Nsaid, higher than with standard oral doses, with very low blood levels” — less than 5 percent of those found with oral Nsaids.

In clinical trials, the skin creams are linked to a higher rate of redness, irritation and rash. And the three topical Nsaids sold in this country — Voltaren gel, the Flector Patch and Pennsaid, a liquid — all contain the Nsaid diclofenac, whose oral version has been linked to liver damage.

The risks in the most vulnerable population — people with other illnesses, like liver disease, or those on blood thinners — are not known, because these patients are generally excluded from studies. One analysis of 19 studies of older adults found that about 15 percent of patients had gastrointestinal complaints, although not life-threatening ones.

“Future research needs to be done using patients with co-morbidities to know that these agents are safe in the highest-risk population,” said the author of the analysis, Dr. Una Makris, an associate research scientist at the Yale School of Medicine.

Still, in one of the only head-to-head trials between topical and oral Nsaids, subjects taking the pills had a much higher rate of indigestion, diarrhea, abdominal pain, abnormal liver tests and anemia than those using the creams.

No randomized, controlled study has assessed the risks for serious events like heart attacks, kidney failure and gastrointestinal bleeding, but other types of studies have found no association between topical Nsaids and these serious risk factors.

The American College of Rheumatology is rewriting its guidelines for osteoarthritis management and will include topical Nsaids in the recommendations, said Dr. Altman, who is on the guidelines committee.

Sports medicine and pain doctors are also recommending them for problems like tennis elbow, Achilles tendinitis and overuse injuries and strains. “We used them off label for a while before they were approved,” said Dr. Robin M. Gehrmann, the director of sports medicine at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. “Now that you can just write a prescription, I use them in my practice a lot more.”

Since the Food and Drug Administration approved the first topical Nsaid in 2007, sales in the United States have soared — to more than $264 million in 2009, according to IMS Health, a health care research company. The average copayment for a month’s supply of Voltaren gel or Pennsaid is around $30.

“I think many people are not aware of topical Nsaids, or there is a perception that they don’t work well, or people confuse topical Nsaids with other topical drugs, like the topical salicylates or capsaicin,” Dr. Chou said.

The topical painkillers are not for everyone. Aside from the possible risks to people with other illnesses, the drugs are not helpful for patients with pain throughout the body, like fibromyalgia, and should not be used along with oral Nsaids.

Nor are they recommended for stress fractures or tendon tears, because anti-inflammatory drugs in general have been shown to slow healing of tendons and bones.

And young, healthy patients may not want to bother with creams or gels, which have their maximum effect if applied four times a day. “It’s easier to pop a pill,” Dr. Altman said.

But for immediate relief of my tennis-related muscle pull, the cream was handy and helpful.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml"/>



The story includes quotes from several experts and points out that two of them have accepted consulting fees or research support from pharmaceutical companies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Drinking concentrated blueberry juice improves brain function in older people, according to research by the University of Exeter.

In the study, healthy people aged 65-77 who drank concentrated blueberry juice every day showed improvements in cognitive function, blood flow to the brain and activation of the brain while carrying out cognitive tests.

There was also evidence suggesting improvement in working memory.

Blueberries are rich in flavonoids, which possess antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties.

Dr Joanna Bowtell, head of Sport and Health Sciences at the University of Exeter, said: "Our cognitive function tends to decline as we get older, but previous research has shown that cognitive function is better preserved in healthy older adults with a diet rich in plant-based foods.

"In this study we have shown that with just 12 weeks of consuming 30ml of concentrated blueberry juice every day, brain blood flow, brain activation and some aspects of working memory were improved in this group of healthy older adults."

Of the 26 healthy adults in the study, 12 were given concentrated blueberry juice - providing the equivalent of 230g of blueberries - once a day, while 14 received a placebo.

Before and after the 12-week period, participants took a range of cognitive tests while an MRI scanner monitored their brain function and resting brain blood flow was measured.

Compared to the placebo group, those who took the blueberry supplement showed significant increases in brain activity in brain areas related to the tests.

The study excluded anyone who said they consumed more than five portions of fruit and vegetables per day, and all participants were told to stick to their normal diet throughout.

Previous research has shown that risk of dementia is reduced by higher fruit and vegetable intake, and cognitive function is better preserved in healthy older adults with a diet rich in plant-based foods.

Flavonoids, which are abundant in plants, are likely to be an important component in causing these effects.

The new paper, "Enhanced task-related brain activation and resting perfusion in healthy older adults after chronic blueberry supplementation", is published in the journal Applied Physiology, Nutrition and Metabolism.

The research was carried out in association with the University of the West of England, and the concentrated blueberry juice (BlueberryActive) and some funding for the study was provided by CherryActive Ltd, which produces cherry, beetroot and blueberry products in concentrate and capsule form.

The study was also supported by the charity BRACE, which raises funds to support dementia research.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The release included the important fact that a commercial enterprise selling blueberry juice concentrate and blueberry capsules provided the samples and some of the funding for the study.
The published paper states the authors declared they had no conflicts of interest.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 28, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Breast-conserving surgery for early stage breast cancers may result in better survival than mastectomy, according to a new study.

For those with early stage breast cancer, "lumpectomy is just as effective if not more effective than mastectomy," said researcher Dr. Shelley Hwang, chief of breast surgery at Duke Cancer Institute in Durham, N.C.

"There are lots of women who think the more [treatment] they do, the better they will do," she said. "This refutes that."

The findings, published online Jan. 28 in the journal Cancer, are especially strong for women over 50 with hormone-sensitive cancers, the researchers found.

Earlier research had also concluded that the two procedures are similarly effective, but Hwang's is a more "real-world" study.

Hwang's team looked at 14 years of data from the California Cancer Registry, following more than 112,000 women with early stage breast cancer (stages 1 or 2) between 1990 and 2004. Ages ranged from 39 to 80.

More than half (55 percent) had lumpectomy and radiation, while 45 percent had mastectomy (complete breast removal) alone.

Hwang compared lumpectomy and radiation with mastectomy alone, not mastectomy plus radiation. "We wanted to look at early stage disease, and those patients typically don't get radiation after mastectomy," she said.

The researchers tracked the women's progress for a median of more than nine years (half followed longer, half less). During that time, more than 31,000 women died, nearly 40 percent of them from breast cancer. The others died of other causes.

For the first three years after treatment, those who had a mastectomy had a higher risk of dying from heart disease and other ailments than those who had lumpectomy. This may indicate that the women who underwent lumpectomy were generally healthier, Hwang said.

Over the entire follow-up, those who underwent lumpectomy were more likely to survive the breast cancer.

"The group that benefited the most -- who had the biggest difference in breast cancer survival -- were those women over 50 with estrogen-receptor positive disease," Hwang said. This means their cancer depends on estrogen to grow.

Among those women, the lumpectomy group had a 13 percent lower risk of death from breast cancer and a 19 percent lower risk of death from any cause than those who had a mastectomy.

Not all women with early stage breast cancers can have a lumpectomy, Hwang said. In this procedure, just the tumor and some healthy tissue are removed, sparing the rest of the breast. Among the exceptions are those whose cancers are too large, or those who have different cancers in the same breast.

The percent of women with early breast cancers choosing a mastectomy has risen recently, after a dip in previous years. Hwang and others suspect that women told they could safely opt for lumpectomy were still afraid to try it.

The new research, which was funded by the U.S. National Cancer Institute, suggests that if a lumpectomy is possible, it may actually increase survival, Hwang said.

The findings may reverse the mastectomy trend, said Dr. Laura Kruper, co-director of the breast oncology program at the City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center in Duarte, Calif., who was not involved in the study.

The study is scientifically sound in many ways, Kruper said. "They broke it down by year of diagnosis and by age category," she said. "They looked at socioeconomic status, and they kept it early stage."

Dr. Wendy Woodward, section chief for breast radiation oncology at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, said that for women with early cancers, the study "clearly reiterates there is no detriment to cancer control in having a lumpectomy and radiation for breast-conserving surgery candidates."

But, Woodward added, "I am not sure the study convinces us that lumpectomy and radiation is better for breast cancer survival, but it may be."

The study was observational, Hwang stressed. It found a link or association but could not provide cause-and-effect proof that the breast-conserving treatment is more effective than mastectomy in early stage breast cancer.

Hwang believes the study does arm women with valuable information. However, "I don't want women who chose mastectomy to think they did the wrong thing," Hwang said. "At the end of the day, personal preference trumps everything else. I fully support the patient's options to choose the best treatment for themselves."

To learn more about lumpectomy, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The article did include the perspectives of two independent sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Adding seaweed to processed foods such as frozen pizzas, hot dogs and dried pasta will reduce cardiovascular diseases, concludes a new scientific article. One suggestion is to replace 5% of the flour in pizza dough with dried and granulated seaweed.

According to the World Health Organization (WHO) cardiovascular diseases are the number one cause of premature death globally. Ironically, many of the pathologies leading to premature death from cardiovascular diseases are not only widespread, but they are preventable.

One way to prevent cardiovascular diseases is to avoid obesity and eat healthy, leaving the responsibility with the individual consumer.

But the responsibility should also be shared by society, argues University of Southern Denmark professor of biophysics, Ole G. Mouritsen, who has authored several books on seaweed as food.

Professor Mouritsen is the co-author of an article in the journal Phycologia reviewing existing knowledge on the health effects of 35 different seaweed species.

In the article the authors offer suggestions to how both individual consumers and the food industry can use seaweed to make our everyday meals healthier.

"Certain substances in seaweed may be important for reducing cardiovascular diseases. We think this knowledge should be available for society and also be put to use", says Mouritsen.

Many seaweed species have a variety of health benefits. They contain, among other things, beneficial proteins, antioxidants, minerals, trace elements, dietary fiber and polyunsaturated fatty acids.

Seaweed's content of potassium salts does not led to high blood pressure - unlike the sodium salts, typically encountered in the processed food.

An important feature is also that the seaweed has umami - the fifth basic taste, which is known to promote satiety and hence regulate food intake in addition to reduce the craving for salt, sugar and fat.

"It is difficult to determine how much seaweed a person should consume to benefit from its good qualities. 5-10 grams of dried seaweed per day is my estimate", says Professor Mouritsen.

He and the co-authors suggest that seaweed should be added fast food, thus making this type of food healthier. It can even enhance the flavor of the food, they argue. For example, dried and granulated seaweed can replace some of the flour when producing dry pasta, bread, pizza, snack bars, etc.

It is also possible to add seaweed to meat products and thereby provide the consumer with an increased intake of dietary fiber and antioxidants - or maybe the aim is lower cholesterol levels.

In the article Professor Mouritsen and his co-authors describe a study in which a group of overweight but otherwise healthy men were asked to taste bread with added dried seaweed from the species Ascophyllum nosodum. The men's reaction was that the bread tasted acceptable as long as the seaweed content was kept under 4%.

By eating bread containing 4% of dried seaweed the overweight men ingested more dietary fiber (4.5 g more fiber per. 100 g) than when they ate the control whole-meal bread. Another effect was that they consumed 16.4% less energy in the 24 hour period after eating the seaweed enriched bread.

"We know that many people have difficulty distinguishing between healthy and unhealthy food. By adding seaweed to processed foods we can make food healthier. In many cases we also get tastier food, and it may also help reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases", the authors believe.
• Seaweed contains only few calories, but is still rich in rich in essential amino acids, dietary fibers, minerals, trace elements, vitamins and polyunsaturated fats.
• You can easily add up to 5% dried seaweed to a dough without losing its ability to raise.
• Dried seaweed can be stored for months or years without loss of flavor and nutritional value.
• Dried seaweed can be added to food as powder, granulate or pieces in pastries, egg dishes, mashed potatoes, dressings, or sprinkled on vegetables or fish dishes.
• Powders and granulates can be used as a salt substitute.
• Hijiki contains arsenic, which is carcinogenic and therefore some national food authorities recommend that you do not eat it. Despite these warnings, you can buy dried hijiki in many stores.
• Some species may contain large amounts of iodine.
• Never eat seaweed that is washed up on the beach.

Contact Professor Ole G. Mouritsen, head of Centre for Biomembrane Physics (MEMPHYS) at University of Southern Denmark, head of center Taste For Life, President of the Danish Academy of Gastronomy. E-mail: ogm@memphys.sdu.dk. Tel: + 45 6550 3528.

Ref Cornish, Critchley & Mouritsen. A role for dietary macroalgae in the ameliorating ration of certainement Risk Factors Associated with cardiovascular disease. Phycologia 54, 649-666 (2015). November 16, 2015.
QUESTION: Does the news release identify funding sources & disclose conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The only clue as to why this news release was written comes when it says that the author of the study in question “has authored several books on seaweed as food.” This seems to be promotional material for his books and little more.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Cardiac arrest patients who get cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) from a bystander at the scene may have better survival odds even when an ambulance takes a long time to arrive, a Danish study suggests.

Researchers examined data on 7,623 cardiac arrest patients and found when an ambulance arrived within five minutes of a 911 call, patients were 2.3 times more likely to survive at least 30 days if they received bystander CPR than if they didn’t get this aid at the scene.

When ambulances took up to 10 minutes to arrive, bystander CPR was associated with tripled survival odds, the study also found. After 13 minutes, patients who got CPR at the scene continued to have better survival odds but the difference was no longer statistically meaningful.

“Early CPR saves lives, and the lack of CPR efforts from bystanders could result in significantly decreased chances of survival,” said lead study author Dr. Shahzleen Rajan of Copenhagen University Hospital in Denmark.

Cardiac arrest involves the abrupt loss of heart function, breathing and consciousness. Unlike a heart attack, which happens when blood flow to a portion of the heart is blocked, cardiac arrest occurs when the heart’s electrical system malfunctions, often due to irregular heart rhythms. Cardiac arrest may occur with no warning and is often fatal.

Chest compressions or CPR can help restore circulation, increasing the odds of survival. Bystander CPR generally won’t restore a normal heart rhythm but it can buy time by maintaining blood flow to vital organs.

“We know from previous research that 1 in 8 people survive after a cardiac arrest if a bystander initiates CPR before the arrival of the emergency medical services,” Rajan said by email. “In contrast, if CPR is not initiated before the arrival of the emergency medical services, only 1 in 30 people survive a cardiac arrest.”

For the current study, researchers looked at 30-day survival for patients who had cardiac arrests outside of a hospital between 2005 and 2011.

When the ambulance arrived within five minutes, 14.5 percent of patients in the bystander CPR group survived at least 30 days, compared with 6.3 percent in the group that didn’t get this help.

For ambulance arrival times up to ten minutes, 6.7 percent in the CPR group and 2.2 percent of the other patients survived. If the ambulance took more than 13 minutes, the survival rate was 3.7 percent in the CPR group and 1.5 percent for the others - a difference that wasn’t statistically meaningful.

The study is observational and doesn’t prove bystander CPR increases survival odds, the authors note in Circulation. Researchers also lacked data on how quickly bystanders intervened after the start of cardiac arrest, which could influence outcomes, the authors note.

“Once a victim has sustained a cardiac arrest with little or no blood supply going to the heart or brain, the time to reestablishing blood flow with oxygenated blood is critical,” said Dr. Lenworth Jacobs, director of trauma and emergency medicine at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut.

“It is generally thought that the sooner this is implemented the better,” Jacobs, who wasn’t involved in the study, added by email.

The biggest obstacle to bystander CPR remains that too few people know how to do it, said Dr. Peter Pons, an emergency physician in Denver and professor emeritus at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.

“Clearly, if someone has been motivated to learn and has been taught CPR, they will often assist,” Pons, who wasn’t involved in the study, said by email. “When someone does not have that knowledge, they tend to be more reluctant to act and may fear making things worse.”
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes two independent experts whose specific credentials are clearly presented. These sources are cited on the general mechanism of CPR and the importance of starting CPR early. Ideally, they’d also speak to the research itself, providing context on what the general public should know. But given that the story presents the research accurately, and included a discussion of limitations, this is a minor concern here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The controversy over when a woman should get mammograms is about to heat up again.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of experts whose members are appointed by the federal government, issued a final set of recommendations late Monday saying that women between the ages of 50 and 74 should get routine screening once every two years. The task force's guidelines are important because insurers and government programs often follow the panel's recommendations in deciding whether to cover certain preventive services.

The task force's final recommendation is likely to be controversial because some other groups say the screening should start earlier. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, for example, recommends that regular screenings begin at age 40, while the American Cancer Society calls for women to start yearly screening at age 45 and then move to screening every two years starting at age 55.

Congress has sided with proponents of earlier screening. Last month, in anticipation of Monday's release of the task force’s final recommendation, lawmakers took preemptive action: It directed insurers to ignore the task force's latest guidelines and, instead, to rely on its 2002 recommendation. That called for annual mammograms to begin at 40. As a result of the congressional action, women in their 40s will continue to be able to get annual mammograms at no cost.

The differences over when to start regular screening reflect the growing concern that the benefits of mammograms may have been oversold, and that they don't outweigh the anxiety and potential harm caused by over-diagnosis and false positives from the tests.

[In major shift, these guidelines scaled back breast cancer screening for women in their 40s]

The debate over when to start regular screening involves only women of "average risk" who don't have specific risk factors for breast cancer such as the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genetic mutations or a family history of the disease. They're also not aimed at diagnostic mammography, which takes place once a woman has a symptom such as a lump. The screening recommendations are not binding on doctors, hospitals or insurers.

In releasing its final recommendations, the task force confirmed an earlier guidance it issued that said screening mammography had the greatest benefit for women ages 50 to 74. For women in their 40s, the likelihood of benefit is less and the potential harms are proportionally greater, it said. The most serious potential harm is unneeded treatment for a type of cancer that would not have become a threat to a woman's health during her lifetime.

The congressional action, which was included in the recently enacted spending law, has drawn criticism from some experts.

“The U.S. Congress thinks it's perfectly acceptable, even preferred, for a scientific document from 14 years ago to guide coverage policy on screening for breast cancer in women,” says Kenneth Lin, a Georgetown University family medicine doctor who teaches preventive and evidence-based medicine.

Part of the problem is the common perception that women deserve free mammogram coverage and that the scientific community is basing its decision on cost or rationing, said Lawrence Gostin, a Georgetown University law professor and expert on public health.

Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, said the task force's guidelines for women in their 40s — that they should discuss whether to get mammograms with their doctors and make individual decisions — come closest to following the evidence accumulated over the past three decades. Women should trust that process, she said.

Despite the decades of marketing of mammography to women, "women are capable of understanding the complexities of the issue, evaluating the evidence and making their own health decisions," she said in a statement.

"At some point we will have to decide that we are not going to pay for interventions that lack a high level of medical evidence," she said. "At this time, what does concern us very much are attempts by Congress to interfere with the makeup and process of the US Preventive Services Task Force."

The task force first suggested in 2009 that breast cancer screening begin at 50 instead of 40, touching off enormous criticism. In 2010, Congress passed the Affordable Care Act, which required that certain preventive services be provided for free — if those services got a strong recommendation from the task force. But it included an amendment that effectively directed insurers to use the 2002 recommendations for mammograms. That meant that women who were 40 and older could get mammograms at no cost.

In April 2015, the task force came out with its latest draft guidance, basically reaffirming its 2009 recommendations that the greatest benefit of mammography screening is for women between 50 and 74.

Worried that millions of women under 50 could lose their free annual mammogram coverage if the guidelines became final, several health-care groups, including ACOG, the American College of Radiology and the Susan G. Komen Foundation, lobbied Congress to block that from happening.

Language was included in the spending bill that says any recommendations of the task force related to breast cancer screening, mammography and prevention refers to those “issued before 2009.”

Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.) was among the lawmakers who pushed for the language to be included. In a statement, she said her number one priority was to ensure that women can get mammograms if they and their doctors decide it's the right thing to do. "This means making sure that cost is not a deterrent to care," she said.

Several groups that lobbied for congressional action said in a statement last month that the task force recommendations conflict with those of other organizations. This results in confusion and puts more than 22 million women at risk of losing of losing insurance coverage for mammograms.

This post has been updated.

The simple way doctors can make patients feel understood

How cancer will affect Americans in 2016: in seven charts

Omega 3 is still good for the brain. But 'fish oil supplements just don't cut it.'
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story incorporates input from several independent sources. Comments from Fran Visco of the National Breast Cancer Coalition are worth repeating: “Women are capable of understanding the complexities of the issue, evaluating the evidence and making their own health decisions.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 31, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Women who carry genetic mutations that boost their odds of breast and ovarian cancer can live longer and reduce their cancer risk by having preventive surgery, a new study suggests.

The surgery in question is drastic: removal of the breasts or ovaries before any signs of cancer have arisen.

However, "what our findings show is that women who choose to have these surgeries will reduce their risk of dying of breast or ovarian cancer by about 70 to 80 percent, which is pretty profound," said study senior author Dr. Timothy Rebbeck, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.

The findings are published in the Sept. 1 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.

The 22-center trial, one of the largest of its kind, studied nearly 2,500 women who were found to have inherited mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes.

Women who carry these mutations have a lifetime risk of breast cancer of anywhere between 56 percent to 84 percent, according to the researchers, whereas the risk for ovarian cancer ranges from 36 percent to 63 percent for BRCA1 mutation carriers and 10 percent to 27 percent for BRCA2 mutation carriers. By contrast, the lifetime risk of breast cancer among women generally is about 12 percent, and for ovarian cancer, it's less than 2 percent.

Roughly half of the women in the study had undergone either mastectomies (surgery to remove their breasts) or salpingo-oophorectomies (surgery to remove the ovaries and fallopian tubes) between 1974 and 2008, in order to proactively lower their risk of cancer. The women were followed for an average of about 3.5 years.

During the follow-up period, no breast cancer events occurred in the women who underwent mastectomies, while 7 percent of the women in the group who didn't undergo surgery were diagnosed with breast cancer.

In addition, women who had their ovaries removed lowered their risk of ovarian and breast cancer, and also lived longer than women who didn't have the surgery. For example, over 6 years of follow-up, no ovarian cancer cases were seen among BRCA2 mutation carriers who underwent salpingo-oophorectomy, compared with 3 percent of carriers who did not undergo the procedure, the researchers report.

"One of the main messages of our study is that salpingo-oophorectomy should be part of any management plan for any woman who is found to have these genetic mutations," said Rebbeck. "There really isn't anything else that can reduce a woman's risk by this much."

"These findings really emphasize how important it is for all women with a family history of early breast or ovarian cancer to undergo genetic testing," said Dr. Virginia Kaklamani, co-author of an editorial that accompanied the study. "I see women all the time who get the genetic test only after they're diagnosed with cancer," said Kaklamani, who is director of translational breast cancer research at the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, in Chicago.

Kaklamani added that she hoped the findings would encourage more women to ask their primary care physicians whether they are candidates for genetic counseling.

"This is a very important study because it gives us more information in order to counsel women at risk," said Dr. Daniel Silver, assistant professor of medicine at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School. Silver added that women who are found to carry one of these genetic mutations face "a very complex set of considerations, so the more hard facts you can give them, the better."

According to Rebbeck, doctors usually recommend that women who test positive for the genes have their ovaries removed at around age 35, but are okay with putting it off until age 40 if they haven't finished having children. He said the surgery today is often done in an outpatient setting, with the use of laparoscopes, which limits scarring and shortens a patient's recovery time.

Find out more about the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes at the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story includes comments from an author of an editorial in the journal who was not involved in this study. Although the story does not report financial or other information about the sources, the study was funded by a variety of grants from public agencies and foundations and neither the researchers nor the editorial writers reported any relevant financial disclosures.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Feb. 26, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug improves patients' blood sugar control without increasing the risk of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) in patients with type 2 diabetes, according to the results of a phase 2 clinical trial.

Type 2 diabetes is the more prevalent form of the disease, accounting for about 90 percent of cases. Often tied to obesity, type 2 diabetes involves a gradual decline in how insulin responds to changes in blood sugar (glucose).

The new drug, called TAK-875, is a pill designed to enhance the secretion of insulin in response to such changes, which means that it has no effect on insulin secretion when blood sugar levels are normal -- potentially reducing the risk for hypoglycemia.

The trial, led by Dr. Charles Burant of the University of Michigan Medical School, included 426 patients with type 2 diabetes who were not getting adequate blood sugar control through diet, exercise or treatment with the first-line diabetes drug metformin.

The patients were randomly assigned to receive either TAK-875 (303 patients), placebo (61 patients), or another diabetes drug called glimepiride (brand named Amaryl).

The study was funded by Takeda Pharmaceutical (which is developing the drug), and appears online Feb. 26 in The Lancet.

After 12 weeks, all the patients taking the different doses of TAK-875 had significant drops in their blood sugar levels, the researchers said. A similar reduction occurred in patients taking glimepiride.

However, the incidence of episodes of hypoglycemia was much lower among patients taking TAK-875 (2 percent) than among those taking glimepiride (19 percent) and the same as those taking the placebo (2 percent).

The incidence of treatment-related side effects was 49 percent among patients taking TAK-875, 48 percent among those in the placebo group, and 61 percent among those in the glimepiride group, according to the researchers. They write that they are "excited about the potential of TAK-875 and are eager to conduct larger trials to find out how well this drug works, how safe it is and what its place is in the treatment of diabetes."

In a journal commentary, Clifford Bailey of Aston University in Birmingham, England, cautioned that, "on the journey to approval of a new class of treatment for type 2 diabetes, many questions will be asked of [drugs such as TAK-875]," including questions of how long they might remain effective, as well as safety issues.

Other diabetes experts had mixed views on the new findings.

Dr. Loren Wissner Greene is clinical associate professor of endocrinology at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City. She noted that glitazones -- a separate class of newer drugs such as Rezulin, Avandia and Actos that also target insulin resistance -- have all shown initial promise in clinical trials before worrisome side effects began to surface in users (due to concerns around heart risks, Avandia remains on the U.S. market but under limited distribution).

As for TAK-875, it targets a separate mechanism "but again, until more is known about short-term and long-term cardiovascular effects, we need to proceed with moderated enthusiasm for each new drug and drug mechanism," Wissner Greene said.

Dr. Minisha Sood, endocrinologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City stressed that, "given the rising global incidence of type 2 diabetes, the medical community is eagerly awaiting the development of novel agents to add to our existing armamentarium of anti-diabetic agents."

She said that, "though this study includes a small sample size followed for a short period of time, the results are promising in that TAK-875 appears to be effective for glycemic [blood sugar] control without significant risk for hypoglycemia or weight gain. However, like Wissner-Greene, Sood said that "further investigation is warranted, especially including [heart disease] patients."

The U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases has more about diabetes medicines.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: The story says clearly that the study was funded by the company making the drug being studied: “The study was funded by Takeda Pharmaceutical (which is developing the drug), and appears online Feb. 26 in The Lancet.” The story also includes two valuable comments from independent researchers. Dr. Loren Wissner Green says that, “until more is known about short-term and long-term cardiovascular effects, we need to proceed with moderated enthusiasm for each new drug and drug mechanism.” And Dr. Minisha Sood, says that “further investigation is warranted, especially including [heart disease] patients.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Can a little fresh blood reverse the damage of Alzheimer’s disease?

Researchers trying to answer the question say they found the treatments are at least safe. And they got a tiny hint that they just may help.

The team at Stanford University found that infusions of plasma from healthy young men didn’t hurt the 18 Alzheimer’s patients who got them. And a few of the patients seemed to do a little better in the skills of everyday living, although memory and thinking skills were not affected.

This does not mean that blood transfusions could treat Alzheimer’s disease, researchers cautioned. The study is a very long way from showing that. But it does show it’s worth going forward with more tests, said Dr. Sharon Sha, who ran the test program at Stanford.

“Although it’s very exciting, it is very early days,” added Sha.

“We need to do the next steps to understand what is in the young plasma.”

Plasma is the liquid part of blood, with the red cells and immune cells removed.

The researchers were working off earlier studies from the lab of Tony Wyss-Coray at Stanford, who found that infusing young human plasma into old mice seemed to perk them up. The work made headlines and launched a company, Alkahest, that’s working to develop young human plasma into treatments for aging-related diseases.

Alkahest plans to move forward with formal clinical trials in 40 volunteers next year, said Joe McCracken, vice president for development at the company.

"We do have a study with what we think is a commercially viable product that will start early next year," McCracken said.

Stanford was doing what’s called a proof of concept trial, just to check the safety of the treatment, in 18 volunteers with moderate Alzheimer’s disease.

At first they did what’s called a blinded trial --- treating half the patients with real plasma, and giving half the patients a sham infusion, with no one knowing which patient got the real treatment. Then they swapped the two sides.

Later, because it was taking so much time and effort, they cut the trial to just nine people and all nine knew they were getting the real thing – a unit of plasma, once a week for a month, from healthy young men under the age of 30.

There was no measurable effect on memory or thinking, the team told the Clinical Trials on Alzheimer’s Disease conference in Boston. But Sha said on two measurements of function there was a difference in answers the caregivers gave on a questionnaire.

“Anecdotally, when I saw these patients and caregivers, those that did say they had an improvement…they might have said things like ‘they are more engaged’, ‘they are participating on conversations more’,” she said.

But that doesn’t mean there really was an effect. You just cannot tell with a trial of only 18 people.

“I worry that people would take this information and say, ‘I need to get this. I need to get young blood.’ It’s important to understand the science behind this first,” Sha said.

More than 5 million Americans have Alzheimer’s, and this number is expected to grow as the population ages. There’s no cure, and treatments that have looked promising have flopped in big trials.

“There are things you can do but right now there is no drug that is actually going to slow down the progression of the brain disease in Alzheimer’s,” said Keith Fargo, director of scientific programs for the Alzheimer’s Association.

“They showed it was safe and tolerable treatment at least for this small number of people,” Fargo said.

Sha says it’s not clear what might be found in plasma from young people that might help the symptoms of Alzheimer’s. “There is a theory that there is an inflammatory process that is driving the disease and the plasma is helping that,” she said.

Any actual treatment would not involve whole plasma, McCracken said.

He said the company has developed a safer plasma product that has blood clotting factors removed, as well as immunoglobulin. Whole plasma must be matched to blood type.

And, McCracken says, the company is working to figure out just what it is in the plasma that might affect aging and disease.
QUESTION: Does the story use independent sources and identify conflicts of interest?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story a Satisfactory here since it does quote one source unaffiliated with the research and points out that earlier work led to the formation of a private company which intends to market a product derived from the research. However, the story would have been stronger if it had commentary from an independent expert with a more skeptical perspective.
<|endoftext|>
