<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Corey Thomas admitted to his pharmacist that he hated the blood pressure medications a previous doctor had prescribed for him. They came with "horrible" side effects, he said, and so he rarely took them.

As a blood pressure monitor squeezed snugly around his arm, the pharmacist counseled Thomas, 49, on his diet and stress level while checking his blood pressure. She then helped Thomas find a medication better suited for his body.

Thomas was not at a health clinic or pharmacy or a primary care physician's office.

He was at the barbershop where he works in Inglewood, California. As part of a study, these health services were provided at his barbershop and others across Los Angeles County.

The study, published Monday in the New England Journal of Medicine , tested whether pharmacist-led programs in barbershops could significantly lower high blood pressure in black men in the United States.

Results from 12 months after the study show that when guidance was coupled with medication, a blood pressure measurement of less than 130/80 was achieved by 68% of men who participated in the study program, versus 11% of those who didn't.

"To a certain extent, I was surprised by the magnitude of the effect of the intervention," said Ciantel Blyler, a clinical pharmacist at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles who was a co-author of the study.

"Especially once we sat down and looked at the blood pressure control rates and we were comparing the intervention group and the control group, I was sort of taken aback," she said.

"The first number, called systolic blood pressure, measures the pressure in your blood vessels when your heart beats," the CDC says. "The second number, called diastolic blood pressure, measures the pressure in your blood vessels when your heart rests between beats."

Many older black men tend to avoid seeing the doctor until they have a serious health problem, and then they "use the emergency room as a doctor," Thomas said.

"If it wasn't for the program, a lot of guys wouldn't have known they had high blood pressure," he said of the study. "Unfortunately, I wish we had other programs to come in, too."

On the other hand, the barbershop represents a safe haven in the black community -- a no-judgment zone -- where conversations about health and other personal topics are commonplace.

As a barber, "we know more about our customers than their spouses do," Thomas said.

Shape your hair and your blood pressure

The new study included 319 black men across 52 black-owned barbershops in California's Los Angeles County. The men, 35 to 79 years old, had systolic blood pressure of 140 or more.

The researchers randomly assigned the men, based on their barbershop, to participate in the pharmacist-led program or to a control group between February 2015 and July 2017.

In the program group, barbers encouraged the men to meet with specially trained pharmacists at the barbershop to help monitor their blood pressure. The pharmacists could prescribe drug therapy under a collaborative agreement with the men's doctors.

At his barbershop, Thomas said, many customers were hesitant to open up to the pharmacists and doctors and to meet with them for health consultations.

"No one wanted to do it," he said. "But by them being there -- they were in there every day -- and then we got used to them, and they warmed up to everybody. ... Then a lot of guys eventually were like, 'I'll go. Let me make sure I'm OK.' "

Blyler said it didn't take long for the customers to warm up to her and her colleagues.

"They understood that we were there with good intentions. It was a very comfortable environment, and folks were very welcoming, and it really worked," she said.

In the control group, barbers encouraged the men to make lifestyle changes and doctor appointments, but not much else changed in their usual barbershop visits.

By the end of the study, the researchers found that the barbers' role in encouraging the men to monitor and improve their health resulted in a significant reduction in blood pressure, when coupled with medication from the pharmacists.

In participants assigned to the pharmacist-led program, the average reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure were 21.6 and 14.9 greater, respectively, than in those assigned to the control group at six months, the researchers found.

At 12 months, the average reductions were "statistically indistinguishable" from the six-month data, according to the researchers.

'Medical mistrust has been an important barrier'

The study had some limitations, including that it was not blind, because both participants and researchers knew who was assigned to the pharmacist-led program and who was in the control group.

Additionally, more research is needed to determine whether similar study results would occur on a national level, since the study was conducted only in the Los Angeles area.

Also, pharmacists aimed to lower blood pressure in the program participants to less than 130/80, whereas the primary care providers of those in the control group probably targeted a blood pressure of less than 140/90.

The researchers found that 17.5% of men who received help were screened, compared with 8.4% of those who didn't receive the screening help.

"Medical mistrust has been an important barrier to African-Americans seeking health care, and so the barbershop -- where men go on a monthly basis and have an opportunity to develop a rapport with a trusted key opinion leader in the community -- that rapport is a perfect foundation for talking about health," Ravenell said.

"We know that when it comes to people being receptive to health messages, the setting and the mood that people are in can have an impact on how open they are to receiving those messages," he said. "Since the barbershop is a place where men want to be, it's a place that's known for open collegial conversation, it really is a perfect place to relay health messages that are important for black men."

The history of barbershops as havens for health

In the years to come, as racial segregation laws limited the spaces where black Americans could gather, the barbershop served as a safe meeting space for the black community. In barbershops, black men could speak openly and honestly about a range of topics, including their health -- and that seems to continue today.

"I think that what's so wonderful about health outreach in the barbershop: It's a comfortable place," Blyler said.

"Folks can ask questions or get information about their health in a 'low-stakes,' relaxed environment," she said. "Barbershops are a social hub for black men, a place where they gather, when getting a haircut or not, and share information."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story explained the alternative–not receiving special help at the barbershop–and what the outcomes were. It also discussed similar past efforts to help black men at risk of colon cancer. Perhaps more could have been said about the effectiveness rates of other public health programs, but we feel this wasn’t critical.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jay Konduros used to rush home several times a year after accidentally cutting or bumping himself. There he would inject himself with refrigerated blood-clotting factor to prevent internal bleeding and extensive bruising and swelling. “I was walking on eggshells all the time,” said the former aerospace engineer who has a blood disorder called hemophilia B.

Then, last year, Konduros enrolled in a clinical trial, receiving an experimental gene therapy at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Almost immediately, he began producing the missing clotting factor. Several weeks later, after he dropped a heavy box on his shin, he watched a bruise develop and shrink within hours. “Are you kidding me?” he thought. “Life's easy if this is what happens.”

Konduros, 53, who runs a bakery and cafe in southeastern Ontario, is one of 10 men in an early-stage trial sponsored by Spark Therapeutics. (The disorder is much more common in men than women.) On Wednesday, researchers reported that a single intravenous infusion of Spark's novel gene therapy enabled patients to safely produce sufficient clotting factor to prevent dangerous bleeding episodes.

The treatment also “nearly universally eliminated” the need for preventive infusions of clotting factor a few times a week, the scientists said. And its effects lasted; after a year and a half, the longest patient follow-up, the therapy was continuing to work.

The results, published Wednesday online in the New England Journal of Medicine, represent “another example of the gene-therapy renaissance,” Matthew Porteus, a pediatrician at Stanford University, wrote in an accompanying editorial. He said the data suggests that the treatment ultimately might provide an “ideal cure” for hemophilia B.

Still, he noted, the study has some limitations. The follow-up period was relatively short, from 28 to 78 weeks in the new report; longer-term studies are needed to prove safety and effectiveness over extended periods. In addition, he said, researchers need to find ways to provide the therapy to a broader group of people, including children, and to figure out how to reduce the costs involved.

The researchers presented earlier findings on the gene therapy a year ago at the American Society of Hematology's annual meeting, but the latest data covers a larger patient group and a longer time period.

The hemophilia gene therapy is one of several being tested for conditions including sickle cell anemia and Huntington's disease. The one-time treatments seek to fight the disease by adding correct copies of a patient's defective genes. If approved, such treatments are expected to command stratospheric prices. For example, a separate Spark gene therapy for a rare type of childhood blindness, which is on track for Food and Drug Administration clearance soon, could cost $1 million per patient for infusions in both eyes, according to some Wall Street analysts.

Still, the therapies can produce at least some offsetting savings. Porteus noted in his editorial that the hemophilia therapy resulted in savings of about $200,000 a year per patient because of the elimination of clotting-factor infusions.

Other experts also were impressed by the results. The hemophilia study “is small but very promising, and it gives me the sense that gene therapy for hemophilia B is going to be at our disposal in no time, maybe a few years from now,” said Aric Parnes, who is associate director of the Boston Hemophilia Center at the Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center and wasn't involved in the study. “One of the key things is, how long will the treatment last? Does it wane over time? So far, with a full year, it doesn’t look like that is happening.”

Lindsey George, the lead investigator and a hematologist at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, said that nine of the 10 men in the trial didn't experience any bleeding episodes after the gene therapy treatment. The one patient who needed clotting factor because of bleeding used 91 percent less than before, she said.

“People were planning their lives around hemophilia, and now they are doing activities that they weren't before,” George said. “One man who came in a wheelchair is now out of a wheelchair and is coaching Little League.”

People with hemophilia B inherit a gene mutation on the X chromosome that interferes with their ability to produce normal levels of blood-clotting factor IX. (Because women have two copies of the X chromosomes, the other one can compensate, so they may carry the disease but not suffer from it.) Bleeding episodes — which can result from injury or occur spontaneously — can cause extensive damage and be life threatening.

The therapy developed by Spark, a biotech company spun off from the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia in 2013, involves a bioengineered gene designed to prompt the body to produce increased levels of a different clotting factor. The gene is transported to the liver, where clotting factor is made, by a harmless virus called an adeno-associated viral vector. For the current trial, which is being funded by Spark and Pfizer, researchers used a clotting factor that is 8 to 10 times as strong as the normal version. The stronger factor is called Factor IX-Padua, because it was discovered in 2009 in an Italian family.

Patients produced clotting-factor levels that were enough to allow blood to clot but not to spur an undesirable immune-system response, the researchers said.

FDA advisers urge approval for first gene therapy for inherited disease

In a first, scientists edit genes inside a man's body to try to cure a disease. What's next?

'This is not the end': Using immunotherapy and a genetic glitch to give cancer patients hope
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Individuals coping with hemophilia B have few options, and the story describes the main one: injections of blood-clotting factor to stem runaway bleeding.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Dec. 9, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- The bone drug zoledronic acid (Zometa), considered a potentially promising weapon against breast cancer recurrence, has flopped in a new study involving more than 3,360 patients.

Zometa did not appear to prevent breast cancer from returning or to boost disease-free survival overall. British researchers presented the disappointing findings Thursday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas.

"As a whole, the study is negative," study author Dr. Robert Coleman, a professor of medical oncology at the University of Sheffield in England, said during a Thursday news conference on the findings. "There is no overall difference in recurrence rates or survival rates [between patients who got the bone drug and those who did not], except in older patients, defined as more than five years after menopause."

That was a possible bright spot in the results.

"In that population, there is a benefit," Coleman said. The older women had a 27 percent improvement in recurrence and a 29 percent improvement in overall survival over the five-year follow-up, compared to those who didn't get the drug.

"There was tremendous hope that this [drug] approach would be a major leap forward," Coleman noted. "There have been other trials that suggest this is the case." In one previous study, the use of the drug was linked with a 32 percent improvement in survival and lowered recurrence in younger women with breast cancer.

Other research has found that healthy women on bone drugs were less prone to develop breast cancer, so experts were hoping the drugs had an anti-tumor effect.

Zometa, marketed by Novartis AG, is used to relieve pain when cancers have spread to the bone -- in part, by slowing bone erosion caused by the disease. It is given intravenously, while other bisphosphonates such as Actonel, Fosamax or Boniva can be taken orally.

In the trial, known as AZURE (Adjuvant Treatment with Zoledronic Acid in State II/III Breast Cancer), Coleman and his colleagues evaluated 3,360 breast cancer patients from 174 participating centers, all with stage II or III cancers but no evidence of metastases (cancer that has spread beyond the original site). About half received the bone drugs plus standard therapy; half just got standard therapy.

The focus was on disease-free survival. After five years, about 400 women in each group either died or had recurrences.

When Coleman's team looked at subgroups, however, they found the benefit among older women, a finding they say warrants more study.

"The younger patients are getting no benefit," Coleman said. "If anything, they are doing a little bit worse."

In addition, there were some troubling side effects among women taking Zometa, including 17 cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (a severe bone disease that can result in death of the jawbone).

Dr. Sharon Giordano, an associate professor of breast medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, was not involved in the study but put it in perspective. Bisphosphonates have been used to treat osteoporosis as well as bone complications of breast cancer treatment, she said.

"The role of bisphosphonates in preventing cancer recurrence has been less clear," she said, noting that multiple studies have had conflicting findings.

As for the benefit found in postmenopausal women, she said, "I would consider this hypothesis-generating and not practice-changing."

Other studies underway may provide a clearer answer, she said.

Since the current study was presented at a meeting, its findings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Said Coleman: "Zoledronic acid cannot be routinely recommended for prevention of cancer returning, but it remains a very good drug for patients where the cancer has already spread to the bone."

Coleman disclosed receiving speaker fees from Novartis; the researchers also received academic grant funding from the drug maker.

For more information on bisphosphonates, visit U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story did point out that the women in this trial did receive standard therapy (and it did so more clearly than the other story we reviewed), though it did not specifically say what that treatment entails. We will give the story a satisfactory rating since it is not clear that there is a proven alternative that would provide the type of recurrence and survival benefits seen in a previous study of zoledronic acid for early stage breast cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New York, NY, September 22, 2015 - The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation against regular prostate specific antigen (PSA) screening for prostate cancer is controversial. While it may reduce the risk of over diagnosis and overtreatment, the reduction in intermediate and high risk cancer diagnoses raises concern because of the potential for delayed diagnoses of important cancers in men who may benefit from treatment, according to investigators reporting in The Journal of Urology®.

Prostate cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer death among men in the U.S., with nearly 30,000 deaths annually. Deaths from prostate cancer have declined by about 40% since the advent of PSA screening in the late 1980s, and 40-70% of that decline may be attributable to screening. However, radiation therapy and surgery have a negative impact on quality of life. The uncertain benefit of PSA based screening, combined with the complications associated with treatment, led the USPSTF to conclude in October 2011 that the harms of PSA based screening outweighed the benefits, leading it to recommend against regular screening.

"Our study was designed to assess the impact of the USPSTF recommendation on screening practices among urologists and primary care providers and the incidence of prostate cancer," explained lead investigator Daniel A. Barocas, MD, MPH, of the Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. "We know there is decreased utilization of PSA testing in some institutions and health systems, but has the number of incident cases per month changed substantially since the draft guideline was issued?"

Investigators evaluated the effect of the USPSTF guideline on the number and distribution of new prostate cancer diagnoses in the U.S. They identified incident cancers diagnosed between January 2010 and December 2012 in the National Cancer Database and assessed the trend of new prostate cancers diagnosed each month before and after the draft guideline was issued, comparing their findings with colon cancer.

This study helped quantify the potential benefits (reduced harms of over diagnosis and overtreatment of low risk disease and disease found in elderly men) and potential harms (missed opportunities to diagnose important cancers in men who may benefit from treatment).

The number of prostate cancer diagnoses dropped by more than 12% (1363 cases) in the month after the USPSTF draft guideline was issued and the number continued to drop, resulting in an overall decline of 28% in incident prostate cancer diagnoses in the year after the draft guideline was issued. By contrast, the number of monthly colon cancer diagnoses remained stable. Diagnoses of low, intermediate, and high risk prostate cancers all decreased significantly, but new diagnoses of non-localized disease did not change. The decreases were similar across all subgroups of age, comorbidity, race, income, and insurance.

The study showed that 12 months after the draft guidelines were published diagnoses of new low risk cancers had fallen by 37.9%, and continued to fall more rapidly than other disease risk strata, suggesting that, in this regard, the USPSTF recommendation had its intended effect,. Similarly, new diagnoses had fallen by 23.0-29.3% among men over age 70 and by 26.0% among infirm men, populations at risk for harms of treatment but unlikely to live long enough to benefit from early detection.

However, the study also identified a drop of 28.1% in diagnoses of intermediate risk disease and 23.1% in high risk prostate cancer one year after the draft guideline, which could result in missing important opportunities to spare men with higher risk cancers from progressive disease and cancer death.

"While some of the effects of this guideline may be beneficial in terms of reducing harms of over diagnosis and overtreatment, the reduction in intermediate and high risk cancer diagnoses raises concern for delayed diagnoses of important cancers associated with inferior cancer outcomes," noted Dr. Barocas. "Future research should focus on prostate cancer screening paradigms that both minimize harms and maximize the potential benefits of screening, as well as accounting for individual patient risk factors and preferences."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternatives are to screen (or at least screen more selectively) vs. not to screen. Although the story at least raises the comparison, the only way to truly compare the alternatives is to look at mortality outcomes, ideally with randomized trials. We have data from the ERSPC (European Randomised Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer) showing that screening reduces mortality by about 1/1000; the US PLCO (Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian) Cancer Screening Trials was negative. A key message is that men need to make informed decisions and be aware that a potential trade off with not screening is that the risk of dying from prostate cancer might be slightly increased. However, the current study is unable to provide data to quantitate that risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) – Patients who need to be rehospitalized within a month after major surgery have a lower risk of death over the next two months if they return to the hospital where they had the surgery rather than going to a different facility, according to a new study.

“Most clinicians or surgeons feel like if you take the time to do a big operation on someone, you know the area operated on, how the operations went, if there were complications,” lead author Dr. Benjamin S. Brooke of the University of Utah School of Medicine in Salt Lake City told Reuters Health by phone.

Doctors who did not perform the surgery won’t have that context, which may explain part of the survival benefit of returning to the original hospital, he said.

He and his team analyzed Medicare claims data from 2001 to 2011 on patients readmitted to the hospital within 30 days after major surgeries, including coronary artery bypass surgery, removal of the colon or pancreas, and hip or knee replacement. More than nine million patients underwent one of 12 such surgeries during the study period, and between six and 22 percent, depending on the surgery, were readmitted to the hospital within a month.

More than half the time, patients were readmitted or transferred to the hospital where they had the surgery.

Those who returned to the original hospital were 26 percent less likely to die within three months of surgery than those admitted to a different hospital, as reported in The Lancet.

“Patients readmitted after surgery almost always have a postoperative complication, either medical or surgical,” Drs. Justin B. Dimick and David C. Miller, both of the University of Michigan, wrote in an editorial.

Patients readmitted at the original hospital also tended to be readmitted one to two days earlier than those who ended up at different hospitals.

It might be harder for patients to get appropriate care at the other hospitals, where they don’t have a pre-existing relationship with a surgeon, and so treatment might be delayed, Dimick and Miller wrote.

“If you are a surgeon or clinician who takes care of this person, it’s intuitive that going back to that surgeon would influence how well they do,” Brooke said.

For complex operations, some patients will fly to prestigious hospitals from several hundred miles away, he said. If these patients have complications weeks later, they end up going to a local hospital, not the one where they had surgery.

“A lot of big Fortune 500 companies contract with bigger hospitals for patients undergoing major surgery,” Brooke said, noting the Wal-Mart has contracted with the Cleveland Clinic.

“Even if they live in the same city where they had their surgery, they might have to call an ambulance to pick them up, and the ambulance drivers don’t understand how important it is to take them to the same hospital,” he said.

Ambulance drivers and emergency department doctors should make every effort to get a patient who has had major surgery back to their original hospital, he said.

“A lot of readmissions are patients who have time to be transferred or triaged, if they are not bleeding to death or having a heart attack,” he said.

Patients should try to stay in the immediate vicinity of their surgical hospital for at least a week, Brooke said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternatives here are going to the same hospital or not. The piece emphasizes that this may be important, so we’ll give credit. The story could also have attempted to address what to do about these findings. What are the implications? The story mentions the ambulance driver or the patient traveling to another city for a procedure at a big name facility. The article implies that this situation could be changed, but doesn’t state how. This would require an initiative where insurers and payers decide that this is something important enough to address through policy changes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Boston, Mass – Physicians at Massachusetts Eye and Ear have, for the first time, induced a sense of smell in humans by using electrodes in the nose to stimulate nerves in the olfactory bulb, a structure in the brain where smell information from the nose is processed and sent to deeper regions of brain. Reporting online today in International Forum of Allergy & Rhinology, the research team describes their results, which provide a proof of concept for efforts to develop implant technology to return the sense of smell to those who have lost it.

“Our work shows that smell restoration technology is an idea worth studying further,” said corresponding author Eric Holbrook, MD, Chief of Rhinology at Mass. Eye and Ear and associate professor of otolaryngology at Harvard Medical School. “The development of cochlear implants, for example, didn’t really accelerate until someone placed an electrode in the cochlea of a patient and found that the patient heard a frequency of some type.”

Smell loss, or anosmia, has an estimated prevalence of 5 percent of the general population. While some cases of anosmia may be treated by caring for an underlying cause (often nasal obstruction, in which odors can’t reach the nerves of the olfactory system due to swelling, polyps or sinus disease), other cases involving damage to the sensory nerves of the nose (i.e. head injury, viruses and aging) are much more complex. There are currently no proven therapies for these cases.

Our sense of smell not only contributes to our enjoyment of life, but also to our daily safety and well being. We rely on our sense of smell to make us aware of smoke in detecting a fire, natural gas leaks and to avoid eating rotten food. In the elderly, of whom there are estimates that greater than 50 percent of the population over the age of 65 has experienced smell loss, it can be difficult to get proper nutrition, as the sensation of flavor is closely tied to the sense of smell, and as flavor diminishes, appetite decreases in this population.

A Cochlear Implant for the Nose

Motivated by work conducted by research colleagues at Virginia Commonwealth University’s School of Medicine, Mass. Eye and Ear physicians wanted to address the question of whether electrical stimulation of the olfactory bulb could induce the sense of smell in human subjects.

The findings described in the International Forum of Allergy & Rhinology report demonstrate this feasibility. In the report, the researchers describe endoscopic procedures to position electrodes in the sinus cavities of five patients with an intact ability to smell. Three patients described sensations of smell (including reports of onions, antiseptic, sour and fruity aromas) as a result of the stimulation.

This breakthrough in human patients opens the door for a “cochlear implant for the nose” to be developed — though the study authors caution that the concept of an olfactory stimulator is more challenging than existing technologies. The most successful neuroprosthesic device in the world, cochlear implants have been on the market for more than three decades to electrically stimulate the auditory nerve to restore hearing in people with profound hearing loss.

“There’s currently so little that we can do for these patients, and we hope to eventually be able to reestablish smell in people who don’t have a sense of smell,” Dr. Holbrook said. “Now we know that electrical impulses to the olfactory bulb can provide a sense of smell — and that’s encouraging.”

In addition to Dr. Holbrook, authors on the International Forum of Allergy & Rhinology study include co-first author Sidharth V. Puram, MD, PhD, of Washington University School of Medicine, Reiner B. See, MD, and Aaron G. Tripp, of Massachusetts General Hospital, and Dinesh G. Nair, MD, of Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

About Massachusetts Eye and Ear 

Massachusetts Eye and Ear, founded in 1824, is an international center for treatment and research and a teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. A member of Partners HealthCare, Mass. Eye and Ear specializes in ophthalmology (eye care) and otolaryngology–head and neck surgery (ear, nose and throat care). Mass. Eye and Ear clinicians provide care ranging from the routine to the very complex. Also home to the world’s largest community of hearing and vision researchers, Mass. Eye and Ear has pioneered new treatments for blindness, deafness and diseases of the head and neck. Our scientists are driven by a mission to discover the basic biology underlying these conditions and to develop new treatments and cures. In the 2018-2019 "Best Hospitals Survey," U.S. News & World Report ranked Mass. Eye and Ear #4 in the nation for eye care and #6 for ear, nose and throat care. For more information about life-changing care and research at Mass. Eye and Ear, please visit our blog, Focus, and follow us on Twitter and Facebook.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that some cases of anosmia can be treated, but that there are no proven therapies for treating anosmia cases caused by nerve damage. The release also mentions preliminary work being done at another university aimed at developing a treatment for patients with anosmia caused by nerve damage (that work is also in its earliest stages). That earns it a satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The defense system that doctors are trying to breach evolved to keep out toxins and microbes. It consists mainly of cells that line the walls of capillaries in the brain and are so tightly packed that many molecules in the bloodstream cannot slip out between cells to reach the brain tissue itself. But certain drugs, like mannitol, will temporarily open the barrier and were first used more than 20 years ago to help other medicines reach the brain.

The new technique refines the art of opening the barrier: it uses microcatheters — fine, highly flexible tubes that are inserted into an artery in the groin and then threaded up into tiny blood vessels nearly anywhere in the brain — to spray chemotherapy directly onto tumors or areas from which they have been removed. The catheters are normally used to deliver clot-dissolving drugs to the brain to treat strokes.

“This will substantially alter the way that chemotherapy is given in the future,” said Dr. John Boockvar, the brain surgeon who devised the trial. “But we have to prove that at certain doses, nobody gets hurt.”

Referring to glioblastoma patients, Dr. Riina said, “Everyone is looking for something to do for these people.”

“Even if you buy someone just a year, that could be a wedding or a graduation,” he continued. “You never know what might happen in the year they hold onto.”

The study, which began in August, is still in its earliest phase, meaning its main goal is to measure safety, not efficacy — to find out if it is safe to spray Avastin directly into brain arteries and at what dose. Nonetheless, the doctors were pleased when M.R.I. scans of the first few patients showed that the treatment seemed to erase any sign of recurring glioblastomas. But how long the effect will last remains to be seen.

Despite a beautiful scan, the first patient who was treated died in October, from pneumonia and the spread of glioblastoma to his brainstem.

Innovations are desperately needed to make headway against glioblastoma, which is “one of the most deadly tumors that exist in humans,” said Dr. Russell Lonser, chairman of surgical neurology at the National Institutes of Health.

“This is a very good start,” Dr. Lonser said. “The early data is very interesting and exciting.”

The complexity of a study like this goes beyond the science. Clinical trials are also a complicated pact, emotionally and ethically, between desperate patients and doctors who must balance their ambition as researchers against their duty as clinicians, and must walk a fine line between offering too much hope and not enough.

“I tell patients, ‘I’m going to try to cure your disease, but so far glioblastoma is an incurable disease,’ ” Dr. Boockvar said.

“I’m optimistic,” Mr. Sugrue said one morning in September, after scheduling a second brain operation. But he had tears in his eyes.

There are about 10,000 new cases of glioblastoma a year in the United States, mostly in people over 45. The tumors are notorious for growing back like weeds even after being cut out and blasted with chemotherapy and radiation, and they are nearly always fatal. With the best treatment, the median survival time is about 15 months.

But in the last five years, the number of patients who survive 2 years has increased to 25 percent, from 8 percent, largely because doctors began using a chemotherapy pill called temozolomide, or Temodar, along with radiation (Temodar is believed to seep through the blood-brain barrier).

Dr. Boockvar said he thought that if he could just keep patients alive for two years, more advances might come along and give them time.

“The glioblastoma population is very studyable, unfortunately, because the prognosis is so grim,” he said.

Patients often wind up on the front lines of research, figuring they have little to lose and hoping they will be lucky enough to test the big breakthrough. More than 500 studies for people with glioblastoma are listed on the government Web site www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Mr. Sugrue, who lives in Stamford, Conn., with his wife, Donna, and their children Molly and Tim, began having headaches in April. He thought he had a sinus problem. But a scan found a brain tumor nearly the size of a golf ball. A local doctor referred him to Dr. Boockvar. He had the standard treatment: surgery, temozolomide pills and six weeks of radiation, which ended on June 25.

By July, an ominous bright spot on his M.R.I. scan suggested that the tumor might already be growing back. He continued chemotherapy, but the spot kept enlarging.

By mid-September, the Sugrues were back in Dr. Boockvar’s office to plan their next step. Stubbly hair was growing in on Mr. Sugrue’s scalp, except for a bare patch, around an arcing scar above his right ear. His eyes, bright blue with thick, dark lashes that gave him a boyish look, searched the doctor’s face.

The headaches had returned. New scans, displayed on a computer screen, showed signs of brain swelling and bright spots that should not have been there. Dr. Boockvar recommended more surgery and then chemotherapy with Avastin, which had recently been approved for recurring glioblastoma.

It was approved for intravenous use — to be dripped into a vein, usually in the arm — but he said Mr. Sugrue would be an ideal candidate for his study, in which the drug would be infused directly into an artery in the brain, producing levels at least 50 times what the intravenous route could achieve. One other patient had been treated that way, and M.R.I. scans showed that recurring tumors seemed to have melted away.

Mr. Sugrue said he was all for it, even though Dr. Boockvar warned him that the drug was no magic bullet. Then Dr. Boockvar ticked off the risks from a second brain operation.

“I have to quote you a 5 percent risk you’ll be visibly weak,” he said. “A 1 percent chance of paralysis on the left side.”

Mr. Sugrue wiped his eyes and began to apologize for losing his composure, but the surgeon cut him off and said, “In neurosurgery they say that if you don’t make your patient cry, you haven’t gotten informed consent.”

The trial grew out of a conversation about a year ago between Dr. Boockvar and Dr. Riina, an expert in using microcatheters to treat strokes.

“I said, ‘Why can’t you infuse chemotherapy for my brain tumor patients?’ ” Dr. Boockvar recalled. “And he said: ‘I can. Just show me what you want to do.’ ”

Dr. Riina said, “Technically, I can go anywhere in your brain.”

He said microcatheter technology had advanced “light-years” in the last decade and was just waiting for a new drug to come along for glioblastoma.

They wrote up a plan to test what they called “superselective intra-arterial cerebral infusion” of Avastin in 30 patients with glioblastomas that had recurred after standard treatment. Each patient would receive just one treatment directed into the brain, followed weeks later by a series of intravenous treatments with Avastin.

Their study involves a technique first developed about 30 years ago, which uses mannitol to open the blood-brain barrier temporarily to get chemotherapy into the brain. Mannitol pulls water out of the tightly packed cells lining the capillaries so that they shrink and pull away from one another, opening up gaps through which drug molecules can pass into the brain.

The technique was developed by Dr. Edward A. Neuwelt, a neurosurgeon at Oregon Health Sciences University and the Veterans Affairs Hospital in Portland. Its best results have been in people with a rare type of brain tumor called a primary central nervous system lymphoma. But it has not been helpful with glioblastoma, because until recently there was no chemotherapy to infuse that would have much effect on those tumors.

Dr. Neuwelt said that Avastin had helped to renew interest in opening the blood-brain barrier but that researchers disagreed about whether the drug would lend itself to that use.

Avastin starves tumors by blocking the growth of new blood vessels, which they need to survive. Dr. Boockvar said microcatheters should increase the odds of success by delivering a high dose of the drug directly to where it was needed most. Earlier research with other drugs used larger catheters inserted into the carotid arteries, which feed the entire brain — meaning that the tumor did not receive the most concentrated dose and that healthy brain tissue was exposed to the toxic drugs.

By mid-November, the researchers had treated five patients, including Mr. Sugrue; they first infused mannitol, waited five minutes and then sprayed in the Avastin. In all the patients’ M.R.I. scans, the telltale bright spots that marked tumor growth faded away after the treatment.

“I can’t tell you what it means,” Dr. Boockvar said. “Nobody knows.”

Indeed, the death of the first patient was a reminder that glioblastoma can invade other parts of the brain and the spinal fluid and that the highly localized spray of Avastin might miss deadly seeds of cancer.

But Dr. Boockvar remained hopeful for the remaining patients, describing the scans as “astronomically far better than I had anticipated.”

Mr. Sugrue was still in the hospital in late September when Dr. Boockvar burst into his room and got him out of bed to look at his own before-and-after scans.

“He took me to this room with all these computers and said, ‘I’ve got to show you this,’ ” Mr. Sugrue recalled. “This M.R.I. was a thing of beauty. I’m excited that he’s excited. That means a lot to me.”

Dr. Boockvar said: “Avastin may not be the best drug for this delivery technique. What’s exciting about our results is that we’ve proven there is a local effect.

“Suppose someone said, ‘I have much better drug.’ Now I can say I at least have a delivery system.”

With patients, Dr. Boockvar tries to walk a fine line, trying to level with them and yet not rob them of all hope. He knows the emotional toll that a cancer diagnosis can take: his own father had leukemia for about eight years and died in September. Mrs. Sugrue said the doctor urged her and her husband to resist doing an Internet search for glioblastoma because they would just read that it was a death sentence.

They said they tried to follow his advice, but when the subject of prognosis came up in an interview, both had tears in their eyes.

“You don’t ask the question if you don’t want the answer,” Mrs. Sugrue said. “What will be, will be. You do what you can.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story describes the conventional treatments for glioblastoma–surgery, radiation and/or chemotherapy via pill or IV. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Brynne Henn, 26, leaned back onto a pristine white couch and settled white-and-red headphones over her ears. She picked up a handset, grasping one buzzer in each hand, closed her eyes, and the session began.

The room was quiet. Through the headphones, Henn heard an alternating tone — first in the right ear, then the left, back and forth. The handset buzzed in synchrony, right-left-right-left, part of a trauma treatment that also involves recalling painful memories. She turned her thoughts to the day her brother, Nate, died.

Nate Henn had been visiting relatives and working with Invisible Children, a nonprofit in Kampala, Uganda. On July 11, 2010, he was at a sports complex with friends, enjoying the broadcast of a World Cup soccer match, when terrorists struck. Nate was only 25 when shrapnel from a bomb ended his life.

“ ‘Your brother’s dead, and you need to come home to take care of your mom,’ ” she remembered her father saying. With those simple words, her brother was gone — and she felt compelled to take control in the ensuing chaos. Henn, who had been visiting her boyfriend in Chapel Hill, immediately returned home to Raleigh, N.C.

“I didn’t stop for the first week after Nate died,” she said.

The ordeal didn’t end with the news of Nate’s death. Her other brother, Kyle, rushed home from Delaware to be with the family. But the private plane carrying him crashed the next day in nearby Chapel Hill. The pilot was killed and the co-pilot was seriously injured, but Kyle survived.

“And then the media storm went crazy,” Henn said. The family already had received inquiries from journalists about Nate’s death; Kyle’s brush with death only intensified the interest of media outlets from Philadelphia to Raleigh.

“It made it so much worse,” Henn said. At age 20, she began functioning as the family spokeswoman. “I felt like I had to protect my family from all of it,” she said. She occupied herself with press inquiries and funeral arrangements. But after the whirlwind passed, unaddressed grief remained with her.

When a person experiences trauma, the associated memories can remain as vivid and urgent as on the day the event happened. The brain perceives the trauma as happening in the present and reacts accordingly, even in safe situations.

When Henn’s traumatic memories of her brother’s violent death were triggered, they “popped” and glowed in her mind as if they were being shown on a projector screen.

“All these memories around me started playing like a video loop,” Henn said. Her body remembered the sensations vividly: the heat and discomfort of the summer day, the pain of her high heels as she delivered the eulogy at the funeral.

Henn did cognitive behavioral therapy — a form of conventional talk therapy — for five years.

“It helped me realize feelings were normal,” she explained, and that she was not weak for reeling from the tragedy. “But I never felt like I was getting over it.” Random memories could send her spiraling into panic and fear. Talk therapy helped her manage those attacks, but it didn’t address the root cause.

Henn was initially diagnosed with a condition known as complicated grief; she was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder only last year. She was surprised. She had thought of PTSD as an affliction of soldiers and others directly involved in horrendous events — not of people like her, suffering from the ripple effects of a bombing in Uganda.

It was Kyle Henn, recovering from his own PTSD after surviving the plane crash, who recommended eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy, or EMDR.

Psychologist Francine Shapiro developed EMDR in 1987. Three years later, she founded the EMDR Institute, which has trained more than 100,000 practitioners.

Some therapists use sounds from headphones during a session. Others use eye movement, moving a finger or object back and forth as the patient follows, eyes moving left to right and back again. Others employ a bar on which small bulbs light up from one side to another.

Patients follow the light or object with their eyes or listen to the alternating tone while thinking about a specific traumatic memory or series of memories. They describe the memories to the therapist, who gives guidance as needed.

The idea is that reliving the memories helps remove the sting and that the urgency of the memories can be reduced as the brain begins to move them from short-term to long-term memory. The sound or the eye movement is supposed to activate both sides of the brain in an imitation of REM sleep, when the brain usually converts short-term memories into long-term recollections.

Studies have found benefits to EMDR. But there is debate about whether the eye movement makes a difference, said Stephen Holland, founder of the Capital Institute for Cognitive Therapy and co-author of the textbook “Treatment Plans and Interventions for Depression and Anxiety Disorders.” “The question is whether stimulation adds to it.” He does not use it in his practice because he considers it no more effective than cognitive behavioral therapy.

Brynne Henn, who lives in the District, began seeing a licensed clinical psychologist who practices EMDR last September. In Gail Kalin’s office, nestled in a tree-shaded apartment building in Northwest Washington, Henn confronted the trauma that still haunted her.

The techniques associated with EMDR may merely have a placebo effect, some psychologists say. In early sessions, Henn focused on the headphones and handset; they helped distract her from the terror of reliving the traumatic events surrounding her brother’s death, she said. This distraction had a positive effect on her, she said, allowing her to dive deeply into the therapy without freezing in the face of fear.

Some insurance plans cover EMDR. Henn’s does not; she pays for the sessions out of pocket.

Henn, who is a communications associate at a Washington research institution, was initially very skeptical of EMDR.

“It is so weird,” she said. “When I first got there and she hands me these two paddles that vibrate in my hands, and then [I] put on these giant headphones — I was, like: What is this, a hearing test? What are we doing?”

But Henn was encouraged by the progress she made. “I started getting really interested in it,” she said. “Why is my brain coming up with this? What in the world are you doing to me, that this is what I came up with?” Henn was surprised by the vivid memories — some of which she hadn’t known existed — that resurfaced after so much time had passed.

It didn’t matter to her whether research supported EMDR; what mattered was whether it worked for her. Each time a particularly painful memory resurfaced, Henn said, “you have to go through it again until it has no meaning.” By confronting the trauma head-on, she added, it became less powerful.

“It’s integrating what’s stuck in time,” explained Kalin, the psychologist. Memories formed under the adrenaline of trauma are never put to rest, she said. “EMDR processing is untangling the knot.”

Once the memories are processed, therapists say, they are less vivid — less like the film reel Henn would see in her mind. Henn was able to recall processed memories without feeling panic.

EMDR’s central appeal lies in the possibility of closure — an end to PTSD, and to therapy for it.

“I’m going to come out equipped with tools to take care of myself,” Henn said. She already has put these tools to the test: Two months after she started EMDR, terrorists hit Paris, killing at least 130 people.

Soon after that attack, she heard reports that a video, possibly from the Islamic State, contained a threat to hit Washington next, and she had a “full-fledged panic attack,” she said.

“I was not sure where I was; I was sweating profusely but also really cold,” she said. She stepped onto the 11th-floor terrace at work and looked down.

“The thought came into my head: ‘I just need to walk off, and that will wake me up,’ ” Henn remembered. “And I had enough awareness that I sat myself down and was trying to think of calming breaths and going back and forth” — actions reminiscent of EMDR processing.

“It took a while, and it was a little terrifying that I had that thought,” she said. “But the process of being able to calm myself down was much better than anything I had been equipped with before.”

In a few weeks, Henn mentioned to Kalin, she would be marrying her college sweetheart. Beneath the excitement, she felt a twinge of panic: How would she react to her brother’s absence from the wedding? She asked a close friend to write a speech from Nate’s point of view, as if he were speaking at the celebration. But Henn admitted she was worried that the speech would trigger an extreme emotional reaction, a fear shared by many who suffer from PTSD. They never know when the trauma will reignite; it can spread from the smallest spark, even on the happiest day.

“Does EMDR deal with the future?” she asked Kalin. Kalin nodded, and they began processing memories again.

Among the painful recollections, Henn encountered a happy memory — friends who arrived at the funeral to support the family — and a smile broke through the tears.

“It felt like a gift from Nate,” she said.

EMDR, Henn said, allowed her to have a do-over — to be able to grieve properly and then to move beyond grief. She was finally able to remember the good times with her brother without being overwhelmed by pain.

“I’m still sad, but I’m not hurt by it anymore,” she said. “It’s not opening up any fresh wounds.”

As Henn walked outside into a brisk April evening after her session, there was a new easiness to her, as though something had finally been freed.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Cognitive behavioral therapy, a popular alternative, is mentioned in the story, with conflicting reactions. The individual who is the subject of the story left that treatment modality to try EMDR, indicating that the therapy had not been sufficiently helpful.  A psychologist-source who appears to be independent, in contrast, indicates that he considers EMDR no more effective than cognitive behavioral therapy.
We do want to point out that medications were not discussed, although there are several approved for PTSD.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Restoring testosterone production in men may be as effective as replacing it, without compromising their fertility. Two phase III clinical trials show that a drug that restores the body's natural production of testosterone has no negative effect on a man's sperm count while a topical testosterone gel causes a significant drop. The findings, which are published in BJU International, could change the way men are treated for low testosterone.

While testosterone replacement therapy can boost men's energy levels, sex drive, and mood, the treatment can fool the body into thinking that it is producing enough testosterone, so that it in turn starts making less of its own. This can result in a significant decrease in sperm count--leading to infertility--because the body needs its own testosterone to produce sperm.

An alternative approach to testosterone replacement is based on restoring the body's natural production of testosterone with drugs similar to those used to help women ovulate. Edward Kim, MD, urologist at the University of Tennessee Medical Center and Professor at the University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine in Knoxville, and his colleagues compared such a drug, called Enclomiphene citrate, with testosterone replacement therapy (Androgel) in overweight men with low testosterone, or hypogonadism. In the randomized studies, 44 men started on 12.5 mg of oral enclomiphene citrate daily, with 25 men being up-titrated to 25 mg; 42 men received a topical 1.62 percent AndroGel; and 41 men received a placebo. Over five months, patients had 10 clinic visits with one overnight stay.

The investigators found that Enclomiphene citrate restored blood testosterone levels to normal after 16 weeks while maintaining sperm concentrations, whereas Androgel restored blood testosterone levels but caused marked reductions in sperm concentrations by suppressing the function of the testes.

"One of the basic tenets in medicine is to do no harm. As this study has shown in a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled manner, exogenous testosterone therapy with Androgel can clearly decrease sperm production and potentially impact fertility," said Dr. Kim. "This study confirmed that Enclomiphene can maintain spermatogenesis while restoring testosterone levels to normal."

Full citation: "Oral Enclomiphene Citrate Raises Testosterone and Preserves Sperm Counts in Obese Hypogonadal Men, Unlike Topical Testosterone: Restoration Instead of Replacement." Edward D. Kim, Andrew McCullough and Jed Kaminetzky. BJU International; Published Online: October 23, 2015 (DOI: 10.1111/bju.13337).

Author Contact: To arrange an interview with the author please contact Susan Wyatt of the University of Tennessee Medical Center's press office, at SWyatt@mc.utmck.edu or +1 (865) 305-6845.

About the Journal: BJUI is a highly respected international medical journal that aims to provide the very highest standard of research and clinical information for the urological community, promoting awareness of new advances and supporting best practice in urology. Every issue gives invaluable practical information in the form of original articles, reviews, comments, translational science and surgical education articles on all aspects of urology.

Wiley is a global provider of knowledge and knowledge-enabled services that improve outcomes in areas of research, professional practice and education. Through the Research segment, the Company provides digital and print scientific, technical, medical, and scholarly journals, reference works, books, database services, and advertising. The Professional Development segment provides digital and print books, online assessment and training services, and test prep and certification. In Education, Wiley provides education solutions including online program management services for higher education institutions and course management tools for instructors and students, as well as print and digital content. The Company's website can be accessed at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The very basis of the news release — and the study upon which it is based — is a comparison of alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CLEVELAND, Ohio (October 8, 2018)--Microablative fractional CO2 lasers are energy-based devices designed to help manage troublesome menopause symptoms such as painful sex, dryness, itching/burning, urinary frequency, and incontinence. Although there is ongoing debate regarding the safety and effectiveness of vaginal laser surgery, a new study suggests that it may be effective, especially after multiple treatments. Study results are published online in Menopause, the journal of The North American Menopause Society (NAMS).

Collectively known as the genitourinary syndrome of menopause (GSM), the various genital and urinary problems associated with menopause have created a market for new therapies and treatments to help women regain sexual function and bladder control. Vaginal laser surgery represents one of the newer and more hotly contested approaches.

In the case of microablative fractional CO2 laser surgery, a series of microscopic laser beams using fractionated energy penetrate the skin to remove old and damaged skin cells, intended to rebuild the vaginal pathway. In this new study, GSM symptoms were evaluated up to12 months after the last laser surgery and compared based on the number of total therapies applied (up to a total of five).

The results of this small, retrospective, non-sham-controlled study demonstrated that this type of laser surgery was particularly effective in reducing the intensity of dyspareunia (painful sex) and dryness. It further demonstrated that four or five laser therapies may be superior in lowering the intensity of GSM symptoms compared with three laser therapies in both short- and long-term follow-up. Study results are published in the article "Microablative fractional CO2 laser for the genitourinary syndrome of menopause: up to 12-month results."

"This study adds to the literature on vaginal laser therapy for GSM. However, more robust randomized, sham-controlled data are needed, with larger numbers of women, to evaluate long-term safety, benefits, and risks," says Dr. JoAnn Pinkerton, NAMS executive director. "Until more data are available, all treatment options, including lubricants, vaginal moisturizers, and FDA-approved vaginal and systemic hormone therapies, should be discussed with women who suffer from GSM to determine the best treatment option for them."

For more information about menopause and healthy aging, visit http://www. .

Founded in 1989, The North American Menopause Society (NAMS) is North America's leading nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting the health and quality of life of all women during midlife and beyond through an understanding of menopause and healthy aging. Its multidisciplinary membership of 2,000 leaders in the field--including clinical and basic science experts from medicine, nursing, sociology, psychology, nutrition, anthropology, epidemiology, pharmacy, and education--makes NAMS uniquely qualified to serve as the definitive resource for health professionals and the public for accurate, unbiased information about menopause and healthy aging. To learn more about NAMS, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release names some of the many treatments available for managing menopause symptoms through this quote from the executive director of NAMS:
Until more data are available, all treatment options, including lubricants, vaginal moisturizers, and FDA-approved vaginal and systemic hormone therapies, should be discussed with women who suffer from GSM to determine the best treatment option for them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Tens of thousands of kids may benefit from cholesterol-lowering medication, but no one would know because screening guidelines exclude too many children, U.S. doctors said Monday.

In a report published in the journal Pediatrics, they call for screening of all children, expanding one set of current recommendations that target only those whose parents or grandparents have heart disease or high cholesterol. Another existing set of guidelines doesn’t call for screening in any children.

Screening all children would “identify a number of children who are of very significant risk of premature heart disease,” said Dr. William Neal of West Virginia University in Morgantown, who led the new study.

Neal said treating youth with cholesterol-lowering drugs, the so-called statins, would curb the risk that they went on to develop heart problems in middle age. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the Western world.

Based on data from West Virginia, Neal and colleagues found that more than one percent of all fifth-graders had cholesterol levels that warranted drug treatment. But a third of those children didn’t have relatives with heart disease or high cholesterol, and so wouldn’t have been screened under the current guidelines, issued by the government’s National Cholesterol Education Program.

“I have gradually become convinced that universal screening in children is not only preferable, but necessary,” said Neal. He added that although universal screening would be expensive, it would save a lot of money later on if heart disease could be prevented.

But not all scientists agree that screening is a good idea. For example, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal expert panel, currently doesn’t recommend routine cholesterol screening in any children.

“Unfortunately, there is no evidence that starting a ten-year-old on cholesterol-lowering drugs will prevent heart disease 40 years later,” said Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, a member of the task force.

He said statin treatment in children was still controversial, and that no long-term safety data existed.

The new study tapped into data from more than 20,000 children who had been screened at public schools in West Virginia over five years.

More than seven in 10 school kids had first-degree relatives with heart disease, and about one percent of those had “bad” cholesterol (LDL cholesterol) levels that might require drug treatment in addition to diet changes and exercise, according to the researchers.

Yet among the kids without heart disease in their family, the percentage of children who might benefit from treatment was closer to two percent than to one, meaning that family history didn’t seem to make a difference.

“It is therefore prudent to implement universal screening in the pediatric population independent of family history,” the researchers conclude.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story includes an expert who argues against universal cholesterol screening for children. It also points out that lifestyle changes would be part of the treatment considered for children who have elevated cholesterol.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters) - Johnson & Johnson’s Stelara helped a significantly higher percentage of Crohn’s disease sufferers than those who received a placebo, according to a study of patients who had not been helped by other commonly used drugs.

In addition, nearly 70 percent of patients who stayed on Stelara beyond the initial six weeks of the mid-stage study continued to respond to the drug and there was a significantly higher rate of remission at 22 weeks than in a placebo group.

Stelara, known chemically as ustekinumab, is already approved to treat the skin condition plaque psoriasis and is in late-stage testing for psoriatic arthritis. An approval for Crohn’s would give the drug entry into an estimated $1.3 billion U.S. market and $2.7 billion market worldwide.

The intravenous biotech drug met the primary goal of the study as almost 40 percent of patients who received the 6 milligrams per kilogram of weight dose of Stelara achieved a clinical response — defined as a 100-point reduction in the Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) — after six weeks of treatment.

That compared with a response rate of 23.5 percent of patients who received a placebo.

Two lower doses of Stelara were also tested in the study of 526 patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease who were not helped by, or could not tolerate, treatment with a widely used class of drugs known as TNF antagonists, such as Abbott Laboratories’ Humira.

Those who received 1 mg/kg had a 36.6 percent response rate and the 3 mg/kg dose led to a 34.1 percent response rate.

“To see these kind of outcomes, where you have high response rates in the short term and then good remission rates out toward five or six months of therapy, it shows unequivocally that the drug is effective for treating Crohn’s disease,” said Dr. William Sandborn, the study’s lead investigator, who presented the data at the Digestive Disease Week meeting in Chicago on Sunday.

“It’s effective in the patient population that has the greatest unmet need at this point in time,” Sandborn said of patients who do not respond to anti-TNF drugs.

He said a 100-point drop in the CDAI was clinically meaningful to patients. “They’ll feel measurably better.”

“The patient population was really quite ill and had very high disease activity, and despite that we saw nice response rates,” Sandborn said.

In a second phase of the study, those who responded to Stelara after six weeks of treatment were given either a 90-mg injection of Stelara at week eight and week 16 or a placebo.

After 22 weeks, 69.4 percent of the Stelara patients maintained a clinical response and 41.7 percent were deemed to be in clinical remission. That compared with 42.5 percent who maintained a clinical response and a 27.4 percent remission rate in the placebo group.

Clinical remission was defined as a CDAI score down to 150. Patients in the study on average started at 320 or 325 on the CDAI scale, researchers said.

Crohn’s is a chronic autoimmune disorder of the gastrointestinal tract that affects an estimated 700,000 Americans. Common symptoms are abdominal pain and diarrhea, and it can lead to bowel perforations. Many Crohn’s patients require surgery when medicines no longer control symptoms.

The rate of infections and other serious side effects was similar in the Stelara and placebo groups, researchers said.

“We’ll need more patients and longer-term data to really fully characterize the safety profile in Crohn’s disease, but so far so good,” Sandborn said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story gets a check here for telling us that subjects in this study had tried TNF antagonists but didn’t benefit or couldn’t tolerate them. It gets another check when it mentions that when medicines for Crohn’s disease stop working, many patients require surgery.
There was room for more details here, too, or an outline of what’s unknown. The article states the trial was placebo-controlled in individuals who “failed” other approved meds, but that doesn’t mean we know how it compares to other meds commonly used, like prednisone.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
International Study Finds Effective, Less Toxic Way to Treat Brain Tumors

Newswise — CHARLOTTE, N.C., July 26, 2016 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Physicians from Carolinas HealthCare System's Neurosciences Institute and Levine Cancer Institute are among the authors of a study that was accepted for publication by the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA). The study, released on July 26, 2016, shows that patients with the most common form of brain tumor can be treated in an effective and substantially less toxic way by omitting a widely used portion of radiation therapy. These results will allow tens of thousands of patients with brain tumors to experience a better quality of life while maintaining the same length of life.

Anthony L. Asher, MD, FACS, medical director at Carolinas HealthCare System's Neurosciences Institute and the senior author on the report, and as well as Stuart H. Burri, MD, chairman, department of radiation oncology at Levine Cancer Institute, began their research on this subject over 10 years ago in Charlotte, North Carolina. Along with Dr. Paul Brown at Mayo Clinic, they spearheaded an international, multi-institutional, randomized trial that will ultimately improve the standard of care for patients with a specific type of brain tumor, brain metastases, by reducing the toxicity of their treatment without reducing the effectiveness.

Typical therapies for these types of brain tumors include surgery, whole brain radiation therapy and focused radiation, also known as stereotactic radiosurgery. "We discovered that whole brain radiation added to focused radiation in the treatment of brain metastases – in other words, cancer that travels to the brain- reduces the number of new brain tumors over time; however, patients receiving the whole brain radiation had significantly more difficulties with memory and complex thinking than patients who only had the focused radiation," says Dr. Asher.

"Whole brain radiation patients also reported worse quality of life compared with patients who only received the focused radiation," adds Dr. Burri. "Interestingly, the data showed that the addition of whole brain radiation produced no improvement in survival."

According to the American Cancer Society, in 2016, there will be approximately 1.7 million new cancer cases diagnosed in the United States. Almost one in four of those patients (about 400,000) will experience spread of their cancers to the brain. In contrast, 300,000 and 240,000 patients will be newly diagnosed with breast and primary lung cancers, respectively, each year. "Brain metastases are not only extremely common, they are also a major source of disability in society," says Dr. Asher. Because of their location, these tumors often produce severe neurological symptoms, such as headaches, weakness or problems with speech and information processing, thereby compromising both daily function and quality of life in cancer patients.

According to Dr. Asher, there are two primary objectives in cancer care:

To improve survivalTo maintain or improve quality of life for patients"The first and highest rule of medical care is 'do no harm,'" says Dr. Asher. "Consistent with that obligation, when it isn't possible to extend survival with various therapies, it's absolutely essential that we work to reduce or eliminate any possibility that quality of life will be compromised by treatments. Another way to state that principle for cancer care, is that when two cancer therapies produce similar survival, it's important to understand which therapy offers patients a better quality of life."

In this study, although whole brain radiation decreased the number of new brain tumors over time, its addition to focused radiation interestingly did not result in a survival benefit over focused radiation alone. Furthermore, whole brain therapy was associated with considerably worse quality of life.

"In the past, clinicians who treated patients with brain tumors seldom used sophisticated techniques like neurocognitive tests to evaluate patients' daily function in response to various therapies," said Dr. Burri. "Without those tests, we might have incorrectly concluded that whole brain radiation was a better option for patients because it made their scans look better, at least in the short term. However, the data from our study shows that clinicians can no longer simply rely on the results of traditional lab tests or scans to assess the value of care; we have to understand the total impact of cancer therapies on our patients."

Drs. Asher and Burri emphasize that the real importance of this study is its potential to make us think differently about what really matters in cancer therapy.

The trial authors concluded that the benefit of adding whole brain radiation was outweighed by its risks in patients with one to three newly diagnosed brain metastases. This is a very relevant finding, as over 200,000 patients still receive whole brain radiation in the United States each year, and the majority of patients with brain metastases have a limited number (typically three or less) of brain lesions. Drs. Asher and Burri, along with their co-investigators, now recommend that patients with one to three brain metastases should no longer receive routine whole brain radiation therapy, and should be treated with focused therapy alone to better preserve cognitive function and quality of life.

"Having the research published in JAMA is validation of more than a decade of work," says Dr. Burri. " It is deeply satisfying to have developed an important scientific project, work in close collaboration with other investigators to obtain support from the National Cancer Institute, then carry the to carry the trial to completion with publication of impactful results in one of the leading medical journals in the world."

Drs. Asher and Burri are now working on a new method of focused therapy for tumors that have spread to the brain that combines radiation and surgery. The technique was pioneered at Levine Cancer Institute and they are looking to expand and further validate the approach with the National Cancer Institute.

About Carolinas HealthCare System Carolinas HealthCare System (carolinashealthcare.org), one of the nation's leading and most innovative healthcare organizations, provides a full spectrum of healthcare and wellness programs throughout North and South Carolina. Its diverse network of care locations includes academic medical centers, hospitals, freestanding emergency departments, physician practices, surgical and rehabilitation centers, home health agencies, nursing homes and behavioral health centers, as well as hospice and palliative care services. Carolinas HealthCare System works to enhance the overall health and wellbeing of its communities through high quality patient care, education and research programs, and numerous collaborative partnerships and initiatives.

(R) Anthony L. Asher, MD, FACS, medical director at Carolinas HealthCare System's Neurosciences Institute and the senior author on the report, and (L) Stuart H. Burri, MD, chairman, department of radiation oncology at Levine Cancer Institute, spearheaded an international, multi-institutional, randomized trial that will ultimately improve the standard of care for patients with a specific type of brain tumor, brain metastases, by reducing the toxicity of their treatment without reducing the effectiveness.Video - http://origin-qps.onstreammedia.com/origin/multivu_archive/PRNA/ENR/CarolinasHealthCareSystem.mp4Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160726/392955
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release is clear that the point of the study was a direct comparison of two commonly-used treatments. The release also points out that surgery is a treatment option for these patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATS 2016, SAN FRANCISCO - A new skin test for tuberculosis infection has proven safe, easy to administer and accurate in two Phase III clinical trials, according to research presented at the ATS 2016 International Conference.

The test, known as C-Tb, combines the "field friendliness of the PPD-based tuberculin skin test with the high specificity of interferon gamma release assays, or IGRAs," said lead researcher Morten Ruhwald, MD, PhD, head of human immunology at Statens Serum Institut in Denmark, which developed the test.

The new test measures the body's immune response to two TB antigens, EAST-6 and CFP10. The test is administered like a tuberculin skin test (TST), and results are interpreted by measuring the size of the skin induration two or three days later.

The TST is the most commonly used test to detect TB infection, with about 50 million tests worldwide each year, according to the World Health Organization. The test is easy to administer but produces too many false positives to achieve the WHO's goal of reducing TB deaths by 95 percent and new cases by 90 percent by 2035, Dr. Ruhwald said.

Introduced a decade ago, IGRAs have high specificity, producing few false positives, but require blood samples and complicated lab work, which has limited their widespread use. There is also a dramatic price difference between the two diagnostic tests. According to Dr. Ruhwald, a TST costs about $2; an IGRA is 20 to 40 times more expensive depending on setting.

In the first clinical trial, Dr. Ruhwald and colleagues conducted a double-blinded study of C-Tb in 979 participants enrolled at 13 clinical trial sites in Spain. Participants, all adults, ranged in TB status from presumed uninfected through intermediate and high risk of latent TB to active disease.
• Both C-Tb and the IGRA had a specificity of 97 percent.
• C-Tb was highly concordant to IGRA in 95 percent of study participants.
• The specificity of C-Tb, unlike the TST, was not impacted by the BCG vaccine, the partially effective vaccine that many residents in the developing world receive. TST specificity in this group was only 62 percent.
• The sensitivity of C-Tb was comparable to the IGRA in confirmed TB cases (77 percent vs. 81 percent), indicating similar abilities to detect infection.

In the second double-blinded trial, researchers were primarily concerned with testing how accurate C-Tb was in HIV-positive patients and in young children--populations in which the accuracy of the TST and the IGRA is known to be compromised. The study, conducted in South Africa, enrolled 1,090 participants, including 299 patients with HIV and 402 children as young as 28 days.
• Among participants with HIV, the ability of all three tests to detect TB infection was diminished, though the C-Tb appeared more robust in HIV-infected participants with low CD4 T cell counts.
• Among children under 5, C-Tb was comparable with the other two tests in identifying those infected.

Dr. Ruhwald said another advantage of C-Tb is that the measurement of infection, a 5mm or larger induration, is universal across patients with different risk factors, including HIV infection. With TST, the size of the induration is often adjusted to increase its accuracy in measuring infection in different patient populations.

Regulatory approval for C-Tb is currently being sought and Statens Serum Institute is actively seeking a commercial partner for marketing of C-Tb. The cost of a C-Tb test is to be determined; however, it is expected to be significantly less than an IGRA.

Diagnostic Accuracy of the Novel C-Tb Skin Test for Latent M.tuberculosis Infection; Results from Two Phase III Clinical Trials 

M. Ruhwald1, J.A. Cayla2, H. Aggerbaek1, K. Dheda3, P. Andersen1 

1Statens Serum Institut - Copenhagen/DK, 2Public Health Agency of Barcelona - Barcelona/ES, 3UCT Lung Institute, Lung Infection & Immunity Unit - Cape Town/ZA

Renewed emphasis on the detection and preventive treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected individuals at risk is required to reach the goals of the WHO post-2015 global tuberculosis strategy.

Statens Serum Institut has developed a novel specific skin test, C-Tb, based on the antigens ESAT-6 and CFP10. C-Tb combines the field friendliness of the PPD-based Tuberculin Skin Test (TST), with the high specificity of the interferon gamma release assays (IGRA).

This presentation outlines the results from two recently completed phase III trials (TESEC-05 and -06). The results have not previously been published or presented.

The TESEC-06 trial included 979 participants from 13 clinical trial sites in Catalonia, Galicia and Basque Country (Spain) with various risk profiles of M.tuberculosis infection. The TESEC-05 trial included 1090 participants with symptoms of TB and 100 endemic controls from Cape Town (South Africa).

In both trials C-Tb and TST were administered in a double-blinded fashion to one or the other forearm. Skin indurations were read 2 to 3 days later. A reading ?5mm was considered positive for the TST and C-Tb (cut off preset in phase II). Blood for IGRA testing (Quantiferon, QFT-GIT) was drawn prior to skin testing.

The safety profile of C-Tb was acceptable and not different from TST. Test specificity was assessed in 212 presumed unexposed Spanish controls. Here, C-Tb had comparable specificity to QFT-GIT (both 97%, p=1.0, and there was no impact of BCG vaccination). By contrast, previous BCG vaccination subverted TST specificity [62% (67/108) in BCG vaccinated compared to 95% (99/104) in BCG unvaccinated persons; (p<0.001)]. Sensitivity of C-Tb and QFT-GIT was comparable in patients with confirmed TB [77% (235/307) vs 81% (250/307); p=0.08]. In contacts, mirroring the findings with QFT-GIT, there was a strong trend in increasing C-Tb test positivity with M. tuberculosis exposure (figure 1). The impact of age and HIV infection on C-Tb, TST and QFT reactivity was assessed in 1090 individuals with symptoms suspect of TB disease, analysis is ongoing and will be included in the presentation.

These phase III trial results demonstrate that C-Tb is safe, has comparable diagnostic performance to QFT-GIT and addresses the problem of false positive TST results in BCG vaccinated persons.

The field-friendliness and high specificity offered by the C-Tb test could allow for improved targeted treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected persons in also in resource-constrained settings, where IGRAs are too complicated to implement.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Since the release is showing results of comparisons between existing tests for tuberculosis and the new C-Tb test, there clearly are alternatives, so we’ll give it a satisfactory grade in this category.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 25, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental breath test, designed to quickly identify patients suffering from heart failure simply by analyzing the contents of a single exhaled breath, has demonstrated promise in early trials, a team of researchers says.

The investigators stressed that their evaluation is based on a small group of participating patients, and that more extensive research will have to be done to confirm their initial success.

But by subjecting a patient's breath to a rigorous but fast analysis of the hundreds of so-called volatile organic compounds contained therein, the study team said it has so far been able to correctly diagnose heart failure among newly hospitalized patients with a 100 percent accuracy.

"Every individual has a breath print that differentiates them from other people, depending on what's going on in their body," explained study lead author Dr. Raed Dweik, a staff physician in the department of pulmonary, allergy and critical care medicine with the Respiratory Institute at Cleveland Clinic. "And that print can tell us a lot about a person, what they've been exposed to and what disease they have," he added.

"That's what makes the new field of breath testing so promising, because it is non-intrusive, so there is no risk involved," Dweik said. "And you can do it anywhere, in a clinic, in a hospital, anywhere."

The findings were published March 25 in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology.

The study authors pointed out that the most common reason American patients are admitted to a hospital is when there is a suspicion of heart failure -- a tough-to-treat condition in which the heart's pumping action grows gradually weaker over time.

Currently, a diagnosis of heart failure comes from a variety of factors, according to the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. These include medical history and symptoms, and a physical exam in which a doctor will listen to a patient's heart and lung sounds, and check ankles, feet, legs and abdomen for signs of fluid buildup. Blood tests and an electrocardiogram can help confirm that heart failure exists.

In the new study, to gauge how well the noninvasive breath test could identify heart failure, the team collected exhaled breath samples from 41 patients who had been admitted as in-patients to the Cleveland Clinic.

Of those, 25 had been admitted with a primary diagnosis of "acute decompensated heart failure" while another 16 patients had shown no signs of heart failure but did have other cardiovascular issues. A single breath sample was obtained from each of the patients within 24 hours of admission, as well as from an additional 36 patients with acute decompensated heart failure as an independent point of comparison.

Within two hours of collection, all the samples were subject to the breath test analysis, which relied upon "mass spectrometry" technology to scan the samples for their molecular and chemical compound content. Some of those compounds had been pegged as potential telltale signs of heart failure.

The result: The breath test correctly identified all the patients with heart failure, clearly distinguishing them from those cardiac cases where heart failure was not an issue.

Dr. Gregg Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said that if further research were able to establish its effectiveness, a breath-driven tool for identifying heart failure would be a helpful diagnostic innovation -- but more so in a doctor's office or clinic than in the hospital.

"If it is clear that it is highly reliable and specific and sensitive, then yes, it would be a welcome advance," he said. "But I would say it would be perhaps more helpful for primary care physicians in an outpatient setting, because that is where it's most challenging to identify heart failure. Today a diagnosis in that environment is based on a patient's history and exam, but symptoms for heart failure can easily overlap with a lot of other diagnoses. And the blood work that would be taken in a doctor's office might not come back until the next day, delaying identification," he noted.

"So a breath test would be most useful in that kind of challenging situation," Fonarow said. "But in an emergency room, while there are challenges as well, bedside blood tests are much more readily drawn and quickly analyzed so you can often get the results in minutes. So there may be potentially less of a role for a breath test in that kind of setting."

Study author Dweik added that the test is "theoretically cheap. But of course we're still early in the process of exploring its potential. This study is really a proof of concept. There is much more work that needs to be done to get it to the point where it would become widely available."

For more on heart failure, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does list some of the standard tests for heart failure. It also notes that the research is too preliminary to tell whether this sort of breath test would be any better. However, it is likely that readers will get the impression that the new test is an advance, even though there have not been any experiments done to compare different methods.
The story could have compared with the B-type Natriuretic Peptide (BNP) blood test (an inexpensive blood test).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study that tracked tens of thousands of midlife and older men for more than 20 years has found that vigorous exercise and other healthy lifestyle habits may cut their chances of developing a lethal type of prostate cancer by up to 68 percent.

While most prostate cancers are 'clinically indolent,' meaning they do not metastasize and are nonlife-threatening, a minority of patients are diagnosed with aggressive disease that invades the bone and other organs, and is ultimately fatal. Lead author Stacey Kenfield, ScD, of UCSF, and a team of researchers at UCSF and Harvard, focused on this variant of prostate cancer to determine if exercise, diet and smoke-free status might have life-saving benefits.

In the study, published today, Nov. 17, 2015, in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, the researchers analyzed data from two U.S. studies: the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study that tracked more than 42,000 males ages 40 to 75, from 1986 to 2010; and a second, the Physicians' Health Study that followed more than 20,000 males ages 40 to 84, from 1982 to 2010.

To gage the effects of lifestyle habits, the researchers developed a score based on the results of the health professionals survey, then applied it to the physicians' study. They assigned one point for each affirmative response to questions about regular intense exercise that induced sweating, body mass index (BMI) under 30, tobacco-free status for a minimum of 10 years, high intake of fatty fish, high intake of tomatoes and low intake of processed meat.

To reduce error, participants had to be free of diagnosed cancer at the start of the study and a four-year lag was imposed to rule out those who unknowingly had lethal prostate cancer, which was determined by evidence of 'prostate cancer death or metastasis to the bones or other organs, excluding the lymph nodes.' Cases were confirmed through medical records and pathology reports, and cause of death was determined by death certificate and medical record, and secondarily by next of kin.

The researchers identified 576 cases of lethal prostate cancer in the health professionals' group and 337 cases in the physicians' group. Participants with 5 to 6 points in the health professionals' group had a 68 percent decreased risk of lethal prostate cancer and a 38 percent decreased risk was observed in the physicians' group for the same comparison. For dietary factors alone, men with three points, versus those with zero points, had a 46 percent decreased chance of developing lethal prostate cancer in the health professionals' group. In the physicians' group this decrease was 30 percent.

While there were fewer cases and less detailed data collected in the physicians' study, the score was similar in both populations, indicating the potential benefit of healthy lifestyle habits in warding off lethal prostate cancer, said the authors.

"We estimated that 47 percent of lethal prostate cancer cases would be prevented in the United States if men over 60 had five or more of these healthy habits," said Kenfield, assistant professor in the Department of Urology at UCSF Medical Center, and formerly of the Department of Medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston, where the study was initiated.

"It's interesting that vigorous activity had the highest potential impact on prevention of lethal prostate cancer. We calculated the population-attributable risk for American men over 60 and estimated that 34 percent of lethal prostate cancer would be reduced if all men exercised to the point of sweating for at least three hours a week," Kenfield said.

The researchers also calculated that lethal prostate cancer among American men over 60 would be cut by 15 percent if they consumed at least seven servings of tomatoes per week and that 17 percent would be spared this diagnosis if they consumed at least one serving of fatty fish per week. Reducing intake of processed meats would cut the risk by 12 percent, they reported. In contrast, the population-attributed risk for smoking was 3 percent, largely because the majority of older American men are long-term nonsmokers.

"This study underscores the ongoing need for more effective prevention measures and policies to increase exercise, improve diet quality and reduce tobacco use in our population," said senior author June M. Chan, ScD, from the departments of Urology, and Epidemiology and Biostatistics at UCSF. "It takes co-operation and effort from multiple areas, like insurance companies, employers, policy makers and city planners, to figure out how to creatively support and encourage more exercise into most busy adults' working day. These lifestyle habits align with other recommendations to prevent diabetes and heart disease."

About one man in seven will be diagnosed with prostate cancer during his lifetime, making it the most frequently diagnosed cancer in the United States, excluding non-melanoma skin cancer. According to the American Cancer Society, in 2015 there will be approximately 220,800 cases of prostate cancer and approximately 27, 540 deaths.

This study was supported by grants from the Prostate Cancer Foundation and the National Institutes of Health.

Co-authors are Erin Van Blarigan, ScD, of the departments of Urology, and Epidemiology and Biostatistics at UCSF; Howard Sesso, ScD, MPH; Edward Giovannucci, MD, ScD; Meir Stampfer, MD, DrPH, and Julie Batista, ScD, all of Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital; Mary Kathryn Downer and Jaquelyn Jahn both of Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, and Brigham and Women's Hospital.

UCSF is a leading university dedicated to transforming health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. Founded in 1864 as a medical college, UCSF now includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with world-renowned programs in the biological sciences, a preeminent biomedical research enterprise and top-tier hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals. Please visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Things get tricky again here. As the release notes, most prostate cancers don’t metastasize and aren’t life threatening. But some do metastasize and can be fatal. Are there different types of prostate cancer, just like there are different types of flu? Are there genetic factors that affect risk? Readers would have benefited from that information.
And we suppose that the release could have also mentioned other dietary or lifestyle factors that might help reduce risk that were not considered in the paper. However, the range of healthy behaviors discussed here is pretty broad, and it seems excessive to expect the release to address an entire laundry list of possibilities. We’ll give this a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 1, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A drug widely used to treat high blood sugar in type 2 diabetics may hold some promise in the prevention of tobacco-induced lung cancer, according to extremely preliminary findings in a mouse study.

In the September issue of Cancer Prevention Research, researchers report that metformin was associated with a substantial reduction (up to 73 percent) in the number of tumors mice developed when they were given a common carcinogen found in tobacco.

Despite the fact that there have been no randomized controlled trials on whether metformin really can prevent cancer, researchers expressed excitement both over this animal study and previous epidemiological evidence pointing to this possibility.

Metformin (originally marketed as Glucophage, though it is now available as an inexpensive generic) has been in use for more than two decades and is currently prescribed to 40 million Americans.

"This is a very safe agent and has been around for a while," said Cancer Prevention Research editor-in-chief Dr. Scott Lippman, chair of thoracic head and neck medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, at a Wednesday news conference.

"The evidence in diabetic humans is very convincing and very strong," added Dr. Phillip Dennis, a senior investigator with the U.S. National Cancer Institute and senior author on the lung cancer paper. "Almost every epidemiological study I can think of found a decreased cancer incidence in diabetics taking metformin. The reduction is real and ranges from 30 to 70 percent."

The researchers thought metformin's possible cancer-lowering properties suggested the need for clinical trials to investigate whether the drug might help prevent tumors in smokers at high risk of developing cancer. Others believed that the finding might influence the choice of drugs in people with diabetes.

"All other things being equal, many diabetics face a choice of oral agents, and early evidence that metformin may have an effect on the oncology side may increasingly play a role in decision-making," said Dr. Michael Pollack, professor of medicine and oncology at McGill University in Montreal. "We can't ignore this, but we can't say we have FDA [U.S. Food and Drug Administration] approval for metformin for cancer indications."

Metformin was developed from the French lilac plant, known in the Middle Ages to control excess urination, a symptom of uncontrolled diabetes. The drug was approved by the FDA in the mid-1990s.

The study by Dennis and colleagues looked at mice that had been genetically engineered to be susceptible to lung tumors.

Mice taking metformin in their drinking water had 34 percent fewer tumors than those not taking metformin. And when the drug was administered by injection, the improvement seen was 73 percent.

Dennis stated that a likely mechanism of action resides in the liver "and specifically the hormones [including insulin] that are released." Insulin may have a relationship with cancer.

"It's most likely that metformin is working by reducing insulin and IGF1 [insulin-like growth factor] levels in the body," said Lewis Cantley, director of the Cancer Center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, and co-author of an accompanying perspective piece.

It's also possible, however, that metformin is working more directly on the tumor process, the researchers said.

A second study, this one a randomized controlled trial involving a very small number of humans (23), found that patients with an early form of colorectal cancer who were treated with metformin did see a decrease in possible cancer-related growth, compared with participants not taking the drug.

"These patients were not diabetic, so they didn't necessarily have high insulin levels to begin with but lower insulin levels," Cantley explained.

This adds credence to the idea that metformin's value is in its ability to lower overall insulin levels in the body, Cantley said.

At this point, no one knows if metformin is safe in non-diabetic populations but some clinical trials are starting to look at the issue, Lippman said.

And, pointed out Dr. Lucas Wong, associate professor of internal medicine at Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine and co-director of the Gastrointestinal Cancer Program at Scott & White in Temple, Texas, while the new research is "interesting and thought-provoking, what's proven in humans is totally another level."

The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more on metformin.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This job did a better job of at least mentioning alternative approaches and also other research.  This quote even touched on the possible future decision-making impact of this research: "All other things being equal, many diabetics face a choice of oral agents, and early evidence that metformin may have an effect on the oncology side may increasingly play a role in decision-making." 
But, importantly, the story ended with another quote about the new research:  "interesting and thought-provoking, what’s proven in humans is totally another level." 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Does swapping out all of your saturated fat with unsaturated fat lead to a longer life?

A new study suggests the answer may be no.

Eat less saturated fat for better heart health: that’s been the conventional wisdom based on decades of scientific study. Consumers have been advised to swap saturated (animal) fats — found in foods like whole milk, cheese, butter, and fatty cuts of beef and pork — for unsaturated vegetables oils.

The new report, which analyzed 40-year-old data from the Minnesota Coronary Experiment, found no association between lower cholesterol levels and longer life, suggesting that reducing the amount of saturated fat in the diet isn’t enough to reduce risk of death from heart disease.

A group of more than 9,000 people were divided into two groups; one group swapped out the dietary saturated fat for unsaturated vegetable fats in the form of corn oil and corn-oil margarine, and the other group continued with their standard daily saturated fat intake.

While the diet rich in vegetable oil did lower cholesterol levels over the 4-5 year study period, compared to a control group (who continued to eat saturated fat daily), the researchers found no change in the rate of death from heart-related ailments.

The original MCE study was conducted between 1968 and 1973 at seven different long-term care facilities. Researchers from the National Institutes of Health and University of North Carolina obtained data from 2,355 of these participants — information which apparently had not been analyzed — and discovered that giving up saturated fats didn’t protect against heart disease.

It’s unclear whether the corn oil or corn oil margarine consumed by the participants contained artery-clogging trans fats or hydrogenated vegetable oils that are now associated with heart disease, or whether the patients had a history of heart disease or genetic risk. All that is known is the participants had a normal cholesterol levels and normal blood pressure.

But even when their cholesterol levels were lowered by the switch from saturated fats, there was no longevity benefit. In fact, the study found that the lower the cholesterol, the greater the risk of death. But that’s a misleading association because a variety of illnesses can also cause drop in cholesterol, which is unrelated to diet.

“What's important here is for us to understand what we know and what we don't know, and the conventional wisdom, the evidence that saturated fat and cholesterol in the diet are the main drivers of heart disease is not supported by the study,” says cardiologist Dr. Steve Nissen, chair of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic.

While this study suggests that cholesterol levels alone are not associated with longevity, it is important to emphasize that many studies show the benefit of statin medications to lower blood cholesterol, that are highly associated with a reduced risk of death. Whether statins have additional properties to reduce risk, in addition to lowering serum cholesterol remain under study.

How does this translate to what we eat every day?

Current worldwide guidelines remain the same, and are modeled after Mediterranean-style eating: a variety of fruits, vegetables, whole grains and fish.

Saturated fats can remain a part of a healthy diet, in limited amounts – but there are two easy ways to help:
• Saturated fats should make up 10 percent of total caloric intake daily. For someone eating 2,000 calories, that’s about 200 calories, or 20 grams of saturated fat
• 1/3 of the total fat consumed daily allocated for saturated fat; if consuming 60 grams of fat daily, no more than 20 grams should come from saturated fat.

While the study has many limitations because it doesn’t take into account genetic or lifestyle factors that are proven important in both heart disease risk and longevity, it suggests that blood cholesterol levels are only one factor.

Madelyn Fernstrom, Ph.D is NBC News Health and Nutrition Editor. Follow her on Twitter @drfernstrom.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of talking about the complicated recommendations regarding diet, as well as medications, specifically statins.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new, experimental cholesterol-fighting drug is creating quite a buzz among researchers and other experts, prompting some to use words such as "dramatic," "breakthrough" and "game changing," to describe early-stage clinical trial results.

If these initial results pan out in larger trials, the drug could prove to be more effective than statins, the widely prescribed drugs which have been very successful in lowering levels of LDL - or bad cholesterol.

Researchers have known for some time that when the protein PCSK9, which stands for proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9, binds to LDL receptors on the liver, it compromises the organ's ability to filter the bad cholesterol from the blood. 

 

 Too much LDL cholesterol circulating in the blood can lead to the thickening of artery walls, making them less flexible and therefore impairing their function and increasing the risk of heart disease.

In this phase one clinical trial, which is designed to determine if a drug is safe, researchers found that using a monoclonal antibody (lab-produced protein) called REGN727, was not only safe, but effectively blocked PCSK9 and therefore signficantly reduced bad cholesterol in healthy patients as well as those also taking the popular cholesterol-lowering drug Lipitor.

Earlier studies had shown this effect in primates, but this new study, published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine, provides the first clinical trial data for testing the drug on humans. This new drug is being developed by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi, who funded the research.

“Wars for PCSK9 are far bigger than the statin wars," said Dr. Evan A Stein, lead author of the study and researcher at the Metabolic and Atherosclerosis Research Center in Cincinnati, Ohio. “This is a hot research area and everybody is so close together."

Other companies including Amgen, Merck & Company, Novartis and Pfizer, are also hot on the trail developing their own PCSK9 inhibitor drugs. Stein said.

Additional results for PCSK9 inhibitor drugs are expected to be presented at the annual American College of Cardiology meeting which begins Saturday in Chicago, he said.

The REGN727 study included three trial arms. Two arms used 72 healthy volunteers who were either injected with a single dose of the drug in increasing amounts to test for side effects, which is the purpose of a phase one clinical trial. A third arm included 21 people with a family history of high cholesterol, and 30 people with nonfamilial high cholesterol. All of those subjects were also receiving treatment with the statin Lipitor.

A control group of subjects with nonfamilial high cholesterol was treated only with a special diet. None of the subjects who received REGN727 discontinued the study because of adverse effects, and the subjects who received REGN727 had a striking reduction of 60 to 65% in LDL cholesterol, according to Stein.

Stein characterized the results of the trial as “pretty dramatic.”

A PCSK9 inhibitor, Stein said, differs from statins "because it's unlike any other drug. With statins you get toxicity – with these drugs we don’t see any side effects with the antibody.”

In an accompanying editorial, authors Dr. Stephen G. Young, and Loren G. Fong, Ph.D. write: “At this point, the status of PCSK9 therapeutics appears to be full speed ahead. Soon, we can expect more human trials in which investigators will dissect the properties of different PCSK9 antibodies and assess the effect of these agents.”

However, without long-term safety data and evidence that PCSK9 inhibitors truly help prevent heart disease, Young and Fong caution that it will remain unclear how important this class of drugs will be.

The cost of this drug will also play a role in determining which patients might use it, Fong and Young say. But they also note that "patients who cannot tolerate statins could benefit greatly."

If the results are confirmed, “This is game changing science,” said Dr. Richard A. Stein, a spokesman for the American Heart Association who's not related to the study author or involved in the research.

Stein called the trial results “a very important breakthrough," while being careful to note that they represent early science which should be confirmed through larger and longer studies.

He said the study methodology was thorough because it included people with high cholesterol as well as people with genetic familial high cholesterol, which is proven to be a result of impaired PCSK9 genetic function.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Superficial comparisons were included:
Again, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this but it is too early to even suggest that the antibody won’t have any side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Food and Drug Administration advisory committee voted 13-0 on five separate times to endorse Merck and Co.'s Gardasil. The anticipated cost of the vaccine, administered in three shots over six months, is $300 to $500, a possible impediment to widespread vaccination campaigns.

Gardisil is likely to be approved in early June, After that, the vaccine will move into the hands of the Centers for Disease Control, which will have to decide if it should be a mandatory vaccine or just a recommended vaccine, CBS News correspondent Elizabeth Kaledin reports.

The drug protects against the two types of human papillomavirus (HPV) believed responsible for about 70 percent of cervical cancer cases. The vaccine also protects against two other virus types that cause 90 percent of genital wart cases. All four virus types are sexually transmitted.

However, this vaccine should not be considered a replacement for the standard screening test: the pap smear, adds Kaledin.

The FDA is not required to follow the recommendations of its outside panels of experts, but usually does. An agency decision is expected by June 8.

HPV is the most common sexually transmitted disease. It affects more than 50 percent of sexually active adults. The cervical cancer it can cause kills each year about 290,000 women worldwide, including 3,500 women in the United States, where regular pap smears often detect precancerous lesions and early cancer.

"This is certainly a wonderful, good step in addition to our screening processes" in helping eradicate cervical cancer, said Dr. Monica Farley, who heads the advisory panel. She is a bacterial infectious disease expert at the Emory University School of Medicine.

Advocates are recommending the vaccine be given to 11- and 12-year-old girls before they become sexually active, but argue that it is not a license to behave promiscuously, Kaledin reports.

Making their case for approval, Merck officials suggested that development could make Gardasil the biggest advance in preventing cervical cancer since the pap test.

"Gardasil has the potential to meet an unmet medical need as the first vaccine to prevent cervical cancer," Merck's Dr. Patrick Brill-Edwards told the Vaccine and Related Biological Products advisory committee.

Several speakers said the vaccine should not replace screening. Merck said the drug is not intended to do that.

"We would like to see the FDA mandate some sort of labeling or other mechanism to communicate to health care providers and patients the continued need for regular cervical screening," said Amy Allina, program director of the National Women's Health Network.

Merck said the vaccine could be used in females age 9 to 26, but would work best when given to girls before they begin having sex.

Pending action by the FDA, the national Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices will decide in June whether to endorse routine vaccination with the vaccine.

The committee's HPV vaccine group is recommending giving the vaccine to girls 11 and 12. The 15-member committee of experts who advise the government will consider recommendations for females 13 to 26.

The committee's HPV vaccine workgroup is recommending the vaccine be given to girls 11 and 12, and the committee will consider recommendations for females 13 to 26.

Early opposition to Gardasil was based on concerns it could encourage sexual activity in the young. But that largely faded away because of vaccine's potential for reducing cancer.

FDA reviewers said Gardasil appears safe and effective, according to agency documents. One agency reviewer, Dr. Nancy Miller, told the advisory committee that Merck submitted data to support the use of the vaccine in females 9 to 26.

Miller said Gardasil does not necessarily protect against one or more of the four viruses in people already infected before they get the vaccine, and can increase their risk for precursors to cervical cancer.

Also, the drug does not protect against infection from the many other virus strains not included in the vaccine. In addition, the FDA staff highlighted five cases where children with birth defects were born to women who received the vaccine around the time of conception.

Merck, based in Whitehouse Station, N.J., developed the vaccine and tested it in more than 27,000 females and males.

Thursday's discussion focused on its use in preventing HPV-related disease in girls and women, including those as young as 9. But only 250 9-year-old girls and boys received Gardasil in trials.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention that the alternative is a pap smear and this vaccine is not a replacement for the pap smear. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chelation therapy is a risky procedure approved to treat rare, life-threatening cases of heavy metal poisoning. A taxpayer-funded study tested whether it could reduce heart attacks

A heart disease study presented Sunday is being called a $32 million waste of time — and even a danger to public health — by some of the country's leading health experts.

The taxpayer-funded study tested whether a controversial alternative therapy, called chelation, could reduce heart attacks and other cardiovascular problems in people who had already survived a heart attack.

Chelation therapy, which can remove metals from the blood, is a risky procedure approved to treat rare, life-threatening cases of heavy metal poisoning. Tens of thousands of patients a year undergo the procedure "off-label," however, paying around $5,000 out-of-pocket, based on the claims of doctors who say it can cure everything from Alzheimer's to autism.

National Institutes of Health officials say they launched the study because there has never been any evidence that the practice is effective or safe.

In a presentation Sunday, doctors said the trial found a small overall benefit to chelation, mainly because it prevented heart problems in people with diabetes.

Elliott Antman, chair of the American Heart Association's Scientific Sessions program committee, praised NIH for doing the study.

"Kudos for funding a trial that says, 'OK, if people are lining up to have this done, let's let it undergo rigorous clinical trials,'" Antman said in an interview before the results were unveiled.

In a statement after the study was presented, Antman, a cardiologist at Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital and professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, added, "Intriguing as the results are, they are unexpected and should not be interpreted as an indication to adopt chelation therapy into clinical practice."

Yet some doctors say the study was far from rigorously performed, and so badly run that its marginally positive results are meaningless.

Cardiologist Steven Nissen of the Cleveland Clinic, one of the USA's most respected heart experts, says he's concerned the study will encourage more patients to get off-label chelation instead of taking proven medications or making lifestyle changes that clearly have been shown to reduce heart disease.

"This study has the potential to be extremely dangerous," Nissen says. Chelation "should not be administered to any patients for the indication of heart disease. ... There are a lot of people, including me, who believe this was a poor use of taxpayer dollars."

At least 30 patients have died from off-label chelation therapy since the 1970s, including an autistic 5-year-old Pennsylvania boy, according to a 2008 report in The Medscape Journal of Medicine.

Even the study's lead author says the research should not be used to recommend chelation therapy, and he acknowledges that its findings could have been due to chance.

"A definitive answer on chelation therapy will take much additional research," Gervasio Lamas, chief of the Columbia University division of cardiology at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach, Fla., said in a statement. "The most exciting part of this study is that there may be an unexpected signal of benefit. We need to understand whether the signal is true, or whether it occurred by chance."

The trial, known as the Trial to Assess Chelation Therapy, or TACT, has been dogged by accusations of safety and ethical problems from its beginnings 10 years ago.

The study was temporarily halted in 2008 because of concerns over ethics and patient safety. An investigation by the federal Office for Human Research Subject Protections, which is charged with protecting patients, found that patients may not have been properly informed of chelation's risks.

In response to such concerns, researchers revised their consent forms — the documents that explain a study's risks and benefits to patients — which had failed to mention the risk of death in chelation therapy.

Federal officials also ordered researchers to notify patients that the drug they were receiving had never been approved for lead poisoning, as implied in the consent form, and that the Food and Drug Administration had taken the study drug off of its list of approved medications.

Stephen Kopecky, a Mayo Clinic cardiologist who participated in the trial, says he's also concerned about the reliability of its findings.

The overall benefits were very small, with 26.5% of those randomly assigned to chelation experiencing a cardiovascular problem, compared with 30% of those randomly assigned to a placebo infusion. Even more concerning, that benefit passed the bar for statistical significance — the standard for judging whether a result is real or a fluke — by only 0.001.

Further analysis showed the benefits were limited to those with diabetes, rather than for patients overall.

Under the best of circumstances, that's not a strong result, says anesthesiologist Kimball Atwood of Newton-Wellesley Hospital in Massachusetts, who has followed the study from its beginning.

This study's findings are even more questionable, however, Kopecky says, because patients who got chelation had lower bad cholesterol levels than the placebo group at the start of the trial. That could explain most of their reduced risk for a second heart attack, says Kopecky, president of the American Society for Preventive Cardiology.

In addition, 30% of patients stopped getting their assigned treatments, and 17% withdrew their consent, preventing doctors from including their data or even contacting them to see if they were still alive, Kopecky says.

That large of a dropout rate — which is normally no more than about 3% — could skew the study's findings, Kopecky says.

"That's a big concern any time a study shows a benefit on something that's not highly regulated by the FDA," Kopecky says.

Kopecky also acknowledges that there's no known biological basis for why removing metals from the blood would help heart disease. "That is a million-dollar question," he said.

More than half the trial sites were led by doctors who practice chelation, says Paul Armstrong, a professor of cardiology at the University of Alberta, chosen to discuss the study on a panel at the heart meeting. That could lead to a bias in favor of chelation, Atwood says.

"All of these factors call into question the results," says Michael Carome, deputy director of the advocacy group Public Citizen's Health Research Group.

NIH officials say the trial was worthwhile. Gary Gibbons, director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, says the study was a "breakthrough" not for proving that chelation works, but for "establishing that this chelation therapy regimen can be administered in a safe manner in the context of a clinical trial."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that there are medications and lifestyle changes that clearly have been shown to reduce heart disease. That’s good enough.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the late 1940s, the steroid cortisone, an anti-inflammatory drug, was first synthesized and hailed as a landmark. It soon became a safe, reliable means to treat the pain and inflammation associated with sports injuries (as well as other conditions). Cortisone shots became one of the preferred treatments for overuse injuries of tendons, like tennis elbow or an aching Achilles, which had been notoriously resistant to treatment. The shots were quite effective, providing rapid relief of pain.

Then came the earliest clinical trials, including one, published in 1954, that raised incipient doubts about cortisone’s powers. In that early experiment, more than half the patients who received a cortisone shot for tennis elbow or other tendon pain suffered a relapse of the injury within six months.

But that cautionary experiment and others didn’t slow the ascent of cortisone (also known as corticosteroids). It had such a magical, immediate effect against pain. Today cortisone shots remain a standard, much-requested treatment for tennis elbow and other tendon problems.

But a major new review article, published last Friday in The Lancet, should revive and intensify the doubts about cortisone’s efficacy. The review examined the results of nearly four dozen randomized trials, which enrolled thousands of people with tendon injuries, particularly tennis elbow, but also shoulder and Achilles-tendon pain. The reviewers determined that, for most of those who suffered from tennis elbow, cortisone injections did, as promised, bring fast and significant pain relief, compared with doing nothing or following a regimen of physical therapy. The pain relief could last for weeks.

But when the patients were re-examined at 6 and 12 months, the results were substantially different. Over all, people who received cortisone shots had a much lower rate of full recovery than those who did nothing or who underwent physical therapy. They also had a 63 percent higher risk of relapse than people who adopted the time-honored wait-and-see approach. The evidence for cortisone as a treatment for other aching tendons, like sore shoulders and Achilles-tendon pain, was slight and conflicting, the review found. But in terms of tennis elbow, the shots seemed to actually be counterproductive. As Bill Vicenzino, the chairman of sports physiotherapy at the University of Queensland in Australia and senior author of the review, said in an e-mail response to questions, “There is a tendency” among tennis-elbow sufferers “for the majority (70-90 percent) of those following a wait-and-see policy to get better” after six months to a year. But this is not the case for those getting cortisone shots, he wrote; they “tend to lag behind significantly at those time frames.” In other words, in some way, the cortisone shots impede full recovery, and compared with those adopting a wait-and-see policy, those getting the shots “are worse off.” Those people receiving multiple injections may be at particularly high risk for continuing damage. In one study that the researchers reviewed, “an average of four injections resulted in a 57 percent worse outcome when compared to one injection,” Dr. Vicenzino said.

Why cortisone shots should slow the healing of tennis elbow is a good question. An even better one, though, is why they help in the first place. For many years it was widely believed that tendon-overuse injuries were caused by inflammation, said Dr. Karim Khan, a professor at the School of Human Kinetics at the University of British Columbia and the co-author of a commentary in The Lancet accompanying the new review article. The injuries were, as a group, given the name tendinitis, since the suffix “-itis” means inflammation. Cortisone is an anti-inflammatory medication. Using it against an inflammation injury was logical.

But in the decades since, numerous studies have shown, persuasively, that these overuse injuries do not involve inflammation. When animal or human tissues from these types of injuries are examined, they do not contain the usual biochemical markers of inflammation. Instead, the injury seems to be degenerative. The fibers within the tendons fray. Today the injuries usually are referred to as tendinopathies, or diseased tendons.

Why then does a cortisone shot, an anti-inflammatory, work in the short term in noninflammatory injuries, providing undeniable if ephemeral pain relief? The injections seem to have “an effect on the neural receptors” involved in creating the pain in the sore tendon, Dr. Khan said. “They change the pain biology in the short term.” But, he said, cortisone shots do “not heal the structural damage” underlying the pain. Instead, they actually “impede the structural healing.”

Still, relief of pain might be a sufficient reason to champion the injections, if the pain “were severe,” Dr. Khan said. “But it’s not.” The pain associated with tendinopathies tends to fall somewhere around a 7 or so on a 10-point scale of pain. “It’s not insignificant, but it’s not kidney stones.”

So the question of whether cortisone shots still make sense as a treatment for tendinopathies, especially tennis elbow, depends, Dr. Khan said, on how you choose “to balance short-term pain relief versus the likelihood” of longer-term negative outcomes. In other words, is reducing soreness now worth an increased risk of delayed healing and possible relapse within the year?

Some people, including physicians, may decide that the answer remains yes. There will always be a longing for a magical pill, the quick fix, especially when the other widely accepted and studied alternatives for treating sore tendons are to do nothing or, more onerous to some people, to rigorously exercise the sore joint during physical therapy. But if he were to dispense advice based on his findings and that of his colleagues’ systematic review, Dr. Vicenzino said, he would suggest that athletes with tennis elbow (and possibly other tendinopathies) think not just once or twice about the wisdom of cortisone shots but “three or four times.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 
The article mentioned multiple treatment alternatives.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Women who take bone drugs for several years have a slightly increased chance of suffering an unusual type of thigh fracture, according to a large Canadian study.

The findings add to earlier concern over the medicines, called bisphosphonates, whose U.S. labels have been required since October to include a warning about the thighbone fracture risk.

However, researchers stress the drugs are effective at preventing fractures of the hip or spine, which are much more common in elderly people with the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis.

And the actual risk of having one of the unusual fractures was low, said Laura Y. Park-Wyllie, of St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto, who worked on the new study.

“Women with osteoporosis who are at high risk of fractures should not stop taking their treatment,” she told Reuters Health.

Some 10 million Americans currently suffer from bone thinning, according to the National Osteoporosis Foundation. The majority are postmenopausal women.

Park-Wyllie and colleagues tapped into data on more than 205,000 Ontario women at least 68 years old who had taken the bone drugs. Their findings appear in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Overall, 716 women suffered the unusual type of thighbone fracture after starting the bone drugs, and nearly 10,000 had typical hip fractures.

The risk of a thighbone fracture differed depending on how long the women had been taking the medicine. After taking bone drugs for five years, about one in 1,000 women went on to suffer a thigh fracture over the next year.

That works out to nearly three times the risk of those who’d taken the drugs for roughly three months or less, after accounting for other risk factors.

On the other hand, longer treatment was tied to a 24-percent decrease in hip fractures, which along with wrist and spine fractures affect about half of all people with osteoporosis.

There are several alternative ways to treat osteoporosis, including hormone treatment for women. And one preliminary study, published along with the Canadian findings in JAMA, hints that the common heart medication nitroglycerin might also boost bone health.

So far, however, the cheap and effective bisphosphonate bone drugs remain the most popular treatment option. But some experts worry that negative media coverage might have led to more fractures and possibly deaths by dissuading patients from taking the drugs.

“The bad news is that overstating the levels of risk of side effects with these drugs — which the media have been doing for some time now — has led people to stop the drugs when they should be taking them,” said Dr. Ethel S. Siris, who heads the Toni Stabile Osteoporosis Center at Columbia University in New York.

Apart from atypical fractures, the most serious side effect of the bone drugs is bone death, or osteonecrosis, of the jaw. But that’s a very rare problem, experts say, which only affects about one in 100,000 people on bisphosphonates.

“If you’re taking the drugs and you’ve been on them for a while, but aren’t sure if you’re at high risk, you should ask your doctor about it,” Park-Wyllie advised.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal expert panel, recommends screening all women over 65 for osteoporosis.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does briefly mention alternatives, including hormone therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
STOCKHOLM (Reuters) - Giving patients with a history of heart attacks a margarine enriched with omega-3 oils in addition to standard drugs appears to make no difference to their chances of having a repeat attack.

A 40-month study of more than 4,800 patients showed taking low doses of omega-3 fatty acids in margarine did not significantly reduce rates of serious heart attacks and other cardiovascular events, Dutch researchers said on Sunday.

The finding raised questions about the benefits of omega-3, which has been shown in previous studies to make for healthier hearts. The margarines used in the study were developed for the researchers by food and consumer goods giant Unilever.

Doctors, however, are unlikely to rush to change clinical practice. Many already prescribe omega-3 fish oil capsules, including GlaxoSmithKline’s Lovaza, to reduce triglycerides, a type of blood fat linked to clogged arteries.

“It will be viewed as a largely negative study and people who are enthusiasts for omega fatty acids will continue to be enthusiasts and people who are skeptics will continue to be skeptics,” said Scott Wright of the Mayo Clinic in the United States, who was not involved in the research.

Daan Kromhout of Wageningen University, who led the study, told the European Society of Cardiology the lack of efficacy might reflect the good background drug treatment patients were receiving, with 85 percent on cholesterol-lowering statins, as well as blood pressure and blood-thinning tablets.

“We found the cardiovascular mortality rate in the study population was only half that expected, probably because of their excellent treatment,” he said.

“This may also be why the rate of major cardiovascular events during follow-up was no lower in the fatty acid groups than in the placebo group.”

All the men and women in the Dutch study were aged between 60 and 80 and had suffered a heart attack roughly four years previously.

They were randomly assigned use of one of four margarines on bread instead of their regular spread — one containing no extra omega-3 fatty acids; one with 400 milligrams a day of extra eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA); one with 2 grams of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA); and one with a combination of EPA-DHA and ALA.

Fish like salmon, herring and sardine are a common source of EPA-DHA, while ALA is found in vegetables including soybeans, flax seeds and walnuts.

Despite the overall negative results, researchers did find there was a reduction in repeat heart attacks and other cardiovascular events in women who took ALA margarine, although this was not statistically significant. Diabetes patients also showed a possible benefit.

Unilever, whose margarine brands that contain omega-3 include Flora and I Can’t Believe It’s Not Butter, said the lack of benefit seen with EPA and DHA was surprising, considering the weight of evidence published to date.

“The results indicate that more investigation is required into the efficacy of vegetable omega 3, but do not question the current authoritative dietary recommendations and advices for omega 3 intakes on which our products are based,” the company said in a statement.

The results of the study, which was supported by the Netherlands Heart Foundation, the National Institutes of Health, and Unilever, were also published in the New England Journal of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story reported that that salmon, herring and sardine are common sources of EPA-DHA, while ALA is found in some vegetables.  So alternatives were mentioned.  And it mentioned drugs like Lovaza.  There wasn’t any real comparison, but there was the following important line of context about the new study: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using the immune system to beat cancer is quickly becoming a promising new strategy for battling tumors. But most of the success so far has been with blood cancers like lymphomas and leukemias. Immunotherapy, as it’s called, has yet to prove itself with solid tumors like breast, prostate, lung, colon and brain cancers.

But in a report published in the , researchers led by Dr. Behnam Badie from the City of Hope Beckman Research Institute and Medical Center say that the same immune-based therapy that is successful against blood cancers also helped a patient with advanced brain cancer.

The 50-year-old man with glioblastoma, a particularly aggressive type of brain tumor, had already been treated with surgery, radiation and anti-tumor drug therapies. Despite these treatments, his cancer had returned and also spread to other parts of his brain and spinal cord. Badie and his team extracted immune cells from him, then engineered them to express proteins on their surface that would recognize and destroy glioblastoma tumor cells. After surgery to remove the bulk of the brain tumor, Badie and his colleagues directly injected the site with the modified immune cells (called chimeric antigen receptor T cells, or CAR T cells) six times, and the remaining part of this tumor stopped growing.

Other smaller growths in the brain continued to grow, however, so the patient received 10 more doses of the CAR T cells injected into the cavities in the brain, called the ventricles. This is the first time that immune cells have been injected into these brain regions, because introducing anything into the ventricles can cause dangerous and possibly deadly inflammation. The man did not develop such serious complications, however, and after about four months, these tumors too started to shrink. By six months, almost all had disappeared.

If the patient had not received the CAR T therapy, he likely would only have survived a few weeks after his cancer recurred, says Badie. But after being treated with the immune therapy, his cancer did not grow or recur for nearly eight months. “If we can do the same for other patients, that would be an amazing accomplishment that many decades of work and research on glioblastoma have never done,” says Badie, whose own father passed away a decade ago from glioblastoma.

The patient is one of nine in the trial, and so far, many of the other people are having similar experiences on the therapy. Based on this man’s case, his team is hoping to now inject not just the tumor site but also the ventricular space in the brain, since that may help control spread of the cancer.

It’s also becoming clear that more than one type of modified immune cells may have to be enlisted. The tumors in the first patient remained under control for almost eight months, but the cancer returned after that in new parts of the brain. Badie says it’s not obvious why, but his analysis showed that these tumors did not contain much of the protein targeted by the CAR T cells that were injected. It’s possible that the immune cells had destroyed most of the cancer cells expressing the original protein, so other cancer cells with other proteins began to proliferate and survive.

Badie is hoping to take advantage of this information and introduce immune cells with different tumor-targeting proteins. Eventually, these proteins would also be tailored to be specific to each patient’s cancer — a precision medicine approach to controlling cancer. These results are the first encouraging sign that the immunotherapy that is helping more people with blood cancer might also be effective for people with solid tumors like brain cancers.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article does a pretty good job of describing the standard therapies available and, in this case, delivered to the patient.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MARLBOROUGH, Mass., April 26, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Hologic, Inc. (Nasdaq: HOLX) announced that study results published today in a research letter in JAMA conclude that breast tomosynthesis (Hologic's Genius™ 3D MAMMOGRAPHY™) exams reduce recall rates, and increase invasive cancer detection in women with both dense and nondense breasts. These key benefits of 3D MAMMOGRAPHY™ could lower the costs associated with needless follow-up exams, and improve patient experience for women seeking a more accurate screening mammogram.

Density is only identifiable on a mammogram or other imaging system, and is a reflection of how much fibrous or glandular tissue is in the breast. Higher breast density may increase a woman's chance of getting breast cancer, make detection of cancer on conventional mammography more difficult, and increase the chances that a woman will be recalled for additional imaging.1,2 Mammograms are categorized into four density groups: almost entirely fat, scattered fibroglandular densities, heterogeneously dense, and extremely dense. The latter two groups are considered dense; however, the vast majority of women whose mammograms are considered dense have heterogeneously dense breast tissue.

"Density creates challenges for conventional mammography by obscuring the images, which often results in additional visits and exams for women," said Edward Evantash, MD, board certified OB/GYN and Medical Director for Hologic. "This new analysis confirms that Genius™ 3D MAMMOGRAPHY™ exams reduce unnecessary follow-up exams in dense-breasted women. This has the potential to provide health systems and insurance companies with significant cost savings, reduce patient stress and expenses, and alleviate challenges for referring physicians who are tasked with relaying mammography results to their patients."

Improvements in both recall rate reduction and invasive cancer detection were greatest for women with heterogeneously dense breasts, with a 50 percent increase in invasive cancer detection and a simultaneous 14 percent reduction in recall rate. Women with heterogeneously dense breasts make up about 40 percent of the U.S. screening population (women ages 40-74) — approximately 25 million women in the U.S.

"Utilizing Genius™ 3D MAMMOGRAPHY™ exams for breast cancer screening will reduce the need for subsequent unnecessary testing, and decrease the number of unnecessary breast biopsies— addressing concerns that were previously raised as limitations of conventional mammography while also reducing costs for health systems," said Pete Valenti, Hologic's Division President, Breast and Skeletal Health Solutions. "Twenty-six states have passed legislation requiring doctors to notify women if they have dense breasts — and now these women who were previously confused about how to proceed with breast cancer screening can feel confident turning to 3D MAMMOGRAPHY™ exams to reduce their chances of stressful recalls and help find more invasive cancer."

This study brought together the principal investigators from the groundbreaking 2014 study on 3D MAMMOGRAPHY™ exams, also published in JAMA, this time led by Elizabeth Rafferty, MD, a co-author on the prior study.3 A total of 452,320 examinations (278,906 conventional mammograms compared to 173,414 Genius™ 3D MAMMOGRAPHY™ exams), were analyzed.

Genius™ 3D MAMMOGRAPHY™ exams have been available in the U.S. since 2011, and are only available on the Hologic Selenia® Dimensions® mammography system. In 2015 an estimated 10 million women in the U.S. benefited from a Genius™ exam. Additional information, as well as a locator to find imaging sites offering the exams, can be found at

About Hologic 

Hologic, Inc. is a leading developer, manufacturer and supplier of premium diagnostic products, medical imaging systems and surgical products. The Company's core business units focus on diagnostics, breast health, GYN surgical and skeletal health. With a unified suite of technologies and a robust research and development program, Hologic is dedicated to The Science of Sure. For more information on Hologic, visit www.hologic.com.

Hologic, 3D, 3D Mammography, Dimensions, Genius, Selenia, and the Science of Sure are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Hologic, Inc., and/or its subsidiaries in the United States and/or other countries.

Forward-Looking Statements 

This news release may contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties, including statements about the use of Hologic mammography systems. There can be no assurance the systems will achieve the benefits described here, or that such benefits will be replicated in any particular manner with respect to an individual patient. The actual effect of the use of the systems can only be determined on a case-by-case basis depending on the particular circumstances and patient in question. In addition, there can be no assurance that the systems will achieve any expected level of sales or market share. Hologic expressly disclaims any obligation to release publicly any updates to the data or statements presented here to reflect any change in the Company's expectations or any change in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such data or statements are based.

1 Yaghjyan L, Colditz GA, Collins LC, et al. Mammographic breast density and subsequent risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women according to tumor characteristics. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011;103(15):1179-1189 

2 Bertrand KA, Tamimi RM, Scott CG, et al. Mammographic density and risk of breast cancer by age and tumor characteristics. Breast Cancer Res. 2013;15(6):R104.

3 Friedewald SM, Rafferty EA, Rose SL, et al. Breast cancer screening using tomosynthesis in combination with digital mammography. JAMA. 2014;311(24):2499-2507.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The purpose of study compared digital mammography alone with digital mammography with the addition of 3D mammography.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But in many cases it is just not known whether what is seen on a scan is the cause of the pain. The problem is that all too often, no one knows what is normal.

“A patient comes in because he’s in pain,” said Dr. Nelda Wray, a senior research scientist at the Methodist Institute for Technology in Houston. “We see something in a scan, and we assume causation. But we have no idea of the prevalence of the abnormality in routine populations.”

Now, as more and more people have scans for everything from headaches to foot aches, more are left in a medical lurch, or with unnecessary or sometimes even harmful treatments, including surgery.

“Every time we get a new technology that provides insights into structures we didn’t encounter before, we end up saying, ‘Oh, my God, look at all those abnormalities.’ They might be dangerous,” said Dr. David Felson, a professor of medicine and epidemiology at Boston University Medical School. “Some are, some aren’t, but it ends up leading to a lot of care that’s unnecessary.”

That was what almost happened with Mrs. Weinstein, an active, athletic 64-year-old who lives in New London, N.H. And it was her great fortune to finally visit a surgeon who told her so. He told her bluntly that her pain was caused by arthritis, not the torn cartilage.

No one had told her that before, Mrs. Weinstein said, and looking back on her quest to get a scan and get the cartilage fixed, she shook her head in dismay. There’s no surgical procedure short of a knee replacement that will help, and she’s not ready for a knee replacement.

“I feel that I have come full circle,” she said. “I will cope on my own with this knee.”

In fact, Mrs. Weinstein was also lucky because her problem was with her knee. It’s one of only two body parts — the other is the back — where there are good data on abnormalities that turn up in people who feel just fine, indicating that the abnormalities may not be so abnormal after all.

But even the data on knees comes from just one study, and researchers say the problem is far from fixed. It is difficult to conduct scans on people who feel fine — most do not want to spend time in an M.R.I. machine, and CT scans require that people be exposed to radiation. But that leaves patients and doctors in an untenable situation.

“It’s a concern, isn’t it?” said Dr. Jeffrey Jarvik, a professor of radiology and neurosurgery at the University of Washington. “We are trying to fix things that shouldn’t be fixed.”

As a rheumatologist, Dr. Felson saw patient after patient with knee pain, many of whom had already had scans. And he was becoming concerned about their findings.

Often, a scan would show that a person with arthritis had a torn meniscus, cartilage that stabilizes the knee. And often the result was surgery — orthopedic surgeons do more meniscus surgery than any other operation. But, Dr. Felson wondered, was the torn cartilage an injury causing pain or was the arthritis causing pain and the tear a consequence of arthritis?

That led Dr. Felson and his colleagues to do the first and so far the only large study of knees, asking what is normal. It involved M.R.I. scans on 991 people ages 50 to 90. Some had knee pain, others did not.

On Sept. 11, Dr. Felson and his colleagues published their results in The New England Journal of Medicine: meniscal tears were just as common in people with knee arthritis who did not complain of pain as they were in people with knee arthritis who did have pain. They tended to occur along with arthritis and were a part of the disease process itself. And so repairing the tears would not eliminate the pain.

“The rule is, as you get older, you will get a meniscal tear,” Dr. Felson said. “It’s a function of aging and disease. If you are a 60-year-old guy, the chance that you have a meniscal tear is 40 percent.”

It is a result that paralleled what spine researchers found over the past decade in what is perhaps the best evidence on what shows up on scans of healthy people. “If you’re going to look at a spine, you need to know what that spine might look like in a normal patient,” said Dr. Michael Modic, chairman of the Neurological Institute at the Cleveland Clinic.

After Dr. Modic and others scanned hundreds of asymptomatic people, they learned abnormalities were common.

“Somewhere between 20 and 25 percent of people who climb into a scanner will have a herniated disk,” Dr. Modic said. As many as 60 percent of healthy adults with no back pain, he said, have degenerative changes in their spines.

Those findings made Dr. Modic ask: Why do a scan in the first place? There are some who may benefit from surgery, but does it make sense to routinely do scans for nearly everyone with back pain? After all, one-third of herniated disks disappear on their own in six weeks, and two-thirds in six months.

And surgeons use symptoms and a physical examination to identify patients who would be helped by operations. What extra medical help does a scan provide? So Dr. Modic did another study, this time with 250 patients. All had M.R.I. scans when they first arrived complaining of back pain or shooting pains down their leg, which can be caused by a herniated disc pressing on a nerve in the spine. And all had scans again six weeks later. Sixty percent had herniated disks, the scans showed.

Dr. Modic gave the results to only half of the patients and their doctors — the others had no idea what the M.R.I.’s revealed. Dr. Modic knew, though.

In 13 percent of the patients, the second scan showed that the herniated disk had become bigger or a new herniated disk had appeared. In 15 percent, the herniated disk had disappeared. But there was no relationship between the scan findings at six weeks and patients’ symptoms. Some continued to complain of pain even though their herniated disk had disappeared; others said they felt better even though their herniation had grown bigger.

The question, though, was whether it helped the patients and their doctors to know what the M.R.I.’s had found. And the answer, Dr. Modic reported, is that it did not. The patients who knew recovered no faster than those who did not know. However, Dr. Modic said, there was one effect of being told — patients felt worse about themselves when they knew they had a bulging disk.

“If I tell you that you have a degenerated disk, basically I’m telling you you’re ugly,” Dr. Modic said.

Scans, he said, are presurgical tools, not screening tools. A scan can help a surgeon before he or she operates, but it does not help with a diagnosis.

“If a patient has back or leg pain, they should be treated conservatively for at least eight weeks,” Dr. Modic said, meaning that they take pain relievers and go about their normal lives. “Then you should do imaging only if you are going to do surgery.”

That message can be a hard sell, he acknowledged. “A lot of people are driven by wanting to have imaging,” Dr. Modic said. “They are miserable as hell, they can’t work, they can’t sit. We look at you and say, ‘We think you have a herniated disk. We say the natural history is that you will get better. You should go through six to eight weeks of conservative management.’ ”

At the Partners Healthcare System in Boston, spine experts have the same struggle to convince patients that an M.R.I. scan is not necessarily desirable, said Dr. Scott Gazelle, director of radiology there.

“The consensus is that you are a surgical candidate or not based on your history and physical findings, not on imaging findings,” he said.

Dr. Gazelle had a chance last year to test his own convictions. He had the classic symptoms of a herniated disk — shooting pains down his left leg, a numb foot and difficulty walking.

Dr. Gazelle went to see his primary-care doctor but, he said, “I didn’t get an M.R.I.” That decision, he added, “was the right thing to do.”

About three months later, he had recovered on his own.

In 1998, two medical scientists, writing in The Lancet, proposed what sounded like a radical idea. Instead of simply providing patients and their doctors with the results of an X-ray or an M.R.I. scan, he said, radiologists should put the findings in context. For example, they wrote, if a scan showed advanced disk deterioration, the report should say, “Roughly 40 percent of patients with this finding do not have back pain so the finding may be unrelated.”

It is an idea that only would work for back pain, because that is the one area where radiologists have enough data. But it made eminent sense to Dr. Jarvik. “It gives referring physicians some sort of context,” he said.

So, a few years ago, with some trepidation, his radiology group starting including epidemiological data in their reports. “We thought, ‘What’s going to be the reaction among referring physicians?’ ” Dr. Jarvik said. Their fear was that doctors would start choosing other places for M.R.I.’s and that Dr. Jarvik’s group would lose business.

Because of the way the university’s records are kept, it’s hard to know whether the new reporting system had that effect, Dr. Jarvik said. But he was heartened by the responses of some doctors, like Dr. Sohail Mirza, who recently moved to Dartmouth Medical School.

“We often see patients who have already had M.R.I. scans,” Dr. Mirza said. “They are fixated on the abnormality and come to a surgeon to try to get the abnormality fixed. They’ll come in with the report in hand.”

The new sort of report, Dr. Mirza said, was “very helpful information to have when talking to patients and very helpful for patients to help them understand that the abnormalities were not catastrophic findings.”

Others, like Dr. Modic, are hesitant about reporting epidemiology along with a patient’s scan findings.

“It’s an interesting idea,” he said. But, he added: “The problem isn’t what happens after they get their imaging. It’s that they get the imaging in the first place.”

That was what happened with Mrs. Weinstein.

When she started looking up her symptoms on the Internet, she decided she probably had a meniscus tear. “I was very forceful in asking for an M.R.I.,” she said.

And when the scan showed that her meniscus was torn, she went to a surgeon expecting an operation.

He X-rayed her knee and told her she had arthritis. Then, Mrs. Weinstein said, the surgeon looked at her and said, “Let me get this straight. Are you here for a knee replacement?”

She said no, of course not. She skis, she does aerobics, she was nowhere near ready for something so drastic.

Then the surgeon told her that there was no point in repairing her meniscus because that was not her problem. And if he repaired the cartilage, her arthritic bones would just grind it down again.

For now, Mrs. Weinstein says she is finished with her medical odyssey.

“I continue to live with this, whatever they call it, this arthritic knee,” she said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job of providing an alternative to routine early imaging tests – specifically, the old fashioned careful history and physical examination. The story could have focused more on the fact that these are increasingly becoming lost medical arts as imaging tests become more ubiquitous.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - In a new study of middle-aged New Jersey men, taking cholesterol-lowering drugs was linked to a lower chance of dying from prostate cancer.

The findings don’t prove that the drugs, called statins, ward off aggressive cancer. But they jibe with previous studies suggesting that getting cholesterol levels under control might help reduce the risk of life-threatening disease, researchers said.

“People may be on these medications for their heart, but it may actually be doing them some good for their prostate,” said study author Dr. Stephen Marcella, from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in New Brunswick.

“If a person’s on the fence about taking a statin medication for their heart, this is another potential benefit they may have by taking one of these,” he told Reuters Health.

Marcella and his colleagues collected the medical records of 380 men who had died of prostate cancer and another 380 of the same age and race without prostate cancer or with non-lethal cancer.

Most of the men were white and in their mid- to late-60s, on average. Close to one in four of the men in both groups combined had ever taken a statin.

The researchers found that men who died of prostate cancer were half as likely to have taken a statin at any time, and for any duration, than men in the “control” group.

When they accounted for whether or not men were overweight and their other health problems and medications, it turned out that those with fatal cancers were 63 percent less likely to have ever taken a statin, according to findings published in Cancer.

But, Marcella added, “I would not tell a person if they don’t have a risk of heart disease, (if) they don’t have hypertension...to take a statin just to prevent lethal prostate cancer.”

The evidence that’s effective, he said, just isn’t there yet.

And even if statins do turn out to help prevent fatal prostate cancer, researchers said, previous studies have suggested they don’t lower a man’s risk of getting less aggressive forms of the disease.

According to the American Cancer Society, about one in every six men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer at some point, and one in every 36 men will die of the disease.

Marcella’s team didn’t have the data to figure out if taking a statin for longer, or starting one earlier, was more beneficial than more limited use of the drugs.

The researchers also couldn’t tell whether men started using statins before or after they were diagnosed with aggressive cancer.

But they did find that while high-potency, often newer statins were linked to a lower risk of fatal prostate cancer, lower-potency drugs were not. That suggests it’s something about the drugs themselves that lower men’s chances of dying from prostate cancer, Marcella said.

Statins may protect against fatal prostate cancer through their known cholesterol-lowering effects, said Dr. Stephen Freedland, who studies prostate cancer at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, but wasn’t involved in the new study.

He said that cholesterol is a “key nutrient” for cancer cells, so lower cholesterol levels in the body could prevent more aggressive forms of cancer from developing.

But it’s also possible that statins don’t prevent certain cancers at all, Freedland said, and it’s something else about men who take statins — for example, if they also change their diet and start exercising — that explains their lower risk of fatal cancer.

“It gets very, very tricky to sort out,” Freedland told Reuters Health.

To prove that statins protect against aggressive cancer would require a large study in which cancer-free men, or those with early-stage disease, are randomly assigned to take statins or not and then tracked for years to see how many of them die from cancer.

That type of study, especially involving healthy, disease-free men, would be very expensive and time consuming, said Dr. Nelly Tan, from the University of California, Los Angeles, who has studied statins and prostate cancer risk.

About one-quarter of adults age 45 and older in the U.S. take statins to lower cholesterol and protect against heart attacks. The drugs run anywhere from $11 to more than $200 per month, and sometimes cause side effects including muscle pain, nausea and gas and liver dysfunction.

Researchers agreed that until there’s clearer evidence for benefit, men with healthy hearts shouldn’t seek out statin prescriptions for the purpose of lowering their prostate cancer risks.

But Freedland said that other strategies for lowering cholesterol — such as eating better and exercising regularly — are ways almost everyone can lower their disease risks in the meantime.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Final line of the story quotes an independent expert saying “that other strategies for lowering cholesterol — such as eating better and exercising regularly — are ways almost everyone can lower their disease risks in the meantime.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Thyroid hormones administered to female rats with high blood pressure led to encouraging cardiac improvements, according to a study in the American Journal of Physiology led by NYIT College of Osteopathic Medicine researcher Martin Gerdes.

In the study entitled "Long-term physiological T3 supplementation in hypertensive heart disease in rats," aging female rats with hypertension progressing to heart failure were treated for one year (half their lifetime) with a low oral dose of the active form of thyroid hormone, T3. While their high blood pressure was not affected, cardiac health improved.

High blood pressure is a major contributor to a form of heart failure that affects the way heart relaxes between contractions. About half of the human patients with heart failure suffer from this particular condition, known as diastolic heart failure. The majority of those patients are elderly women with high blood pressure. Importantly, there are currently no effective treatments for diastolic heart failure.

"This low dose of thyroid hormone safely restored depressed cardiac tissue T3 levels to normal while largely preventing the accumulation of collagen, or scar tissue, resulting from sustained high blood pressure," said Gerdes. "Thus, T3 treatment inhibited the major cause of stiffening of the heart in hypertension. The rats experienced overall improvement in contractile proteins and heart function too."

Gerdes has published 32 animal studies showing a link between improvements in thyroid hormone levels and heart health in rats and mice.

"The challenge now is to determine if humans benefit the same way," said Gerdes. "If we can improve heart disease outcomes in patients by restoring normal thyroid function in the heart, we could save lives along with billions of dollars in health care expenses."

In 2014, a study in Molecular Medicine showed that administering low doses of a thyroid hormone to rats with diabetes helped restore hormone levels in their hearts and prevented deterioration of heart function, adverse gene changes, and pathology. Earlier, a study in the Journal of Cardiac Failure found that thyroid hormone replacement therapy in rats significantly reduced the incidence of atrial fibrillation. A 2013 study in The Journal of Translational Medicine showed thyroid hormone treatment administered to rats at the time of a heart attack led to a significant reduction in the loss of heart muscle cells and improvement in heart function.

Gerdes has long argued that medical opinion on thyroid treatment for patients with heart disease is largely shaped by outdated studies that used toxic doses of thyroid hormones.

"What we have tried to do here is show the effect of safe doses of thyroid hormones and we're seeing amazing results in multiple studies, with dramatic improvements in heart function, gene expression, and collagen levels, just by restoring depressed thyroid levels in the heart," said Gerdes. "The studies demonstrate that we should be able to implement a similar, safe treatment and monitoring program for use in human clinical trials. The experts once warned that Beta blockers were too dangerous to use in heart failure patients. But, they were proven to be wrong and these life-saving drugs are now standard therapy for heart failure treatment. I predict the same will eventually be true for thyroid hormones in a large subpopulation of cardiac patients. We are simply talking about restoring normal thyroid hormone balance in heart disease, not over-stimulating the heart."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There are many heart failure treatment options, from surgery to drugs. But most of those treatment options, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, target systolic heart failure specifically. There are currently no effective treatments for diastolic heart failure, and the release tells readers this.(Diastolic heart failure happens when the left ventricle doesn’t let in enough blood; systolic heart failure occurs when the left ventricle doesn’t squeeze hard enough to push out sufficient blood.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Spit Test May Reveal The Severity Of A Child's Concussion

A little spit may help predict whether a child's concussion symptoms will subside in days or persist for weeks.

A test that measures fragments of genetic material in saliva was nearly 90 percent accurate in identifying children and adolescents whose symptoms persisted for at least a month, a Penn State team told the Pediatric Academic Societies Meeting in San Francisco, Calif. In contrast, a concussion survey commonly used by doctors was right less than 70 percent of the time.

If the experimental test pans out, "a pediatrician could collect saliva with a swab, send it off to the lab and then be able to call the family the next day," says Steven Hicks, an assistant professor of pediatrics at Penn State Hershey. Hicks helped develop the test and consults for a company that hopes to market concussion tests.

A reliable test would help overcome a major obstacle in assessing and treating concussions, which affect more than one million children and adolescents in the U.S. each year. Many of the injuries are related to sports.

In most cases, concussion symptoms last only a few days. But up to 25 percent of young patients "go on to have these prolonged headaches, fatigue, nausea, and those symptoms can last sometimes one to four months," Hicks says.

And, right now, there's no way to know which kids are going to have long-term problems, he says.

"Parents often say that their biggest concern is, 'When is my child going to be back to normal again?' " Hicks says. "And that's something we have a very difficult time predicting."

Hicks and a team of researchers have been looking for an objective test that might help.

They knew that, after a concussion, injured brain cells try to heal themselves. As a part of this process, brain cells release tiny fragments of genetic material called microRNAs. Some of these fragments eventually turn up in blood and even in saliva.

The team did an experiment that involved 50 concussion patients between the ages of 7 and 18.

"When they came to our medical center and received the diagnosis of concussion, we evaluated them with some standard survey-based tools and then we also got a sample of their saliva," Hicks says. Most samples were collected about a week after the injury.

The team measured levels of many different microRNAs in the samples, and eventually they identified a handful that let them predict how long symptoms would last. They also identified one microRNA that predicted which children would have a specific concussion symptom: difficulties with memory and problem solving, Hicks says.

A saliva test could greatly improve care for young people who don't have obvious symptoms of a concussion, says Manish Bhomia, an adjunct assistant professor at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, Md.

"A lot of children get mild concussion and oftentimes it goes ignored," he says.

A reliable lab test would help ensure that children who have a head injury don't go back to school, or to the soccer field, before their brain has healed, Bhomia says.

And microRNAs offer a promising way to assess concussions in adults as well as children, says Bhomia, whose research involves a range of "biomarkers" for traumatic brain injury.

But saliva may not be the best place to measure microRNAs, Bhomia says. A better option, he says, might be blood samples, which tend to contain greater numbers of the genetic fragments.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does compare the spit test to a widely used concussion survey. However, many readers and listeners are likely to be confused about the basis of the comparison, and incorrectly believe that the researchers compared how well the tests guide patient care, when actually the new study looked only at the ability to predict reports of symptoms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A swollen lymph node on the neck was the only symptom Karen Anderson noticed.

The 47-year-old pre-school teacher from Eugene was stunned when her biopsy came back positive for melanoma –the most life-threatening form of skin cancer. Malignant cells had spread throughout her body.

Surgeons removed affected lymph nodes but within months tumors appeared in her liver, breast, skull and other lymph nodes. "My oncologist said this is going to kill you and you need to think about preparing for that," Anderson says.

Two years ago, she gained access to an experimental immune-enhancing treatment in clinical trials at Providence Cancer Center in Portland. Called ipilimumab, it unleashes an all-out immune system attack on cancer cells. At first, the injections caused only side-effects: widespread itching, fatigue, and diarrhea. Worse, Anderson says, "I could feel the tumors getting bigger. They felt hot to me."

Then after several months the tumors began to shrink. After one year, the once palpable tumors were no longer detectable in diagnostic scans. While far from a cure, the treatment is the first to improve survival in people with melanoma that has spread, or metastasized, says Dr. Walter Urba, director of cancer research at the Providence Cancer Center. Urba is a co-author of the

on ipilimumab published in the New England Journal of Medicine Saturday.

Success in a cancer as deadly and difficult to treat as advanced melanoma is raising hopes that the treatment may also prove useful in staving off other tumors, including lung and prostate cancer. Drug companies are racing to develop competing versions of the immune-enhancing therapy, an antibody produced through genetic engineering.

"I would not be here today without it," says Anderson, who is undergoing a second round of treatment for resurgent tumors. "It's given me time with my kids, my husband, my family – and it's been quality time."

Melanoma is a rare skin cancer, but accounts for most of the 66,000 annual deaths from skin cancer worldwide. If caught early, before cancer cells break off and spread, surgery can stop melanoma. But most people diagnosed after melanoma has metastasized die within a year.

"For years and years, we've been looking for an effective therapy," Urba says.

Ipilimumab, nicknamed Ippy, is one of the first antibody-based therapies that use the body's immune defenses to destroy cancer cells. The antibodies bind to a specific protein studding the surface of T cells, immune system cells that seek and destroy virus-infected and cancerous cells. The surface protein works like a switch, inactivating T cells after a few days to prevent the immune system from running amok and destroying healthy tissue. The antibodies temporarily jam the switch, allowing T cells to continue attacking cancer tissue for weeks or months – for as long as patients continue to receive injections of the engineered antibody.

More than 600 melanoma patients took part in the ipilimumab clinical trial at 125 cancer centers in 13 countries. All patients had inoperable cancers with widespread tumors after conventional treatment. Some patients received ipilimumab alone, others it combined with a cancer vaccine called gp100, and a third group received only the cancer vaccine.

Ipilimumab appeared to double survival compared with the gp100 vaccine alone. After one year, nearly half of patients given ipilimumab alone or in combination remained alive, compared with one quarter of patients given only the vaccine. After two years, 24 percent of patients treated with ipilimumab were alive, 22 percent of patients treated with the combination, while survival dropped to 14 percent among patients treated with the vaccine alone.

"Some of the people are now out 44 months and still remain free of disease," Urba says.

Serious side effects also became clear. Nearly two-thirds of patients on ipilimumab experienced side effects caused by over-active immunity, such as severe itching, intestinal irritation and diarrhea. Researchers linked 14 deaths to the study drugs, half caused by immune-system reactions.

Still, the study stands as "a major landmark in cancer immunotherapy," says Dr. Bernard Fox, president of the International Society for Biological Therapy of Cancer. He says the results highlight the potential for using the same approach to treat other cancers. Already, early studies in patients with lung cancer and prostate cancer have produced positive, though inconclusive results.

"There is no reason it can't be applied to any of the common tumor types," Urba says. "They all have antigens on their surface that T cells can recognize." Ongoing trials are testing ipilimumab with other cancer drugs, in different doses and against different cancers.

Drug company Bristol-Myers Squibb told investors the drug could gain regulatory approval as early as next year and become available to cancer patients in 2012. Ipilimumab was developed by Medarex, a New Jersey company owned by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Other drug companies are at work on competing versions of the immune-enhancing antibody therapy.

For now, federal regulators have authorized

to people who have serious or immediately life-threatening, inoperable melanoma that has spread, who have no alternative treatment options, and whose physicians believe the drug is appropriate. Providence Cancer Center is the only site in Oregon offering compassionate use of the drug. The Northwest's other participating centers are the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance and Swedish Cancer Institute in Seattle, Providence Cancer Center in Spokane, and Multicare Health System in Tacoma.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that "Other drug companies are at work on competing versions of the immune-enhancing antibody therapy."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Getting pregnant can be tricky. One way an aspiring mother can make it easier is to know when she’s most fertile, a period spanning a few days every month when her body undergoes hormonal changes. And certain body-tracking wristbands may be able to detect these subtle shifts in your biometrics, like your heart rate and body temperature. Depending on the device, it could even help you go one step further and actually conceive. Recently, the women’s health data startup Clue ran an internal test to see if Fitbits could improve the experience of women who track their periods on its popular app and are trying to get pregnant. Scientists put Fitbits on five employees and found that the devices could track their resting heart rate patterns during their menstrual cycles. The devices also showed that resting heart rate spiked shortly before ovulation began, according to the Berlin company, which presented data from the small, preliminary study at the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology's annual meeting this month.

The advantage of a passive sensor is "these things are done kind of autonomously so you don't need to do much except check when the resting heart rate starts coming up," Clue's head of scientific research, Dr. Vedrana Högqvist Tabor, told BuzzFeed News. "It's a cheaper method for people who do want to get pregnant."

 Fitbits aren't the only wearables that can track fertility-related biometrics in the background. After a Kickstarter campaign, YONO just started shipping an earpiece designed to track your body temperature at rest. And Ava is working on a smart wristband that aims to help women conceive.

How an Activity Tracker Caught an Unexpected Pregnancy Fitness trackers, by nature of being worn around the clock, have the potential to capture unexpected insights about how your body works — and simplify laborious acts like manually figuring out your fertile days. That traditionally involves taking your temperature when your body is at rest, examining your cervical mucus, and recording this data every single day on a calendar. Clue’s study, which ran for 13 months beginning in April 2015, didn’t set out to see whether the Fitbit ChargeHR could identify when a woman becomes pregnant. Rather, it was exploring whether the device could reliably track an already-known occurrence: how a woman’s resting heart rate changes when she’s experiencing rising hormonal levels linked to ovulation. For the experiment, five women under 40 wore a Fitbit ChargeHR to bed. That’s because resting heart rate data can be captured at its purest when a person is asleep and not moving. The women also logged their periods on Clue’s app, and took daily urine tests to track when there was a surge in the key hormones that signaled they were entering ovulation. Researchers were watching all these biometrics as the study participants went through their cycles. A woman’s “fertile window” — when she’s likeliest to get pregnant — usually occurs two weeks after the start of her last period, and lasts for about six or seven days, ending on the day of ovulation.

As the researchers had hypothesized, the participants' Fitbits captured a portion of this fertile window by showing that their resting heart rates rose one or two days before ovulation, as well as during ovulation itself. So a woman who saw a bump in her resting heart rate history could use that information to schedule intercourse with her partner, Högqvist Tabor said. And the study had one particularly unexpected outcome. Clue’s marketing director, who was participating, was puzzled when her Fitbit said her heart rate was up by several beats per minute. Högqvist Tabor said she soon realized what the finding meant, and broke the news to the marketing director: She was pregnant. The happy discovery was similar to one earlier this year, when a man posted on Reddit about how his wife’s Fitbit showed an uptick in her resting heart rate. Upon a Redditor’s suggestion, she took a test that confirmed she was in fact pregnant. An expert told BuzzFeed News at the time that her heart rate increase may have been an indirect result of elevated body temperature, another symptom of pregnancy. But Don't Think Of This As Birth Control Even though Clue’s marketing director happened to find out she was pregnant from her Fitbit, the point of the study was to demonstrate that it's possible to use Fitbit as a conception tool, not as a pregnancy test, Högqvist Tabor said. And that's provided that a couple doesn't have any other fertility-related problems.

However, Högqvist Tabor said, this information by itself should not be used as a birth control method. A woman will be fertile four to five days before her increased resting heart rate will start showing up on a Fitbit — so having unprotected intercourse during this period could in fact lead to an unintended pregnancy. If you’re curious exactly what kind of increase in resting heart rate you should look out for, Clue hasn’t revealed that information yet, but says it will publish that and other data in a paper later. (Högqvist Tabor says it's tricky because it depends on the individual, and can range from a few beats per minute to 10 beats per minute.)

 One reason to potentially shy away from trusting Fitbit’s heart-rate sensors: In a class-action lawsuit, some unhappy consumers have accused them of being inaccurate. Regardless, Clue scientists say that they were more interested in the devices’ ability to capture the day-to-day differences in someone’s resting heart rate, which seemed to be consistent, and less interested in whether the devices could produce the exact values of resting heart rate. “You will get a relative change, even though it might not be as accurate as a chest strap,” said Clue co-founder Mike LaVigne.

And while resting heart rate can be a tell-tale sign of ovulation, Lea von Bidder, CEO of Ava, says consumers shouldn’t rely on that measurement alone if they’re serious about getting pregnant. Her company's wristband is designed to track eight physiological markers in addition to heart rate variability, including skin temperature, pulse rate, breathing rate, and sleep.

 The Ava bracelet will launch this summer. As a low-risk medical device registered with the Food and Drug Administration, it doesn’t need in-depth review by the agency to be sold, according to the company. By monitoring these multiple biomarkers while a woman is asleep, Ava’s wearable and app can notify her during the five days she’s most fertile, ending in ovulation, according to von Bidder, who says Ava has conducted studies on about 60 people. Von Bidder said it was promising to see that Fitbit might be able to provide heart rate data to women trying to conceive. “But we also know that heart rate alone will not be enough,” she said. Wearables have a well-worn reputation as step-counting machines. But as Clue’s and Ava’s fertility research indicates, increasingly sophisticated sensors and algorithms could significantly open up wearables’ capabilities — and make them that much more able to tackle bigger, complicated health issues.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story compares the use of the Fitbit to manually tracking one’s cycle (i.e. taking daily temperature and tracking consistency of cervical mucus). It also mentions some other gadgets that track body temperature. We’ll award a Satisfactory on that basis, but there are a host of other options available for women who are seeking help in becoming pregnant. The story doesn’t address any of them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The pocket-watch-sized device is billed as "a pacemaker for the brain," the newest cutting-edge treatment for as many as 4 million adults whose severe depression is not relieved by psychotherapy, drugs or even shock treatments.

Since its approval under unusual circumstances eight months ago by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), more than 550 Americans have undergone surgery to have a vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) implanted in their chests to activate parts of their brains. Another 7,000 people -- aided by a network of nurses hired by Cyberonics, the Houston-based manufacturer of the device -- are seeking approval from their insurance companies for the $25,000 operation.

More than 3,700 psychiatrists, including doctors affiliated with Suburban, Georgetown, Sheppard Pratt and Howard University hospitals, have been trained in the use of VNS, the first device ever approved to treat depression. It consists of a battery-operated generator attached to an electrode implanted in the vagus nerve in the neck. The generator emits regular pulses of electricity that are supposed to stimulate serotonin and other brain chemicals believed to regulate mood, according to Cyberonics.

Yet despite the imprimatur of the FDA and an aggressive marketing campaign mounted by the company, the most basic question about the treatment remains unanswered: Does it work? Is VNS a lifesaving treatment for chronic depression, as some patients and doctors maintain, or an unproven and potentially harmful treatment based on flimsy science, as critics contend?

At the heart of the debate is this: The only rigorous clinical trial of the device -- which is approved to treat severe epilepsy -- failed to demonstrate effectiveness in alleviating depression. That study involved 235 patients, all of whom received the device, which was turned on in only half the group. At the end of three months, there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups.

A second study of 174 VNS recipients found that 30 percent showed significant improvement after one year. Because that study lacked a control group and because patients received other depression treatments after the device was implanted, there is no way to know whether the device was responsible. For years experts have known that depression -- unlike, say, type 1 diabetes -- can get better without treatment.

Last July, a top FDA official, citing the lack of alternatives for severely depressed patients, overruled unanimous opposition by 20 members of his staff and approved the device as a depression treatment for adults who had failed four other treatments.

FDA spokesman Stephen King said that VNS met federal standards for medical devices, which are less stringent than those governing drugs, and might help adults who had exhausted other options and were at a high risk of suicide. Cyberonics officials testified that 30,000 people commit suicide annually, most of whom were diagnosed with severe depression. The same rationale had led an FDA advisory panel in 2004 to approve the device by a 5-2 vote.

To Philadelphia psychiatrist Richard P. Malone, a member of the panel who voted against approval, such arguments are specious.

"Pancreatic cancer is a hopeless condition" with a much higher death rate than chronic depression, said Malone, a professor of psychiatry at Drexel University. "And we have as much evidence that this works for pancreatic cancer as it does for depression. Why not use it for that?"

Some patients with chronic depression say they were willing to try anything that promised relief. Graphic artist Colleen Kelly decided in 2000 that she had nothing to lose by enrolling in an experimental study of VNS. Now 42, Kelly, who lives in Prince George's County, said dozens of medications had not helped her for long or had caused severe reactions. Nearly three dozen electroshock treatments failed to work and wiped out years of memories, she said.

VNS gave Kelly three "very good years," she said, and then her depression returned. "The past year has been abysmal," said Kelly, who urged the FDA advisory panel to approve the device. "I still keep hoping it's going to help me in some way."

But critics say they are not persuaded by Cyberonics's theory of how VNS works. The company's Web site says that "preliminary imaging studies suggest that VNS Therapy affects many areas of the brain implicated in mood regulation."

But Malone called the theory "all speculative."

"This almost has a feel of 18th-century psychiatry -- having a device and not being able to show how it works," he said.

Washington psychiatrist Wayne Blackmon agreed. "Psychiatry has been burned again and again by overextravagant claims" about devices and psychosurgery, said Blackmon, a lawyer and a past president of the D.C. Medical Society. "The history of psychiatry is plagued by psychiatrists jumping the gun because these poor people are suffering and the argument is we have to do something."

The device has also attracted attention on Capitol Hill, where the Senate Finance Committee has spent two years looking into decision-making at the FDA.

Last month committee chairman Charles E. Grassley (R-Iowa), whose panel issued a report highly critical of the agency's approval of VNS, said he was concerned that patients and their doctors were not being adequately informed about the risks of VNS, which include cardiovascular problems that can be life-threatening.

Grassley questioned whether Medicare and Medicaid should pay for the device, which costs $15,000 and must be replaced every five years or so when the battery runs low. So far neither the federal government nor private insurers have agreed to cover VNS for depression on a routine basis, although many have approved individual cases.

Last week, BlueCross BlueShield of Alabama announced it would pay for VNS treatment in chronically depressed patients who had failed four previous treatments.

Two recent technology assessments by major insurance companies have concluded there is insufficient evidence to find that VNS works for depression. A report by Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, an influential mental health insurer in Boston, called it "experimental, investigational and unproven."

Robert "Skip" Cummins, Cyberonics's CEO, dismissed such criticism and said his company, whose sole product is VNS, faced similar skepticism after the device was approved for epilepsy in 1997.

He noted that VNS is now accepted by insurers as a treatment for intractable seizures, which can be fatal if they are not controlled. About 35,000 epilepsy patients have received the implant.

Many FDA "regulators, politicians and third-party payers" know little about resistant depression, Cummins said. "Hundreds of psychiatric thought leaders and patients are rallying around the device" for "the worst of the worst" cases of depression, he said.

"There is nothing out there as safe and effective," Cummins said, adding that a company-financed study showed that the effectiveness of VNS improved over time. He added that he has a personal interest in intractable depression because his mother and grandfather committed suicide.

New York psychiatrist T. Byram Karasu, chairman of the task force that writes the section on depression for psychiatry's diagnostic and statistical manual, said that even though the effectiveness of VNS is uncertain, it appeals to patients and their psychiatrists.

In its marketing campaign, Cyberonics notes that VNS treatment does not cause the weight gain associated with antidepressants and the confusion and memory loss common after electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), psychiatry's term for shock treatments.

"VNS has a quality of cardiac surgery to it, a certain cachet," and it lacks the stigma of shock treatments, said Karasu, adding that six of his patients adamantly refused ECT and opted instead for VNS. "No one would know you didn't get a defibrillator."

For Paulo Negro's patients, the issue is not stigma, but options. Negro, chief of behavioral health services at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, said his VNS patients have tried everything, but their depression always recurred.

"What would you do if you've not been getting better for years?" asked Negro. "It's a chance to get better. I'd take it."

That's what Charles E. Donovan III did. The St. Louis resident credits the implant he received five years ago with saving his life. At the time, the Georgetown University graduate said he was so depressed he told his doctor he hoped to die on the operating table.

But in the weeks after surgery, Donovan said, he started to feel better. Although he takes antidepressants, Donovan said, he is sure drugs are not responsible, because they hadn't helped him previously.

Donovan, who is featured on the Cyberonics Web site, said he has no financial relationship with the company. He recently self-published a book about his experiences, entitled "Out of the Black Hole," and runs a pro-VNS Web site for patients. "I am so humbled by this treatment and grateful," he said.

Others have had far less positive experiences. Among them is Katherine V. Coram, 58, of Silver Spring who got the implant in the same study as Donovan. Coram said she knew she was in the group with the activated device because she could feel it going off, she said. She frequently lost her voice while she was talking and felt a persistent constriction in the back of her throat. Both are common side effects of VNS treatment.

Coram said the device seemed to help a bit at first, but when the doctor turned up the settings, she felt suicidal for the first time in years. Worsening depression and suicide attempts were reported by one-third of patients in one study funded by Cyberonics, according to data presented to the FDA.

Last year Coram said she had the generator removed from her chest because it wasn't helping. The electrodes in her neck must remain forever; doctors tell VNS patients that removing them is too risky because tissue grows around them As a result, VNS recipients cannot undergo a full body MRI or therapeutic ultrasound.

"I'm still angry about the whole thing," said Coram, who said she regrets getting the implant and currently relies on the standby treatments: psychotherapy and antidepressants.

"You get desperate when you've been depressed for years," she said. "This sounds benign, like a pacemaker. My crusade is for people to know a lot more about it before they sign up." ·
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There is mention of psychotherapy, electroconvulsive therapy and antidepressants but few details are given about these options. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
After decades of dreaming about getting patients' immune systems to fight cancer, immunotherapy is finally here. The Food and Drug Administration approved Provenge this spring to treat advanced prostate cancer.

But now the study that led to FDA approval is finally out in this week's New England Journal of Medicine. And it's clear that experts are still scratching their heads about just how Provenge works.

It does work, sort of.

In the study, men with prostate cancer that no longer responds to hormone therapy (basically, chemical castration) lived about four months longer if they took Provenge than if they got placebo treatment. That's better than the only other approved treatment for such advanced cancers.

But, as the study's lead author Dr. Philip Kantoff acknowledges, "It's not a home run; this is not going to cure prostate cancer."

The primary mystery is how Provenge extends life, since it doesn't shrink prostate tumors, as far as anyone can tell. "Prolongation of survival without a measurable antitumor effect is surprising," writes Dr. Dan Longo of the National Institute on Aging in a NEJM editorial.

Deep in the data is further mystery.

Provenge is supposed to work by, in effect, vaccinating patients against their own cancers using a patient's own white blood cells.

The theory is that the custom-made vaccine incites patients' immune cells to attack the cancer. The study shows that patients who got Provenge were indeed more likely to mount immune-cell responses to a prostate cancer antigen in the test tube. But oddly, the patients who had these activated immune cells didn't survive any longer than those who didn't.

The other side of the immune system – the antibody arm -- showed a different picture. Patients who had a good antibody response to Provenge lived longer than those who didn't.

Nobody yet knows just how to explain these results. Longo, the NEJM editorialist, says he'd be more convinced if the placebo patients had received infusions of white blood cells that had been exposed just to the general immune-stimulating part of the Provenge treatment, without the prostate antigen part.

The way the study was done, he says, "does not allow one to conclude" that Provenge is working because it mobilizes the immune system specifically against prostate cancer.

But, after all, Provenge is just the first cancer immunotherapy on the market. So it's not surprising there's a lot to be learned, and that it's pretty pricey.

Other immunotherapy approaches are in the pipeline, along with fancier versions of drugs to block the hormones that feed prostate cancer.

Meanwhile, Dendreon, the Seattle-based company that makes Provenge, says there's a waiting list for the drug. The company estimates 100,000 American men have the kind of hormone-resistant, metastatic cancer the drug is approved to treat. But the company can only make enough at this point for 2,000 patients in the first year.

So does the waiting list contain thousands of men? Tens of thousands? "Can't say," replies Dendreon COO Hans Bishop.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says the drug performed "better than the only other approved treatment for such advanced cancers" and that "Other immunotherapy approaches are in the pipeline, along with fancier versions of drugs to block the hormones that feed prostate cancer." 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The two syndromes differ, though, in their constellation of symptoms. For example, psoriatic arthritis manifests most often in the lower extremities and is associated with the autoimmune skin condition called psoriasis, in which raised red, scaly patches appear on the skin. Although psoriatic rashes most often precede the onset of the arthritic stage, the reverse can also be the case.

Three of the 10 top-selling drugs in the United States in dollar sales — adalimumab, etanercept and infliximab — are biologics prescribed for psoriatic arthritis as well as for the more common rheumatoid arthritis. These three drugs share a common property: They block the action of a pro-inflammatory substance called tumor necrosis factor. Secreted by various immune cells, TNF stimulates the immune response and accompanying inflammation.

However, despite the availability of TNF inhibitors, “only about half of psoriatic arthritis patients who are given TNF inhibitors get better,” said Genovese.

Although the ultimate cause of the disease remains unknown, there was a good clinical rationale for hoping it might be responsive to ixekizumab. For the last decade or so, Genovese said, another pro-inflammatory substance called IL-17 has been drawing the attention of immunologists focusing on psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Ixekizumab works by blocking IL-17. The drug, an injectable monoclonal antibody, is already commercially available for the treatment of psoriasis, for which it has been remarkably effective, said Genovese. And in an earlier Lilly-sponsored phase-3 trial, ixekizumab was shown to be effective for psoriatic arthritis patients who had not yet been treated with biologic drugs such as TNF inhibitors. (Another approved monoclonal-antibody that targets IL-17, secukinumab, was approved in 2016 for psoriatic arthritis.)

Over the 24-week duration of the latest trial, 109 participants received ixekizumab every two weeks; 94 received placebo injections every two weeks; and 111 alternated every two weeks between getting injections of ixekizumab and the placebo. While 19.5 percent of patients who received only the placebo injections were judged to have met the trial’s specified clinical endpoint — at least a 20 percent reduction in the number of tender and swollen joints — the response rate among those getting the real drug every four weeks was 53.3 percent. Those getting the drug every two weeks didn’t do any better and were slightly more prone to side effects, such as a mild reaction at the injection site.

Although any treatment that works by blocking the immune system’s ability to mount an inflammatory response should be carefully monitored for its potential to render the body vulnerable to infectious disease, there were few observed differences in this category between recipients of placebo versus active drug given every four weeks, Genovese said.

Lilly has filed for approval of the drug by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Genovese has served as a consultant to Lilly.

Other co-authors of the study are affiliated with multiple institutions in diverse locations, including the University of Queensland, in Australia; Guy’s & Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, in London; St. Luke’s International University, in Tokyo; Memorial University, in Newfoundland, Canada; Lapeyronie Hospital, in Montpelier, France; Charite University Medicine Berlin, in Germany; and Eli Lilly and Company, in Indianapolis.

Stanford’s Department of Medicine also supported the work.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There was a good explanation about the alternatives — drugs like the TNF inhibitors already on the market such as adalimumab, etanercept and infliximab — but that “only about half of psoriatic arthritis patients who are given TNF inhibitors get better.” We also learn that “another approved monoclonal-antibody that targets IL-17, secukinumab, was approved in 2016 for psoriatic arthritis.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
* Scientists say new drug could have fewer side effects

LONDON, Jan 8 (Reuters) - A drug for bipolar disorder that works like lithium - the most common and effective treatment - but without lithium’s side-effects has been identified by British researchers in tests on mice.

Scientists say the drug, ebselen, may be a swift answer to long-sought after better medications for patients with the manic depressive disorder, since it is already known to be safe.

If the drug could be “repurposed” and licensed for the treatment of bipolar disorder, it could reduce the unpleasant side effects of weight gain, thirst and potential kidney damage that patients risk when taking lithium.

“Ebselen is an experimental drug that has been tested in people for other conditions, and does not have problematic side effects like lithium does,” said Grant Churchill of the department of pharmacology at Britain’s Oxford University.

Bipolar disorder effects around 1 percent of the population worldwide and sufferers can experience moods that swing from one extreme to another, and have periods of depression and mania lasting several weeks or longer. These high and low phases are often so extreme they interfere with everyday life and work.

In a telephone interview Churchill said that in tests, his team found that mice who were made manic with small doses of amphetamines were able to be calmed again with ebselen.

“In mice, ebselen works like lithium,” Churchill said. “Now we urgently need to see if it works like lithium in people.”

Some 60 years after it was first discovered, lithium - a mood stabiliser that can protect against both depression and mania, and reduce the risk of suicide - remains the most effective long-term treatment.

But it is very toxic - at only twice the right dose it could kill a patient, Churchill said - and its adverse side-effects mean many people stop taking the drug and relapse into episodes of mania and depression.

Churchill worked with Sridhar Vasudevan to filter through a library of existing drugs - the U.S. National Institutes of Health Clinical Collection - that are considered safe but do not currently have a proven use.

They screened the library for any drugs that blocked an enzyme that is key to lithium’s success and found ebselen was a possible lithium mimic.

“This is one of the first handful of examples of drug repurposing, where a new use has been found for an existing drug,” Vasudevan said.

Ebselen is an antioxidant originally developed up to late stage, or phase III, clinical trials by the Japanese firm Daiichi Sankyo for the treatment of stroke, but which never reached market and is now out of patent.

Vasudevan said his study, reported in the journal Nature Communications, showed ebselen had the same or similar action as lithium in the brains of mice, blocking the same enzyme.

The researchers are a now starting a small study in healthy human volunteers to look for effects on brain function. If that shows ebselen has similar effects to lithium, they plan to move to second stage trial in bipolar patients. (Editing by Pravin Char)
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story describes lithium as the dominant treatment for bipolar disorder. “Some 60 years after it was first discovered, lithium – a mood stabiliser that can protect against both depression and mania, and reduce the risk of suicide – remains the most effective long-term treatment.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A large new study is challenging the common practice of recommending that older men forgo treatment for early prostate cancer and instead wait to see whether the malignancy progresses.

The study of more than 44,000 American men ages 65 to 80 found that those who chose to aggressively treat their prostate cancer with surgery or radiation were about 30 percent less likely to die than those who waited, indicating that treatment offered a clear advantage.

The research, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, is the first to directly examine what has become conventional wisdom: that many older men need not treat early prostate cancer because it tends to grow so slowly that they will probably die of something else first.

"For many years, the thinking has been that observation or 'watchful waiting' was the safest option for elderly patients with early prostate cancer," said Yu-Ning Wong of the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, who led the study. "This suggests there may be a benefit of treatment, even in this age group."

The findings prompted debate among specialists, who said the results could have potentially far-reaching implications because they address one of the central quandaries about prostate cancer and because the disease is so common. It is diagnosed in 235,000 U.S. men each year and kills more than 27,000, making it the most common cancer and second-leading cancer killer, after lung cancer, among men. Most cases are diagnosed after age 65.

Some experts said they hope the findings will encourage more doctors to consider treating elderly men.

"This debunks the idea that older men do not benefit from treatment," said Christopher L. Amling of the University of Alabama in Birmingham. "This gives support to the idea that active treatment can be beneficial."

Other experts expressed skepticism, saying the study's design may have missed another explanation for the lower death rate among men who were treated: They were probably healthier in ways that doctors can tell only by examining them, not by looking at their medical records, which is what the study's authors did.

"There was probably something about these guys that made them more likely to get treated that also made them more likely to survive," said Mark S. Litwin of the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California at Los Angeles, who co-authored an editorial accompanying the paper.

Wong acknowledged that the study's design had limitations, making it important that the findings be confirmed by additional research. But she said she and her colleagues analyzed the data carefully to account for factors that could have influenced the findings, such as the subjects' ages and whether they had other health problems.

"We adjusted for as many of those differences as we could," Wong said.

The widespread use of the prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, screening to detect prostate cancer early has led to intense debate about how aggressively to treat the disease. Some doctors fear the cancer is being over-treated, particularly in older men, subjecting them to therapies that leave many impotent and incontinent when their cancer would never bother them if left untreated. Autopsies show that most men will develop prostate cancer in their lifetimes but often die of something else.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study does describe the three main treatment options for early prostate cancer: surgery, radiation, and observation.  While more information about surgery or radiation may have been helpful, overall, the article does describe the main choices and especially provides context about where observation may fit into the list of choices.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Each year, five million people have wisdom teeth removed, but it's up in the air whether all of those surgeries were necessary.

Wisdom teeth, also called the third molars, are four teeth that grow at the very back of each corner of the mouth. For most people, they start to grow in between ages 17 and 25. They're thought to crowd out other teeth or cause tooth decay, which is why many dentists and oral surgeons think it's better to just nip those problems in the bud and take them out as a preventative measure.

But there's a serious debate between dentists and oral surgeons: should they preemptively remove someone's wisdom teeth if the patient doesn't have any symptoms?

Simply put, there's no right answer. It comes down to what you, as a patient, want. Here's what you need to know to figure that out.

Dentists and oral surgeons are fighting over wisdom teeth

Dentists and oral surgeons agree across the board that there's cause to remove wisdom teeth if a patient is in pain or if there are signs of disease popping up, like tooth decay or infection. That's an obvious choice. But taking out wisdom teeth when there aren't any symptoms is where the professionals get into it.

Many dental professionals stick with a watch and wait approach with wisdom teeth to avoid surgery if possible. "Many people don’t have adequate space in their jaw for the teeth to come into full position, but that alone isn’t justification of having them all removed," says Dr. Scott Tomar of University of North Carolina's School of Dentistry. Tomar says that as a dentist he feels the risks of complication, including infection and hitting nerves during surgery, outweigh any benefits of preventative removal.

In 2007, oral surgeon Dr. Jay Friedman called the preventative removals a public health hazard in the American Journal of Public Health. The American Public Health Association has sided with this argument since 2008, when it formally opposed the preventative removal of wisdom teeth. (The same thing happened with tonsils, which doctors no longer remove just to get rid of the chance of infection later on.)

Americans spend an estimated $3 billion a year having their wisdom teeth removed

Some doctors, though, still see preventative oral surgery as being two steps ahead of the problem. If you're going to need your wisdom teeth out eventually, why not have them removed when you're younger and are more likely to recover more easily? Some think of removing the wisdom teeth early on as a way to lessen the crowding of other teeth

"You might not have symptoms now, but you can't assume it's gonna be that way for the rest of your life," says Dr. Ray White, an oral surgeon working at University of North Carolina. Rather than let the teeth cause problems later on, many oral surgeons remove them.

But a 2012 Cochrane review of randomized clinical trials found there's no evidence that removing wisdom teeth will prevent or reduce crowding of other teeth down the line. And a different Cochrane review found that watching and waiting can "may reduce the number of surgical procedures by 60 percent or more.

The question comes down to which side of the fence medical professionals fall on

It's worth noting that oral surgeons make a good chunk of their paychecks by removing wisdom teeth, so there is a financial incentive involved.

"Are there people gaming the system? Sure. You don't get paid much for not doing anything," White says. "But I'd hope we can get past that."

The American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial surgeons says, "There is no pat answer, cookbook recipe, or flow chart that is universally accepted regarding the decision making process" in these cases. So the question comes down to which side of the fence medical professionals fall on, and what works best for their patients.

The risks and benefits of removing your wisdom teeth

There's a chance that if you opt not to have your wisdom teeth taken out, they might be fine for the rest of your life.

There's also a chance that they'll need to come out later. If that's the case, you can't always plan for it. Opting to have them removed gives patients time to plan around the procedure, which leaves people out of commission for about three days.

But inconvenience isn't the only risk. "The risk for complications increases as people get older, and the duration of disability after the operation gets longer as people get older," says oral surgeon Dr. Thomas Dodson.

In some cases, the extraction can be more painful if you wait, Dodson says. That's because the tooth is easier to remove if its roots aren't fully developed.

The common risks related to the surgery include poor wound healing, infection, pain, and uncontrolled bleeding. Nerve injury, in rare cases of wisdom teeth removal, can leave people with permanent numbness around the face and mouth, according to the APHA.

Americans spend an estimated $3 billion a year having 10 million wisdom teeth removed, according to the American Public Health Association. That's a hefty bill for something we may or may not need. How much it costs depends on how the molars are situated. A simple surgical extraction for a wisdom tooth that's showing through the gums should run about $230, according to Healthcare Bluebook. If it's impacted (pushed against another tooth and unable to fully come through the gum), the cost jumps to about $400 per tooth.

Update: Added information about the number of teeth removed.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately weighs the benefits of both approaches — early removal or waiting to see if complications develop later on.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It's pretty well known to doctors that the most successful treatment for obesity is surgery, especially the gastric bypass operation. But here's something the medical world is just realizing: that the gastric bypass operation has other even more dramatic effects. It can force type 2 diabetes into almost instant remission and it appears to reduce the risk of cancer.

Surgeons have been performing bariatric, or weight loss operations since the 1950s, but they're much safer than they used to be. They're typically done laparoscopically now, where doctors use tiny surgical tools and video cameras instead of making big, deep incisions.

Despite the increase in obesity, only a small number of people have had the gastric bypass operation.

met some people who were once morbidly obese.

There was Tony Sideman, who underwent surgery in April 2007 and has lost 140 pounds; there was Janet Rovak, who lost 90 pounds in the eight months since her surgery; and there was Travis Goodbou, who lost 260 pounds in the seven months since he underwent the operation.

Dr. Neil Hutcher from Richmond, Va. has performed more than 3,000 bypass surgeries. Asked how many people gain the weight back, Dr. Hutcher tells Stahl, "You know I think when you're dealing with an incurable disease that kills many people, if you have an 85 to 90 percent success rate, that's pretty darn good."

"Is that what you have?" Stahl asks.

There's no diet, no exercise regimen, and no pill with a success rate like that. These patients lose a ton of weight and keep it off.

Here's how Hutcher does the surgery: first, he sections off a small pouch of the upper part of the stomach, which is then attached to a lower part of the small intestine, bypassing most of the stomach, so that there's not a lot of room for food.

It used to be that roughly one in 100 people died from this operation. Hutcher says it's now about one in 1,000, which makes it less deadly than most major surgeries.

"It's less than gall bladder surgery. It's about one-tenth of cardiac surgery," he explains.

It's safer because of new surgical techniques which have also made it more effective. For instance, they can make the stomach pouch smaller than they used to.

"Even if I wanted to eat a whole cheesecake, my stomach is very tiny. It holds four ounces max, stretched to the max. And that's not even one piece of cheesecake," a female patient explained.

A big reason the operation works is because it seems to suppress appetite. "If you listen to your patients, they come back and they say, 'Doctor, you put the fire out,'" Hutcher says.

"When you see a sign for fast food or…she's already shaking her head at me," Stahl asked a patient.

"Don't want it," the female patient replied. "I used to crave sweets all the time. I couldn't go past the gift shop at work without getting a candy bar. Now I go past it and I never give it a thought."

Paul Delios of Saugus, Mass. has lost 90 pounds. He owns a doughnut shop with his siblings, but he's able to resist the cravings. "Before I'd have cravings for everything. Now I really don't," he told Stahl.

For most patients the cravings really do disappear. One theory is that's because the operation suppresses the levels of a stomach hormone called "grelin" that activates the sensation of hunger.

Yet most people who have this operation do not get skinny. Dr. David Cummings, an expert on appetite at the University of Washington, says as a rule these patients end up just one third lighter.

"Most people with severe obesity who undergo gastric bypass do not become fully normal, in terms of body weight. They go from severely obese to mildly obese, or from obese to overweight. But nevertheless it's an enormous change," Dr. Cummings explains.

And not just in terms of weight loss. Dr. Hutcher says the operation itself can take type 2 diabetes - which has ballooned in this country - and throw it into complete remission.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The segment mentions medications to control weight, diabetes and hypertension, but only to describe  them as ineffective and unnecessary for those who have the surgery. 
There are no alternative treatment approaches that are as successful as surgery for reducing body weight and diabetes. 
 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 10, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental Alzheimer's disease drug, gantenerumab, may help lower levels of amyloid plaque in the brains of people with the disease, an early clinical trial indicates.

The new study, which appears online Oct. 10 in the Archives of Neurology, is among the first to show the effects of an anti-amyloid drug in humans with Alzheimer's disease, but experts caution that while promising, more research is needed before this drug can be deemed safe or effective.

And, in what may turn out to be an equally important caveat, experts also say that it's by no means certain that reducing levels of amyloid plaque would stave off memory loss and the other mental declines associated with the disease because the role of the plaque in Alzheimer's isn't fully understood.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia. Symptoms including serious memory loss, confusion and mood changes develop gradually and worsen with time. Recently, many strides have been made in diagnosing Alzheimer's disease earlier, but doctors have been stymied by a lack of effective treatments to stop or slow the course of the disease.

It's long been known that a protein fragment called beta-amyloid builds up in the spaces between nerve cells in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease. The new drug, gantenerumab, targets these amyloid proteins by priming the body's immune system to recognize them as invaders.

Of 16 people with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease, those who received two to seven infusions of the experimental drug every four weeks showed marked reductions in the amount of plaque in their brains via imaging tests that were conducted several months after their treatments.

By contrast, amyloid load increased among people who were randomized to receive the placebo. The new drug was given at either 60 or 200 milligrams (mg) doses. The higher dose yielded greater reductions in amyloid levels, the study showed. People who were given the 60 mg doses saw a nearly 16 percent reduction in the amount of amyloid, and those given the 200 mg doses saw a 36 percent reduction. The new study was conducted and funded by the drug's manufacturer, F. Hoffmann-LaRoche Ltd., in Basel, Switzerland.

The big question is whether or not reducing amyloid levels has any effect on the symptoms or progression of Alzheimer's disease, said Dr. Patrick Lyden, chief of neurology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. "There is a growing concern that amyloid is a guilty bystander, but not the actual culprit in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease, and taking away the bystander may not help the patient," he said.

There are approximately one dozen therapies, including vaccines, for Alzheimer's disease that are currently in the pipeline, Lyden noted. "They are all extremely exciting and promising in animals," he said. "This is the first one to show a preliminary result in people, but we have a huge way to go to make sure it is safe and improves symptoms."

Many in the Alzheimer's research community are awaiting these drugs with bated breath, but "none are ready for prime time," he said.

The leading theory of Alzheimer's disease is that an imbalance in the production or clearance of the amyloid plaque in the brain initiates a cascade of events that lead to dementia, explained Dr. Neelum Aggarwal, an associate professor of neurological sciences at Rush Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago.

"Accumulation of the plaques cause a variety of cellular responses: inflammation, neuronal death, and thus any potential treatment that can alter these processes would be beneficial," she said. The hope is that gantenerumab or other drugs like it will not only prevent amyloid from accumulating in the brain, but also slow down the cognitive impairment that occurs in people with Alzheimer's disease, she added.

That said, these experimental drugs carry the potential for serious side effects, including causing the immune system to go haywire. "The main issue that remains for this type of drug development is managing the immune response," Aggarwal said. Other side effects include a potentially fatal fluid build-up in certain areas of the brain. "This is problematic in that use of these treatments may carry a very high risk for neurologic complications, thus necessitating heightened monitoring, and diminishing its applicability as a treatment for a larger patient population such as the Alzheimer's disease population," she said.

If any of these drugs make it through the pipeline, it also needs to be determined who will get them, including whether the drugs will be given to prevent Alzheimer's in patients at high-risk of the disease or to treat it once it's started.

The need for a drug to delay the onset or slow progression of Alzheimer's disease can't be underestimated, Aggrawal said. In the United States alone, there are 5.4 million people with Alzheimer's disease, and the numbers are expected to increase to 13 million by 2050, when approximately three of every five people over the age of 85 will have Alzheimer's disease, she said.

For more information about Alzheimer's disease signs, symptoms and treatments, visit the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that “There are approximately one dozen therapies, including vaccines, for Alzheimer’s disease that are currently in the pipeline” …and “none are ready for prime time.”
Nice touch.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Even though her mammogram showed no sign of cancer, Sandra Litt knew she could feel a lump. She had a second mammogram. Nothing there, the radiologist assured her. "Then one night, I found the 'nothing there' had grown bigger," Litt said. Her self-exam had proved accurate. Two years ago, Litt underwent a double mastectomy and months of chemotherapy to survive an aggressive breast cancer. It defies common sense, she says, for scientists to conclude that breast self-exams do women more harm than good. "It's a very important tool," the 67-year-old Portland woman says. "Why throw away an important tool?" A scientific review, published in August by the

, highlighted the downside of doing breast self-exams: Women taught to perform the monthly ritual wind up having unnecessary biopsies. They are about twice as likely to undergo biopsies that won't find cancerous tumors, according to two studies tracking hundreds of thousands of women in China and Russia. Conflicting news coverage has heightened the confusion. "Breast self-exam has no benefit," one headline proclaimed. "Breast self-exam key in catching what mammogram may miss," another said. What is clear is that studies don't supply an answer that fits all women.

Dr. Elizabeth Steiner, director of the breast health education program at

, said each woman must decide for herself, with full knowledge of the pros and cons, whether to perform self-exams. And there's not a right or wrong answer. Some may do the exams and accept the risk of unnecessary biopsies, she said. Others may decide that either they can't commit the time to do them right, or that the potential for false alarms and anxiety isn't worth it. "That's a very personal decision," Steiner said.

When doctors began promoting breast self-exams in the 1950s, the benefits seemed obvious. Here was a simple, inexpensive do-it-yourself way for women to find tumors before it was too late. During the women's health movement of the 1970s, the self-exam gained importance as a means for women to take charge and rely less on a paternalistic health system. But researchers have learned that self-exams aren't at all simple. The technique is complicated and difficult to learn to do well. Guidelines on how to do them correctly have evolved, leaving many women and doctors with outdated ideas. Further, decades of research still have not produced good evidence that self-exams make any difference in breast cancer survival. "Not only do the trials not find a benefit, the trials demonstrate harm in terms of increased physician visits and benign breast biopsies," said Dr. Nancy Baxter, a University of Toronto surgeon who reviewed the evidence on self-exams for the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. She said self-exams may not reveal tumors early enough to improve survival. "By the time a breast cancer is large enough to be detected by self-exam, tumor biology is the most important predictor of outcome, not finding a tumor a few months before it would have become apparent," she said. Given the lack of evidence, the

considers the exams unproven. And the

has recommended against routine teaching of breast self-exams since 2001. Unnecessary biopsies may not be the only hidden cost. "One danger of pushing breast self-exams on patients is that they may be falsely reassured by it and opt out of their mammograms," said Dr. Heidi Nelson, medical director of the

in Portland. She stopped routinely teaching self-exams to patients after the large trials in China and Russia showed no benefit.

Some evidence does suggest that self-exams done properly could make a difference. For instance, they provide a means to search for tumors in outer parts of the breast where mammography may not reach. About half of breast cancers develop in the upper-outer quadrant of the breast, which is largely inaccessible to mammography scanners. A small study in Canada in 1997 found that self-exams seemed to improve survival among a subset of women using proper technique. The preferred method, known as the vertical strip, three-pressure test, has proved the most sensitive and least likely to produce false alarms, Steiner said. In the largest and most influential study to date, involving 266,000 women in Shanghai, Steiner said researchers taught an inferior method of exams. She said that could partly explain why the Shanghai study failed to find improved survival. Self-exams also appeal strongly to some younger women, whose main screening test is a manual exam done by a doctor or nurse. Mammography is considered inappropriate for women younger than 40, and many doctors don't recommend it until age 50. If a woman decides to do self-exams, Steiner said, it's important to learn to do them right -- and do them every month without fail. "Done haphazardly and irregularly, it is probably worse than no breast self-exam at all," Steiner said. She encourages women to schedule an appointment devoted to learning the technique, which should take at least a half-hour. A few minutes squeezed into a routine annual exam aren't enough, she said. Steiner said not all doctors are up to speed on breast exam technique, which calls for lying down, not taking a few minutes standing in the shower -- the form pushed for years by physicians and even anti-breast cancer groups. "It's important to ask, 'Do you feel confident in your own technique and training me how to do it?'" she said. Nelson cautions women not to skip their mammograms if they don't find lumps during self-exams. But finding a lump also is no reason to panic, given the limited accuracy of the self-test. Litt, the breast cancer survivor, has another piece of advice: "Do not ignore your own judgment; and be assertive," she said. "You don't get a do-over."

What to make of breast cancer's "1-in-8" statistic.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions mammograms as a better diagnostic option, yet the story also notes that this tool may may miss some cancers in the upper-outer quandrant of the breast.  The story notes improved and more specific tactile breast self-exam methods as an option; however, there is little evidence that these techniques improve detection of early breast cancers in a large population.  The story references current breast cancer screening guidelines from the American Cancer Society and U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Worried About Dementia? You Might Want to Check Your Blood Pressure

Every day, Dr. Walter Koroshetz, 65, takes a pill as part of his effort to help keep his brain healthy and sharp.

The pill is his blood pressure medication. And Koroshetz, who directs the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, says controlling high blood pressure helps him reduce his risk of dementia.

He also keeps his blood pressure down by exercising and paying attention to his weight and diet. "I'm a believer," he says.

Koroshetz is urging other people with high blood pressure to follow his lead.

He is responsible for the institute's public health campaign called Mind Your Risks. Its goal is to let people know that there is a link between high blood pressure, stroke and dementia.

When blood pressure rises, it strains the tiny blood vessels that keep brain cells alive, Koroshetz says.

"With every pulse of your heart, you are pushing blood into these very small blood vessels in the brain," he says. And when the heart pushes too hard, as it does when blood pressure is elevated, it can cause damage that can lead to a stroke.

At least two large studies have revealed an alarming trend among stroke patients, Koroshetz says.

"If you had a stroke, even a small stroke, your risk of dementia within the next two years was greatly magnified," he says. "So there's something about having a stroke that drives a lot of the processes that give rise to dementia."

The evidence is clearest for a type of dementia called vascular dementia. It occurs when something blocks or reduces the flow of blood to brain cells.

But high blood pressure also appears to increase a person's risk of developing Alzheimer's disease, which is associated with the accumulation of plaques and tangles in the brain.

If people knew about the link between dementia and high blood pressure, they might be more inclined to do something about it, Koroshetz says.

"Only about 50 percent of people who have hypertension are actually treated," he says. "So I think there's a lot to be said for trying to get high blood pressure under control."

Koroshetz's campaign is getting some help from the Alzheimer's Association.

The group will present new research on blood pressure and Alzheimer's at its annual scientific meeting in Chicago, which starts July 22. And the group is encouraging people to control high blood pressure.

"The good news is that we can control blood pressure now," says Maria Carrillo, the group's chief science officer. "We can do that with exercise, with lifestyle, with healthy eating and also with medications."

Koroshetz is using all of these approaches. And he says other people with high blood pressure should follow his lead.

"When you get to be my age, you're going to be very grateful that you controlled your blood pressure and exercised," he says.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story indirectly discusses alternatives–such as exercise and diet.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The blood test is also part of a larger debate about who should be treating allergy sufferers. Blood testing would allow pediatricians and other primary care doctors to diagnose allergies and treat many patients. But allergists contend that these generalists are not qualified to assess the laboratory results.

Dr. Dean Mitchell, an allergist in Manhattan, has virtually abandoned the skin-prick test. He was converted, he says, after taking a patient to the emergency room for a severe reaction to his skin test. Dr. Mitchell began to imagine a nearly needle-free office.

“There’s been a longstanding fear of skin testing, and it turns off a lot of allergy sufferers from getting help,” said Dr. Mitchell, the author of “Allergy and Asthma Solution” (Marlowe, 2006), which advocates oral immunotherapy, or allergy drops, instead of shots.

For that reason, he and other experts say, most sufferers never even see an allergist. (And many sufferers of seasonal and pet allergies know what they’re allergic to, so they don’t need a diagnosis.) For them, care has focused on treating symptoms with antihistamines and decongestants, not diagnosing the allergy and avoiding its triggers.

“The question is, why aren’t we identifying more children and adults suffering from allergic rhinitis and asthma to help them?” Dr. Mitchell said.

In Europe, 60 percent of asthma patients are tested for allergies, compared with only 5 percent to 10 percent in this country. A lack of diagnosis may contribute to the worsening of symptoms in children — the so-called allergy march.

It begins with eczema in infants and toddlers, and progresses to respiratory problems and asthma in preschoolers and beyond. Half of babies who have eczema in the first two years of life will develop asthma in childhood, said Dr. Thomas A. E. Platts-Mills, president of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology.

In skin testing, a practitioner makes rows of pricks on a patient’s back or forearm so allergen-containing extracts can seep into the skin. If the antibody IgE is bound to the immune system’s mast cells in the skin, the patient will get an itchy, hivelike wheal surrounded by redness. The size of the wheal and the diameter of the redness help determine if the patient is allergic.

A patient typically gets 15 to 20 skin pricks, but sometimes many more. Because the test comes with a small risk of a serious reaction, it should not be performed in very young children and pregnant women, among others.

The blood test, which is not without its own ouch factor, measures levels of circulating IgE. The lab sends the physician a report with these figures and the patient’s risk of a reaction.

The first generation of blood tests were developed in the 1970s. Because they were not considered very sensitive, physicians were left with a lasting impression that blood testing was inferior to skin testing.

A more sophisticated test with improved sensitivity, called ImmunoCAP, became available in 1992. It has performed equally well in comparison studies with skin-prick testing, said Dr. Jay M. Portnoy, chief of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology at Children’s Mercy Hospital in Kansas City, Mo.

Still, most allergists prefer skin testing. “Skin testing is more sensitive and tells you more,” said Dr. Dean D. Metcalfe, chief of the laboratory of allergic diseases at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. With blood tests, he went on, “you’re not really measuring an allergic reaction, but a potential for a reaction.”

Skin testing produces an answer in about 20 minutes, compared with 48 hours for a blood test. The quick turnaround allows doctors to offer a diagnosis and immediate advice.

But skin-testing results can vary from one allergist to the next, and most allergists don’t rely on a prior allergist’s results when a patient switches practices.

Some experts contend that allergists resist blood testing in part to protect their revenue. “A barrier to allergy testing in the states has been the economics in our system,” said Dr. Richard G. Roberts, professor of family medicine at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health. If an allergist does an in-office skin-prick test, he gets the fees for those tests. If he requests a blood test, the laboratory gets the fee.

But others say allergists are simply more familiar with skin testing. “They have been trained to do skin testing, they’re comfortable with it, and they get an answer in 20 minutes,” said Dr. Portnoy.

Allergists say some patients previously treated by primary care physicians were taken off foods like peanuts, though they never had an allergic reaction to them. Diagnosing requires a thorough medical history and interpreting the test results within that context; generalists may lack the time to do a complete history, especially under the pressures of managed care.

Dr. Roberts says that if primary-care physicians used the blood test, many more patients would be treated appropriately. While most allergy patients are seen by these generalists, he says, many allergies are not adequately diagnosed.

“Could we do a better job collectively?” he asked. “Absolutely.”

Some allergists have made the switch to blood testing — especially in the area of food allergies, where blood testing is replacing the so-called food challenge test, a two- to six-hour procedure in which patients are given increasing amounts of suspect foods like egg or milk to determine whether they will have an allergic reaction.

Dr. Hugh Sampson, a food allergy expert at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, is seeking to add a level of precision to diagnosis. He correlates levels of specific IgE with a probability that the person is allergic to a food — a technique, he says, that reduces the need for food challenge testing by half.

Dr. Mitchell, the Manhattan allergist, called that approach promising. “A lot of academic allergists are very conservative,” he said. “But Hugh Sampson’s work may turn the tide.”

As for Sarah Marcus, starting last summer she was weaned from allergy shots so she would no longer need them when she went away to college, at the University of Pennsylvania. She has been shot-free and allergy-free since Thanksgiving.

“All in all,” said her mother, “if I could go back, if I had a 2-year-old now, I’d never put her through the skin testing.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions the skin testing and talking with their primary care doctors about their symptoms as alternatives to the blood test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An app called Natural Cycles has become the first to be classified as a medical device for use as contraception.



Natural Cycles uses a woman's body temperature and menstrual cycle data to tell her when she is fertile. On fertile days, users must abstain from sex or use other protection such as condoms to prevent pregnancy. The app was approved as a class IIb medical device by Tüv Süd, a notified body in Sweden where it is based.

But sexual health organisations are warning that being classed as a medical device does not guarantee that the app will effectively prevent pregnancy. Sexual health charity the FPA, Fertility UK, and the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Health of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists are jointly calling for more large-scale independent trials to ensure that evidence for such apps is on a par with other rigorously tested methods of contraception.

Natural Cycles is one of numerous apps that help women practise a method of contraception called natural family planning, also known as the fertility awareness method.



Natural family planning involves monitoring your body for signs of ovulation, like an increase in your temperature, or a change in cervical mucus.

"The thing about the female egg is that it only lives for about 24 hours. So if you could reliably know when you've ovulated as a woman, and then you give that egg two or three days to die, any time after that in the cycle you will not get pregnant because there's no egg to fertilise," Dr Susan Walker, a senior lecturer in sexual health at Anglia Ruskin University, told BuzzFeed News.



Taking your temperature is what sets Natural Cycles and other apps like it apart from standard period-tracking apps. Without temperature information an app can can guess at your ovulation day based on your average cycle length, but can't be sure when you actually have ovulated, and so you can't use it as a reliable form of birth control.

You don't actually need an app to practise natural family planning – although it does cut down on paperwork. Even so, the FPA advises that natural family planning is most effective if you’re taught how to do it by a specialist teacher, and you monitor all three fertility indicators – temperature, menstrual cycle length, and cervical secretions.

But natural family planning is not for everyone. For starters, it can only protect against pregnancy, not STIs.

And if you're considering ditching the Pill because remembering to take it each day is too much effort, you probably won't like having to remember to take your temperature every morning.

"You really have to commit to it, whether you're doing it the traditional way or you're using an app. You have to take your temperature every morning and record that, because without all that data it's not really any use to you," Bekki Burbidge, head of communications at the FPA, told BuzzFeed News. "It's not a method that's going to suit everybody."

But for women like Natural Cycles co-founder Dr Elina Berglund, who want an alternative to hormonal contraception, it's an option worth pursuing. Along with her husband and co-founder Dr Raoul Scherwitzl, Berglund created the algorithm used in the app for personal use, before deciding it was something she should share with the rest of the world.

"When it comes to contraception it's all about choice. It's not like one solution will fit all women," said Berglund.

"Our typical user is in a stable relationship a few years before wanting to have kids. At first she starts to use the app to prevent pregnancy, and when she's ready [to get pregnant] she switches to plan, and usually she gets pregnant quite quickly, because the app already knows her body and cycle."



To use the app, you need a monthly or yearly subscription, and a thermometer that you have to use to take your temperature each morning before you get out of bed.



The app then tells you if you're likely to be fertile or not that day. And if the app gives you a "red day" – meaning you could be fertile – you have to abstain from sex, or use another method of protection such as condoms.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article makes reference to other forms of birth control and their advantages and disadvantages with relationship to the Natural Cycles app.  This information helps the reader put the new information into greater context.
The writer also mentioned other apps that track a woman’s monthly cycle, based on user data for when a period begins and ends.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Using chest scans to screen for lung cancer in people who’ve never smoked and have no symptoms might help catch cancers early and decrease the disease’s death toll, suggests a new study from Japan.

But experts say the findings likely don’t apply in non-Asian countries, where the majority of all lung cancers are found in people who smoke — and where using computed tomography (CT) scans to screen for lung cancer in smokers has recently been a controversial topic.

Moreover, they warn that while regular screening might help doctors catch cancer earlier, it also comes with a high price tag and added risks to patients.

CT scanning uses X-rays and computers to produce a clearer image than traditional X-ray techniques, but CT also uses higher radiation doses to generate those images.

Everybody agrees that CT “does find the early stage lung cancer,” said Dr. Heidi Roberts, a lung cancer researcher from Women’s College Hospital, Toronto who wasn’t involved in the new study. Early-stage cancer is easier to treat and has a higher survival rate.

The new study provides further evidence of that. Researchers led by Dr. Ryoichi Kondo of Shinshu University Hospital in Matsumoto looked back at outcomes for close to 500 non-smoking lung cancer patients whose cancer was caught by CT scan screening, or by standard X-ray screening — another strategy for catching cancer early — or when patients came into the doctor with lung symptoms.

Most of the tumors found via CT scans were small, whereas those found through X-ray screening or in patients with symptoms were more often further advanced, according to the findings published in the journal Lung Cancer.

Five years after their diagnosis, 95 percent of people whose cancers were found through a CT scan were still alive, compared to 73 percent diagnosed with an X-ray and 40 percent of patients who had not been screened and whose symptoms led to discovery their disease.

East Asian countries are more likely to regularly screen non-smokers for lung cancer because biological differences seem to put Asians at a higher risk than other non-smokers, researchers explained.

Non-smokers without symptoms generally are not screened for lung cancer in the U.S.

There and in Canada, the lung cancer debate has centered around how often to screen smokers, and until what age screening should be done, Roberts said.

In another study published by Kondo and colleagues — this one looking at lung cancer screening in smokers — five-year survival rates were also highest in those screened with CT scans.

That’s consistent with the findings of the National Lung Screening Trial in the U.S., which in November released data — published online in the New England Journal of Medicine last week — showing that 20 percent fewer middle-aged heavy smokers died of lung cancer when they were screened annually with a CT scan compared to a standard, less detailed chest X-ray.

Lung cancer kills more people in the U.S. than any other cancer — over 150,000 each year.

The problem with frequent screening is not only its cost — CT scans typically run a few hundred dollars each — but that each scan exposes a person to radiation, which also slightly increases cancer risks over time with repeated scans.

And screening comes with an inherent risk of false-positives — scans which suggest a lung cancer that turns out not to be there.

Dr. Christine Berg, one of the leaders of the U.S. screening studies, said that generally about a quarter of chest CT scans show some kind of abnormality — but 96 percent of those abnormal scans turn out not to be lung cancer. While doctors ruled out cancer, those patients would have undergone further tests, sometimes including biopsies, which can cause complications including infection and bleeding.

And for some patients, “if you really weren’t going to benefit from the screening...that complication is something you may not have faced,” Berg said. “Those are some of the things I worry about.”

Her study showed that 300 middle-aged smokers would need to be screened with CT scans to prevent one death from lung cancer.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally-supported expert panel, has said there isn’t enough evidence for it to recommend screening for lung cancer in symptom-free people using CT scans or other methods.

Berg and Roberts both told Reuters Health that more research is needed to see if there might be hints in the blood or genes of smokers that could tell doctors which had the highest risk for lung cancer — and which would get the most out of routine CT screening.

“We now have a technology that can detect (lung cancer) early enough to make some impact,” Berg said. But, “it’s not a home run, and it clearly has these limitations.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The focus of the story was a comparison of lung CT versus x-rays or physician followup of patient symptoms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Type 2 diabetes is a chronic condition that affects 422 million people worldwide. For decades, doctors have treated it with medications designed to keep blood sugar levels down.

But in a paper published in the , researchers in the UK describe a landmark study in which people with diabetes went into remission—just by losing weight.

Nearly half of people in the study who were given a six-month diet plan and lost an average of 30 pounds went into remission and no longer had diabetes. None took any medications during that time to control their disease and relied on weight loss alone.

Type 2 diabetes is caused by the body’s in ability to break down sugars from the diet. Normally, cells in the pancreas work to release insulin, a hormone that can process sugar and either send it to cells that need it for energy or store it as fat for future energy needs. Cells in the liver are responsible for clearing insulin from the circulation. But excess fat in the pancreas and liver can start to shut down these insulin-producing cells, leading to spikes in blood sugar levels. Diabetes medications can bring sugar levels down but do not address the compromised insulin machinery.

In the study, Dr. Roy Taylor, professor of medicine and metabolism at Newcastle University, and his colleagues randomly assigned nearly 300 people to either a weight management program or their usual treatments, including diabetes medications. All of the people had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes in the six years preceding the study. The people assigned to the diet group stopped any diabetes drugs they were taking on the same day they began the diet.

The diet, which was designed to help people lose up to 30 pounds, involved three to five months of a strict low-calorie liquid formula diet averaging no more than 850 calories a day, followed by two to eight weeks of reintroducing food, along with nutritional education and cognitive behavioral therapy to help people stick with the new eating plan.

Taylor and his team tracked outcomes including weight loss, diabetes remission and level of fat in the pancreas and liver. After a year, most of the people in the diet group lost about 22 pounds, compared to two pounds in the control group. Nearly a quarter of the people who managed their weight were able to lose 33 pounds or more, while none in the control group were able to lose that much. Most importantly, 46% of the people in the diet group went into remission with their diabetes, compared to just 4% in the control group.

MORE: Antibiotics Are Linked To Type-2 Diabetes

“People newly diagnosed with diabetes for the first time can look at this and know it isn’t necessarily for life,” says Taylor. “It isn’t an irreversible, inexorable condition that you can never escape from — at the moment, people are told that.”

Previous studies have suggested that lifestyle changes, including diet and exercise, can be powerful ways to lose weight and combat diabetes. The Diabetes Prevention Program in the U.S. revealed in 2002 that diet and exercise alone can prevent people from progressing from pre-diabetes to diabetes, in some cases better than medications designed to control blood sugar. Gastric bypass surgery, which can result in dramatic weight loss, can also help to reverse diabetes, but the procedure is costly and carries a high risk of complications.

The current study takes that work a step further and shows that it’s possible to actually reverse the disease in people who have been diagnosed. Taylor stresses that the study only addressed people diagnosed relatively recently — within the past six years — and that the effect may not apply to more long-term patients. That’s because as the disease continues, he says, insulin-producing cells start to die off. Initially, the cells slowly shut down, entering a so-called resting state. Those are the cells that weight loss can re-activate.

But left in this state too long, the cells eventually die and cannot be revived. Studies suggest that people living with diabetes for more than 10 years, for example, may not be able to rely on weight loss alone to push them into remission.

That points to an important lesson that Taylor hopes doctors and patients will learn from the results. He says that it’s critical to discuss from the start — when people are diagnosed with diabetes — the possibility of using diet and weight loss to treat their disease. If more people can benefit from losing weight alone, then that would mean less cost to the health care system, as fewer people will suffer the serious complications of advanced disease, which can include heart problems, neuropathy, vision issues and even amputations.

Taylor says he intends to follow up on the people in the study for another four years to see if they are able to maintain their weight, and, if they are, whether they continue to remain in remission. “From the very clear data we produced in this trial, yes, this is a watershed moment for diabetes,” he says. “We can offer people hope from the start.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions gastric bypass surgery as another method to dramatic weight loss and that has been shown to reverse diabetes. It also mentioned the high cost of and risk of complications from gastric bypass. Unfortunately, readers cannot compare the cost and harms of the managed diet approach, as the story omits their mention.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new paper in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute finds that testing for cervical cancer using HPV testing in addition to the Pap smear is unlikely to detect cancer cases that wouldn't be found using HPV testing alone.

The main goal of cervical screening programs is to detect and treat precancer before cancer develops. Cytology-based screening, known as the Pap test or Pap smear, is used to detect abnormal cells. The Pap test can also find noncancerous conditions, such as infections and inflammation.

Cervical cancer screening guidelines have changed dramatically over the last 15 years, following introduction of testing for the dozen high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) types that cause virtually all cervical cancer and its precursors. Despite more research into HPV, and the introduction of preventive HPV vaccines, screening will remain important and comprise many millions of tests annually for decades to come. But improved screening methods have also introduced some confusion, even controversy.

HPV testing is more sensitive than the Pap test for detecting precancer. The HPV test captures the known cancer causing viruses, but there are gynecologists who believe that there may be unknown cancer causing viruses and so continue to do the Pap smear (plus HPV testing).

However, reports of rare HPV-negative, Pap-test-positive cancers are motivating continued use of both tests (cotesting) despite increased testing costs. An HPV test, in which doctors test a cervicovaginal specimen for the presence of the nucleic acids of carcinogenic types of HPV, is more sensitive than the Pap test (a microscopic examination of exfoliated cells) for detection of precancers. Thus, if a single screening method were chosen to complement HPV vaccination, primary HPV testing likely would gradually supplant the Pap test.

In the US, an interim guidance issued by a committee of experts from several clinical societies recommended primary HPV testing every three years, the same as the Pap test. Alternatively, current guidelines recommend cotesting but, in recognition of the additional reassurance provided by this approach compared with the Pap test alone, the screening interval is extended to every five years. Draft guidelines from the US Preventive Services Task Force recently recommended either primary HPV testing every five years or the Pap test every three years for women 30 to 64, and did not recommend cotesting.

The accumulated evidence supports inclusion of HPV testing in screening; thus, the main choice moving forward is between cotesting and primary HPV testing alone.

Researchers were searching for realistic performance data to quantify the additional benefit of the Pap test component of cotesting, as the costs of intensive screening of all women using two screening tests are substantial.

In January 2003, just prior to US FDA approval of HPV and Pap test cotesting in mid-2003 and interim guidelines in 2004, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, a large integrated health care organization, introduced three-year cotesting in women aged 30 years and older. Kaiser Permanente has now screened over a million women by cotesting. This remains the most extensive experience of HPV testing incorporated into routine screening in the world.

Researchers here quantified the detection of cervical precancer and cancer by cotesting compared with HPV testing alone at Kaiser Permanente, where 1,208,710 women have undergone triennial cervical cotesting since 2003. Screening histories preceding cervical cancers (n=623) and precancers (n=5,369) were examined to assess the relative contribution of the Pap test and HPV test components in identifying cases.

The analysis found that HPV testing identified more women subsequently diagnosed with cancer and precancer than the Pap test. HPV testing was statistically significantly more likely to be positive for cancer at any time point, except within 12 months. HPV-negative/ Pap test-positive results preceded only small fractions of cases of precancer (3.5%) and cancer (5.9%); these cancers were more likely to be regional or distant stage than other cases.

Given the rarity of cancers among screened women, the contribution of the Pap test to screening translated to earlier detection of at most five cases per million women per year. Two-thirds (67.9%) of women found to have cancer up to 10 years of follow-up at Kaiser Permanente were detected by the first cotest performed.

The researchers conclude that the added sensitivity of cotesting versus HPV alone for detection of treatable cancer affected extremely few women.?

The paper "Relative Performance of HPV and Cytology Components of Cotesting in Cervical Screening" is available at: https:/

To request a copy of the study, please contact: Daniel Luzer

 daniel.luzer@oup.com
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release is about comparing alternative screenings, either co-testing or HPV alone. The report does not address Pap alone (recommended for women under 30 years old).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Can acupressure achieve a sustained reduction in menstrual pain? Is an app-based self-care program particularly attractive to young women? These questions addressed in a new study by researchers from Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, the results of which have been published in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology*.

Approximately 50 to 90 percent of young women experience pain during their periods. While this pain primarily manifests itself as lower abdominal cramping, other symptoms include headache, backache, nausea and diarrhea. Acupressure is a technique derived from traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). In contrast to acupuncture, this technique can be used as a form of self-care and is suitable for use at home. Rather than using needles, this technique involves massage or pressure being applied to specific points on the body.

The researchers wanted to evaluate whether in a group of women suffering from severe menstrual pain, aged between 18 and 34, self-acupressure would be more effective at achieving a sustained reduction in menstrual pain than usual care alone (e.g. pain medication and hormonal contraceptives). A total of 221 participants were randomly assigned to one of two treatment groups, both of which received a study app and short introduction. Acupressure-based features - with instructions on how to administer self-acupressure shortly before and during menstruation - were only made available to the intervention group. One advantage of an app-based intervention is its ability to provide visual descriptions of the pressure points users need to target in order to achieve the desired effect. It can also send regular reminders. Additionally, the app was used to collect all study-related data.

"Initially, we simply wanted to conduct a study on the use of self-care techniques for menstrual pain. However, the women who were involved during the planning stages, all of whom were affected by menstrual pain, wanted an app," reports the study's principal investigator, Prof. Dr. Claudia Witt of the Institute of Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics. The app helped participants to apply simple self-acupressure techniques to three different acupressure points.

After three months, 37 percent of participants in the acupressure group reported a 50 percent reduction in pain intensity. After six months, this proportion had increased to more than half of the women in this group (58 percent). Only 25 percent of women in the control group reported a similar reduction in pain intensity at both the 3-month and 6-month marks. Women in the acupressure group also used less pain medication than women in the control group and reported lower levels of pain overall.

"We were surprised to see that, after six months, two thirds of participants continued to use self-acupressure. So far, research into the clinical effectiveness of apps has been limited, and only a few have been tested using randomized controlled trials," says Dr. Daniel Pach of the Institute of Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics. He adds: "We were able to show that apps can be evaluated in a clinical trial setting. However, despite our experience with conventional clinical trials, there was a lot for us to learn - something we found both exciting and eye-opening." The app Luna has recently been updated and optimized for use with iOS.

*Susanne Blödt, Daniel Pach, Sanna von Eisenhart-Rothe, Fabian Lotz, Stephanie Roll, Katja Icke, Claudia M. Witt: Effectiveness of app-based self-acupressure for women with menstrual pain compared to usual care: a randomized pragmatic trial. In: American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Volume 218, Issue 2, February 2018, Pages 227.e1-227.e9. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.11.570.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the trial aimed to evaluate whether women achieved greater reduction from acupuncture as an add-on treatment than from “usual care alone.” Usual care was described as pain medication and hormonal contraceptives.
The release would have been improved had it made it explicit that the study participants continued to use other pain relief therapies while doing acupressure and that the acupressure study was designed to test the technique’s value as an adjunct therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 21, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- New guidelines issued by three leading cancer organizations suggest that more breast cancer patients should consider radiation therapy after a mastectomy.

Overall, the guidelines say there's enough evidence to show radiation treatment after a mastectomy decreases the risk of breast cancer recurrence, and that even women with smaller tumors and three or fewer lymph nodes involved can benefit from the therapy.

"The new guidelines say there is clear evidence that the benefit of [post-mastectomy radiation therapy] extends to women with limited lymph node involvement," said Dr. Stephen Edge. He is vice president for health care outcomes and policy at Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo, N.Y. Edge was co-chair of the panel that developed the new guidelines.

"The guideline is timely," said Dr. Janna Andrews, an attending physician in radiation medicine at Norwell Health Cancer Institute, in Lake Success, N.Y. "The field of post-mastectomy radiation is changing. It's always up for discussion now as to who needs [post-mastectomy radiation therapy]."

The new guidelines help clarify what used to be a gray area, Andrews explained. "In the past, if a woman had a small tumor, less than 5 centimeters, and not more than three or four positive lymph nodes, many doctors would say she does not need [post-mastectomy radiation therapy]," she said.

The guidelines don't offer a single formula for which patients need radiation therapy, Edge noted. But they do focus on the group of women for whom there is the most debate about the value of radiation.

"There is a great deal of controversy about whether women with one, two or three lymph nodes [with cancer] have sufficient risk to warrant radiation," he said. "For women with four or more lymph nodes involved, everyone would recommend radiation."

The guidelines also strongly support input from all specialists who treat breast cancer in making the decision about radiation treatment. That typically includes the surgeon, radiation physician and an oncologist.

Doctors need to weigh the risks and benefits, Edge added. Side effects can include redness of the skin, swelling and skin breakdown severe enough to compromise future breast reconstruction, he explained.

Edge said that doctors need to consider patients individually. For instance, he explained, ''a woman 65 who has microscopic involvement in a single lymph node and an estrogen-receptor positive cancer would be very different from a 38-year-old who has three lymph nodes involved and so-called triple-negative breast cancer." The younger woman, he said, would typically be advised to get radiation.

The older woman, because her risk is lower, should have a discussion with her doctor to decide if the benefit outweighs the risk, Edge noted.

Andrews said that one take-home message for patients is to expect the surgeon to have consulted with the radiation oncologist and others on her team. If a woman's doctor tells her she does not need radiation after a mastectomy, the woman should be told why and she should ask if the radiation oncologist weighed in on the decision.

Edge was a panel representative from the American Society of Clinical Oncology, which created the guidelines along with the American Society for Radiation Oncology and the Society of Surgical Oncology.

All three groups published the guidelines online this week in their respective journals: the Journal of Clinical Oncology, Practical Radiation Oncology and the Annals of Surgical Oncology.

To learn more about radiation in breast cancer treatment, visit BreastCancer.org.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story essentially compares getting radiation therapy to not getting radiation therapy (but, as noted above, doesn’t really offer much detail on the benefits of radiation therapy).
Depending on the circumstances, patients who receive post-mastectomy radiation may also be treated with chemotherapy, and we wished that had been discussed, too, since the combination can potentially increase health risks.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — HOUSTON ― For the first time, transplanting gut bacteria from healthy donors was used to successfully treat patients suffering from severe colitis caused by treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). The study from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, which includes two patients, suggests fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is worth investigating in clinical trials as a therapy for this common side effect of immunotherapy.

The research, led by Yinghong Wang, M.D., Ph.D., assistant professor of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition and director of Medication Induced Colitis and Enteritis, was published today in Nature Medicine.

“The resolution of colitis in these patients can be confirmed clinically and endoscopically after FMT treatment,” said Wang. “Based on these results, this should be evaluated even as a first-line therapy for ICI-associated colitis because it’s safe, quick, and the effect is durable - from one treatment.”

Immune checkpoint inhibitors, which release a block on the immune system to attack cancer, have been successful in providing durable responses for patients with several cancer types. However, these treatments are often associated with significant immune-related toxicities.

Colitis, inflammation of the colon, is the second most common side effect from ICIs, occurring in up to 40 percent of patients, explained Wang. When ICI-associated colitis is severe, guidelines require a patient to stop ICI treatment until the colitis is in remission.

“If the patient is a good responder to immunotherapy, that means you’ve taken their effective treatment away,” said Wang. “We have a limited amount of time to fix the problem so they can resume ICI treatment, but I feel that we’ve made great progress in this area.”

The researchers chose to investigate the potential for FMT as an alternative, compassionate-use therapy for patients suffering from refractory, or unresponsive, ICI-associated colitis. The two patients included in the study were treated at MD Anderson between June 2017 and January 2018.

FMT has shown promise in treating other types of gastrointestinal diseases, such as recurrent Clostridium difficile infection and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which shares many clinical and molecular characteristics with ICI-associated colitis. These conditions typically are treated with steroids and targeted immunosuppressive agents, which result in additional severe side effects and can counteract the effects of immunotherapy.

Both patients in the study had a complete resolution of their colitis following treatment with FMT. The first patient’s colitis resolved within two weeks following a single FMT treatment; the second patient experienced a partial recovery after the first treatment, followed by complete recovery after a second FMT. With endoscopic evaluation before and after treatment, both patients displayed significant improvements in inflammation and ulcerations, including a reduction of inflammatory immune cells.

Pre- and post-treatment stool analyses revealed patients’ gut microbiomes to be most similar to the donor immediately after treatment, with less resemblance to the donor over time. Still, post-treatment gut bacteria remained distinct from their own pre-treatment microbiome. Additionally, distinct new populations of bacterial species were evident in these patients following FMT compared to pre-treatment samples, including several species known to be protective or reduce inflammation.

The authors acknowledge significant limitations to this study based on the very small cohort, and they plan to pursue clinical trials to investigate the effectiveness of FMT in treating ICI-associated colitis as compared with standard immunosuppressive therapy. FMT continues to be offered to MD Anderson patients on a compassionate-use basis.

Previous MD Anderson research showed that bacteria in the gut influence patient response to ICI therapy, and other evidence suggests modifying the microbiome in mice can alter their response to immunotherapy. The current data further suggests there is the potential for many molecular studies to better understand the role of the microbiome in driving ICI-colitis and immunotherapy response more broadly.

The study was supported by the Andrew Sabin Family Fellowship Program; the American Association for Cancer Research – Stand Up to Cancer; the National Institutes of Health (CA219896-01A1, HL124112); the Cancer Prevention & Research Institute of Texas; and the Melanoma Moon Shot™, part of MD Anderson’s Moon Shots Program™, a collaborative effort to accelerate the development of scientific discoveries into clinical advances that save patients’ lives

In addition to Wang, other MD Anderson authors include: Diana Wiesnoski, Christopher Sanchez, and Chia-Chi Chang, Ph.D., all of Genomic Medicine; Beth Helmink, M.D., Ph.D., and Vancheswaran Gopalakrishnan, Ph.D., both of Surgical Oncology; Hamzah Abu-Sbeih, M.D., Gottumukkala Raju, M.D., and John Stroehlein, M.D., all of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition; Edwin Parra, M.D., Ph.D., and Alejandro Francisco-Cruz, Ph.D., both of Translational Molecular Pathology; Matthew Campbell, M.D., Jianjun Gao, M.D., Ph.D., and Sumit Subudhi, M.D., Ph.D., all of Genitourinary Medical Oncology; Dipen Maru, M.D., of Pathology; Jorge Blando, DVM, and James Allison, Ph.D., both of Immunology; Padmanee Sharma, M.D., Ph.D., of Genitourinary Medical Oncology and Immunology; Michael Tetzlaff, M.D., Ph.D., of Translational Molecular Pathology and Pathology; Jennifer Wargo, M.D., of Genomic Medicine and Surgical Oncology; and Robert Jenq, M.D., of Genomic Medicine and Stem Cell Transplantation. Additional authors include Kati Choi, M.D., Baylor College of Medicine, Houston; Hebert DuPont, M.D., UTHealth School of Public Health and Kelsey Research Foundation, Houston; and Zhi-Dong Jiang, Dr.Ph., UTHealth School of Public Health, Houston.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The text explains that traditional treatment of severe gastrointestinal symptoms involves steroids and drugs that may suppress the efficacy of immunotherapy and suppress an individual’s immune system, while generating their own unpleasant side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - A 15-minute brain scan could in future be used to test for autism, helping doctors diagnose the complex condition more cheaply and accurately.

British scientists said on Tuesday their rapid test had proved more than 90 percent accurate in adults and there was no reason why it should not work equally well in children.

It could be a boon for patients and their doctors by reducing reliance on time-consuming and emotionally trying assessments based on interviews and behavioral observation.

Autism is a complex brain disorder characterized by difficulties in social interaction and communication, ranging from mild to profound impairment.

The new scanning method — which picks up on structural changes in the brain’s grey matter — could be ready for general use in a couple of years. The next goal is to test it in children.

“What we are working on now is to see if we find the same results in younger people,” research leader Declan Murphy, professor of psychiatry at the Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, said in an interview.

“We would hope that it would work just as well ... there is no reason why not.”

The ability to base a diagnosis on an objective biological test, rather than having to rely on personality traits, should mean patients get treatment more quickly, he added.

Cognitive behavioral therapy and educational treatment can be highly effective for some patients and the impact of a more certain prognosis would be especially beneficial for children.

Murphy and colleagues, who published their findings in the Journal of Neuroscience, studied 20 healthy adults and another 20 individuals previously diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, which also includes Asperger syndrome.

The accuracy of the scan in predicting autism was so high that the results were strongly significant, despite the small number of patients involved.

Experts not involved in the research applauded the research but cautioned further study was still needed.

“Although this method is not ready for normal diagnostic situations, any step to easier diagnosis is welcome,” said Terry Brugha, professor of psychiatry at the University of Leicester.

Murphy said he envisaged that in future autism specialists would use a scan alongside interviews, in much the same way as doctors monitoring diabetes look at blood test results alongside patient histories.

The new system works by analyzing variations in the shape and structure of brain regions linked to language and social behavior, using standard magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines made by companies like General Electric, Siemens and Philips.

The speed of the test makes it some 20 times cheaper than traditional tests, which can take a team of doctors four to eight hours to conduct. The actual brain scan costs around 100 pounds ($157.5).

Autism spectrum disorders are diagnosed in one percent of the population in Britain and the United States, and the condition affects four times as many boys as girls. Researchers agree there is a strong genetic component.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that autism is currently diagnosed via interviews and patient observation.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Wilmington, DE, December 17, 2018 - The CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system may be able to restore the effectiveness of first-line chemotherapies used to treat lung cancer by deleting or "knocking out" a gene in cancer tumors that helps the tumors develop resistance to the drugs. That was the conclusion of a new study published today in the journal Molecular Therapy Oncolytics by scientists from The Gene Editing Institute of the Helen F. Graham Cancer Center & Research Institute at Christiana Care Health System.

The study reports that in both tissue culture and in a mouse, tumor growth stopped and there was a dramatic decrease in the volume of existing tumors when chemotherapy was combined with CRIPSP-Cas9, which was used to disable a tumor gene known as NRF2. Previous studies have shown that the NRF2 gene controls cell functions in lung cancer tumors that helps them thwart the effect of chemotherapies that might otherwise reduce or eliminate them entirely.

"Our goal is to see if CRISPR can be used with chemotherapy to provide a safe, affordable way to give patients who are not responding to treatment at least a fighting chance against this very challenging cancer," said Eric Kmiec, Ph.D., the principal author of the study and the director of the Gene Editing Institute. "We believe that finding ways to use CRISPR to improve existing treatments will lead to some of the first benefits for patients while we tackle the vital ethical issues around the use of CRISPR for edits that can be passed on through DNA. This is an exciting step in the journey of exploring the health benefits of gene editing."

The study was led by Pawel Bialk, research scientist at the Gene Editing Institute, the nation's only CRISPR-focused research initiative situated in a community health care system.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States. Dr. Kmiec said there are chemotherapies that have helped patients achieve remission or at least live longer and enjoy a better quality of life by significantly slowing the progress of the disease. But he said some patients with non-small-cell lung cancer, the most common form of lung cancer, are resistant to chemotherapy agents used to treat the disease or develop resistance after being exposed to the drugs.

Dr. Kmiec said the lung cancer work reflects an approach adopted by the Gene Editing Institute to move cautiously in developing medical applications of gene editing. Based inside the Helen F. Graham Cancer Center & Research Institute at Christiana Care, his research team gains unique insight into the lives and needs of cancer patients and the health care professionals who care for them, which helps them to maintain a strong focus on doing what's right for patients.

Dr. Kmiec noted that while his team is working to move into human trials, the CRISPR application being developed for lung cancer does not involve directly editing a patient's genome --only the genes in the tumor.

CRISPR stands for "clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats." It was originally a defense mechanism found in bacteria that allows the bacteria to recognize and slice up the DNA of invading viruses. Scientists have learned how to manipulate this mechanism so that it essentially can be programmed to find and remove a specific sequence of DNA code--which acts like software for controlling biological activity in a cell. Cas9 is a reference to an enzyme, sometimes described as a form of "molecular scissors," that is used by CRISPR to cut out a section of DNA code.

Dr. Kmiec said there are many efforts under way to modify CRISPR so that it can be used to not only remove or "knock out" a section DNA, but also to replace or "knock in" a new strand of code. But he said there continues to be significant safety concerns around this type of CRISPR application. He said for now, his team is focused on "using CRISPR in its native form, which is to just cut out a section of DNA," and to start with applications that do not directly impact the patient's DNA. He said using CRISPR to do things like improving drug response represents the "low-hanging fruit" of CRISPR patient applications.

"We think it's best to start with CRISPR therapies that involve relatively conservative uses of this powerful tool," Dr. Kmiec said. "This approach can also hopefully help contain costs and provide a level of safety and reliability that is reassuring for patients and increases the chance that insurance companies will provide coverage."

Dr. Kmiec said that as a CRISPR research program that treats patients from across the economic spectrum, his scientists are keenly aware of the challenges of making cutting edge medical treatments accessible and beneficial for all patients.

"This work is another significant step on the pathway to FDA approval," said Nicholas J. Petrelli, M.D., FACS, Bank of America endowed medical director of the Helen F. Graham Cancer Center & Research Institute. "The Gene Editing Institute is taking a careful and methodical approach to developing innovative therapies. Dr. Kmiec and his team interact with our oncologists who deal with lung cancer every day on how gene editing could have a realistic impact and improve treatment. This multidisciplinary clinical/scientific team has been working together to develop a compassionate bench-to-bedside approach. Their laboratory benches are literally down the hall from our patients and the oncologist's offices."

The Gene Editing Institute is the only research institute of its kind in the nation based within a community health care system. Led by gene editing pioneer, Eric Kmiec, Ph.D., and based in Christiana Care Health System's Helen F. Graham Cancer Center & Research Institute, the Gene Editing Institute is a worldwide leader in gene editing biomedical research in cancer and other inherited diseases, and the only one working in the same space with oncologists, genetic counselors and patients, bringing translational research from basic science to patient treatment to a new level. You can find the Gene Editing Institute on Twitter and Facebook.

The Helen F. Graham Cancer Center & Research Institute is one of the most advanced cancer centers in the country, part of one of a few hybrid academic-community health systems conducting translational cancer research, and the only center of its kind committed to high-level advancements in research through its Gene Editing Institute. The Graham Cancer Center is part of Christiana Care Health System, one of the country's largest health care providers and a regional center of excellence in cardiology, cancer and women's health services. You can find Christiana Care Health System on Twitter and Facebook.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions “many efforts under way to modify CRISPR so that it can be used to not only remove or ‘knock out’ a section DNA, but also to replace or ‘knock in’ a new strand of code.”
It’s also worth noting that there have been theories about “re-sensitizing” tumors to treatment that have not been successful, usually having to do with the sequence of drugs given after the first line.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By the time 8-year-old Ava Christianson got to the National Institutes of Health this summer, she had lost several grueling rounds to leukemia and was bracing for the next one.

Intensive chemotherapy, which cures up to 90 percent of children with the most common type of leukemia, hadn’t kept her cancer from coming back. Neither had a painful bone-marrow transplant nor an experimental treatment. Her careworn father cried in the shower to hide his anguish. Her mother couldn’t help but wonder, “Why is this happening to our child?”

But Ava was fortunate in one respect. Discoveries in the burgeoning field of immunotherapy are offering lifelines to desperate patients who previously had none. “Five years ago,” said her mother, Bethany Christianson, “our doctor would have just had to tell us to go home.”

Instead, in a five-minute procedure at the NIH Clinical Center in late July, the freckle-face girl got another chance to beat the acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) that has stalked her since age 4. She was infused with 30 million of her own T cells, a key part of the immune system, that had been genetically modified to track down and kill her cancer like a pack of crazed dogs.

Ava’s treatment, called CAR T-cell therapy, is one of the new immunotherapies that attempt to rally the body’s own defenses to fight malignancies. Unlike other cancer advances, it is being tested widely in children because of its stunning effectiveness in ALL, the most common pediatric cancer. In early-stage trials, many patients who had repeatedly relapsed saw their leukemia disappear. Some remain cancer-free.

Yet big questions surround the therapy, and many scientists are urging caution. “There’s very real promise with this approach, but the immune system is complicated,” said Terry Fry, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) scientist who is running Ava’s trial. “There’s a lot that still needs to be worked out.”

[Here’s what you need to know about immunotherapy]

Complications can be lethal; one clinical trial was briefly halted in July after three young adults died of brain swelling. It is also far from clear that such a personalized approach — possibly costing hundreds of thousands of dollars — is economically viable on a large scale or will produce the lasting remissions that everyone hopes to see.

U.S. researchers running CAR T-cell trials for children and adults with leukemia and lymphoma have reported remission rates up to 90 percent in some cases. That’s a major achievement in a group whose cancer is emboldened by every treatment failure. But rates in other trials are considerably lower, and many patients eventually relapse.

“The treatment is great about getting people into remission but not at keeping everyone in remission,” said Rebecca Gardner, a pediatric oncologist at Seattle Children’s hospital. She ran an early-stage trial using CAR T-cell therapy in which 39 of 42 patients went into complete remission. By a year, about half had relapsed, either because their T cells had inexplicably disappeared or their cancer had changed so that the T cells could no longer recognize it. “Leukemia is really smart,” she said.

Ava’s family understands that better than most. She underwent her first CAR T-cell procedure in Minnesota last year, but her leukemia returned within six months. Her treatment at NIH involved a next-generation version, developed by NCI, that used a different target for her marauding T cells. In this first-in-humans trial, she is Patient No. 18.

In late August, the Christiansons learned that Ava had gone into remission. She and her mother, who were still at the Clinical Center in Bethesda, Md., gleefully rushed home to Wisconsin so Ava could start third grade.

Her parents, so frequently disappointed, remain guardedly optimistic. “Hope is all you have,” said her father, Jay Christianson.

Her mother added, “We just need this to work and to stay working.”

NCI’s Fry is careful not to make any promises about an extended remission. “I can’t say that’s going to be the case,” he said, “because we just don’t know. It’s too soon.”

Scientists have wanted for decades to marshal the immune system to vanquish cancer, but their attempts have mostly been frustrated. In the past few years, however, breakthroughs have led to the development of two types of immunotherapy — checkpoint inhibitors and CAR T cells — that are generating enormous excitement.

Checkpoint inhibitors are off-the-shelf therapies aimed at unleashing the immune system’s power to see and attack the disease. Used mostly in adults, to date, they are producing impressive results, albeit in a minority of cases. The most prominent: Jimmy Carter. The former president became the poster patient when he was successfully treated last year with a checkpoint inhibitor called Keytruda, along with surgery and radiation, for his advanced melanoma.

Much of the earliest research for customized CAR T-cell therapy was conducted at NCI, the University of Pennsylvania, the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Seattle Children’s.

“The technology of CAR T cells is really a breakthrough, especially for children,” said Michael Jensen, director of the Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer Research at Seattle Children’s Research Institute.

Almost all the initial work focused on CD19, a protein found on the surface of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Scientists figured out ways to use a chimeric antigen receptor, or CAR, to reprogram T cells to recognize the protein and kill the cancer.

[Immunotherapy is showing benefits in an increasing number of cancers]

Zane Esposito, a 13-year-old from Plano, Tex., calls himself the “T-Cell Explorer.” He was diagnosed with ALL in June 2010. “I just thought my back hurt,” he said. “I couldn’t walk up the steps very well.” Almost three years of treatment, including punishing chemotherapy, provided a couple of years of remission. His leukemia returned in January, and this time it did not respond to treatment.

Soon after Zane relapsed, he and his father bumped into friends in a local doughnut shop who told them about a TV segment on CAR T-cell therapy. Paul Esposito searched online and found Gardner’s clinical trial in Seattle. Zane signed on, got the treatment, went back into full remission and gained 25 pounds.

His Texas doctors have talked about a bone-marrow transplant to increase the chance of a true cure, but the Espositos have resisted. The Seattle doctors say it is not clear yet whether that is necessary or whether there would be still other options should Zane’s cancer recur.

Zane is moving on, with dreams of competing on “Chopped Junior” to show off his homemade pasta and pizza. On July 27, the day that Ava got her T cells, he celebrated his 13th birthday.

Ava was 4 when she started having leg pains, then trouble standing up. Her mother suspected Lyme disease. “You never think of cancer with a child,” she said, eyes filling as she recalled her daughter’s cancer diagnosis in November 2012. The doctors assured the family that it was typical leukemia — and curable.

Like most children, Ava quickly went into remission after starting the prescribed 30 months of chemotherapy. But at home in Prescott, a small Wisconsin city at the confluence of the Mississippi and St. Croix rivers, things did not get easier for the Christiansons. In early 2013, Ava was hospitalized in Minneapolis for a lung infection. About the same time, the couple’s second daughter, Audrey, was born 13 weeks premature and hospitalized in a neonatal intensive care unit in St. Paul. Bethany, who manages occupational therapists for a nursing-home chain, and Jay, a rural mail carrier, shuttled between the Twin Cities visiting their daughters.

“I would be with Ava during the day, and then when Jay got home, he would stay with Ava, and I would spend time with Audrey,” she said. “No matter what you do, you feel like a bad mom.”

A year or so after treatment began, Ava relapsed. Now she was in a much more dangerous category: children whose leukemia no longer responds to chemo. Her doctors arranged for a bone-marrow transplant, with her baby sister as the donor.

The transplant made her sick and the whole family miserable. Ava spent months in the hospital and then a year at home. Because of fears of infection, she couldn’t go out much. She missed all of first grade. But her parents had hope that the transplant would keep her cancer at bay.

[Brain cancer now the leading cause of cancer deaths in children]

At a six-month checkup, tests showed that the leukemia was back again. There were no more conventional treatments to try. But because of her two relapses, Ava was now eligible for a CAR T-cell trial at the University of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospital. Her T cells would be genetically altered to go after CD19.The number of cells then would be vastly increased and reinfused.

It sounded like science fiction, but Bethany Christianson found comfort in talking to the father of Emily Whitehead. In 2012, the 6-year-old Pennsylvania girl became the first child to be treated with reprogrammed T cells for leukemia. She has been in remission ever since.

Ava got her treatment in April 2015 — after her cells were extracted via a tube inserted into her neck — and five days later had a massive immune reaction with a high fever and intense pain. While that is typical, some patients become dangerously ill. Yet Ava recovered fast, went into remission and attended summer school, where she learned how to make pigs-in-a-blanket and wrote her own cookbook.

By then, her parents had gotten used to living in the midst of remissions and relapses. “When she felt better, we would do everything we could,” Bethany said. They visited Robot World, a scientifically themed attraction a few hours from Prescott. “You don’t put things off, because you are always thinking, ‘What if?’ ”

Last fall, doctors delivered the bad news. Ava’s cancer had changed. It was no longer producing the CD19 protein, which meant her modified T cells could no longer recognize the disease. But the leukemia was still producing another common protein, called CD22, and that offered an opportunity.

As it happened, Fry, head of the blood-cancer section in NCI’s pediatric oncology branch, had already launched the world’s first trial using CAR T-cell therapy to focus on CD22. It seemed an equally promising target that could broaden the therapy’s impact, researchers thought. At the time, they did not realize that a significant percentage of patients in the other trials might relapse because of changes in their cancer.

Fry insisted as he designed the study that children be included, despite ever-present concerns about exposing them to safety risks. He wanted to avoid a delay in testing what could be a lifesaving pediatric treatment. “I didn’t want to take two to three years on adults, and then go back and do children,” he said.

[For a 6-year-old with cancer, a future staked on medicine’s hottest field]

The clinical trial already has treated nearly two dozen leukemia and lymphoma patients through age 30. The majority have gone into remission, although some have had their cancer return. While it is far too early to know long-term outcomes, Fry said he is convinced the CD22 treatment holds much potential. He is planning another trial next year with the Stanford University School of Medicine. It will target both proteins — CD19 and CD22 — simultaneously.

Once Ava relapsed after the Minnesota trial, Fry’s study at the NIH Clinical Center appeared to be the only option. But there was no slot immediately available. With Ava deteriorating, doctors put her on an experimental treatment that sent her into remission but had serious side effects.

They immediately stopped the medication when they learned Ava might get her T-cell therapy in January — she actually needed a high level of leukemia in her body to participate. But on this wrenching roller coaster of research and treatment, it turned out that she still had to wait several more months.

Ava’s cancer returned in June. Her T cells were extracted in preparation for the trial, even as she got sicker and sicker.

She was admitted to the Clinical Center in mid-July, to a room with dancing penguins painted on the windows. The day before her therapy, an ebullient Audrey burst into the room and the two sisters ran down the hall to a play space.

Her mother was ready this time for the intense immune reaction that followed treatment, although she still found it hard to watch Ava spike a fever of 106. “When you see that temperature on the thermometer, every bone in your body says it’s wrong to let it get that high,” Bethany said. “Then suddenly it’s over.”

If his daughter’s cancer returns yet again, “I have no idea what we’ll do,” Jay said. “We’re kind of up against the edge.”

Fry thinks she might be able to undergo a second round of her latest immunotherapy, as long as her cancer is still producing CD22 proteins. Doctors in Minnesota also might recommend a second bone-marrow transplant — something her parents dread, saying it was the roughest treatment of all.

For now, Ava is happily back in school. “I just want her to be a kid,” Bethany Christianson said. “She has missed out on a lot of that.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story makes a point of noting that, at present, CAR T-cell therapy is used only when all other courses of action — chemotherapy, bone marrow transplants, etc. — have failed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This Test Can Determine Whether You've Outgrown A Food Allergy

An estimated 4 percent of Americans have food allergies, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has concluded that allergies are a growing public health concern. But diagnosing allergies can be tricky, and kids can outgrow them, too.

Now, a new study sheds light on the effectiveness of a test called a food challenge to determine whether a person can tolerate a food they once reacted to.

Jula Cieciuch, a fifth-grader who lives in Telluride, Colo., recently took a food challenge to find out if she was still allergic to eggs.

When she passed, she was ecstatic. After years of avoiding all foods with eggs, she was a bit shocked. "For so long, it was: You can't eat this. You can't eat this," Jula says. " I was very emotional!"

She's also outgrown allergies to walnuts and almonds. "It's a huge relief ... it has really opened up her diet — a lot," her mom, Kendall Cieciuch, told us. Once you can eat eggs, you can eat cakes and breads and frittatas, and lots of other baked goods.

Jula is still allergic to some foods, including milk and cashews, so she still needs to be careful. But Kendall says every time she's crossed a food off her allergy list, "it makes life a little easier."

Jula Cieciuch's story is not uncommon. About 70 to 80 percent of children with an egg allergy will outgrow it. And about 20 percent of kids outgrow peanut allergies.

In Jula's case, her allergists at National Jewish Health in Denver, Colo., repeated the standard allergy blood tests last summer. That's when they realized she may have outgrown her egg allergy. 

 

The blood test measures the levels of a certain type of antibody, immunoglobulin E (IgE). The higher the level, the more likely a person is to have an allergic reaction. Jula's blood revealed a drop in antibody count.

 

But the only way to confirm that it was safe for Jula to eat egg was to take the food challenge test. Basically, the test entails eating small quantities of the foods you've been allergic to. The testing is done under medical supervision.

"What they do is give you a really small dose, like a crumb, basically," explains Jula. Then after 20 minutes or so, if you don't have any reaction, "you can take a dose that's a little bigger." If you can eat an entire egg, you pass.

A new study published in the Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology illuminates just how many people come to find out they can eat foods they've long avoided. 

 

 Researchers studied the results of about 6,300 food challenges. The tests were done in adults and children whom doctors suspected had become tolerant to foods they'd once reacted to.

 

"We found that 14 percent of the patients challenged had mild or moderate allergic reactions," explains study author Carla Davis, an allergist and director of the Food Allergy Program at Texas Children's Hospital. "If the symptoms were treated with just Benadryl or another antihistamine, they were considered mild or moderate. She says 2 percent of the reactions were more serious, requiring treatment with epinephrine.

But the vast majority of patients, 86 percent, did not have an allergic reaction. In other words, they tolerated the food just fine. She says the results aren't that surprising, since allergists had classified these patients as low-risk for reacting to the foods they were being tested for.

 

"I think [the results] are very encouraging," Bruce Lanser, a pediatric allergist who directs the Pediatric Food Allergy Program at National Jewish Health in Denver, told us. He was not involved in the study, but he says the findings mirror what he sees in his clinical practice. "We know a certain percentage will outgrow [their] allergies," Lanser says. "And the last thing I want to miss is the opportunity to get a food into a kid's diet."

He says many of the patients in the study may have outgrown their allergy, just like Jula did. "But it's also possible [some of them] never truly had a food allergy." As we've reported, people sometimes misinterpret the symptoms of a condition such as lactose intolerance for a food allergy.

Lanser says it can be tricky to diagnose food allergies. That's because the two main tests doctors use — the blood test and the skin prick test — only reveal part of the story. "Both tests only measure sensitization," he explains. "All they can tell us is how likely you are to react when you eat the food."

 

And that's where the oral food challenge comes in. It's become the gold standard test to rule out an allergy.

 

So, if you or your child tested positive for a food allergy years ago, you may want to consider seeing an allergist again.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: In one sense, the only alternative to having an oral food challenge is not having an oral food challenge, and possibly not discovering that a child has grown out of an allergy. That issue is covered in this story. Another important point is that skin prick tests have been found to produce misleading results in a large proportion of patients. There is a growing conviction among researchers and practitioners that the only way to confirm beyond doubt that an individual has a food allergy is to conduct a food challenge. That alternative was mentioned in the story, but more emphasis would have presented a fuller picture of the significance of the study findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, July 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Teens who have high levels of folic acid appear to do better in school than those with lower levels, Swedish researchers report.

"Folate intake had a positive association with academic achievement" in the students studied, the authors wrote in the report published in the July 11 online edition and the August print issue of Pediatrics.

Not only should health providers monitor folic acid levels in teens, but the findings should influence school meals, school teaching and information given to parents, according to the researchers.

Teens often have high levels of the blood protein homocysteine, an amino acid linked to heart disease, and low levels of folic acid. In previous studies, folic acid levels have been linked to mental ability; however, until now this had not been linked with improved school performance, the study authors said.

"We know that folate plays a really critical role in brain development and brain function," said Dr. Daniel Armstrong, associate chair of pediatrics at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

"We know that, in young children, folate deficiencies are associated with poorer neurocognitive function and neurocognitive development," he noted. In fact, folate deficiencies may be involved in the development of autism, he added.

Armstrong thinks that a diet rich in folate might be important for brain functioning throughout life. "It's one of those things that's no harm, no foul. It's not going to do us any harm and it might do us some good," he said.

To find out whether folate might do some good, a team led by Dr. Torbjorn K. Nilsson, from the department of laboratory medicine at Orebro University Hospital in Sweden, collected data on folic acid levels in 386 teens aged 15 years. The researchers also looked at any possible effects of socioeconomic status and genetics.

The investigators found that teens who had the highest levels of folic acid also got the best grades. None of the other factors they examined accounted for their finding, Nilsson's team noted.

"These results provide new information that points to the importance of keeping a closer watch on folate status in childhood and adolescence. They may also have direct implications for school meal provisions, school teaching programs and information to parents," the authors concluded.

However, there is no scientific evidence that taking folate supplements will be beneficial, Armstrong noted. "It's too early to say that everyone should start taking folate," he stressed.

Folic acid is one of the B vitamins and is a key component in making DNA and RNA. Insufficient folic acid is a cause of certain birth defects of the spine and brain, including spina bifida.

Among the elderly, folic acid consumption appears to affect mental ability, and low levels of this vitamin have been associated with dementia and Alzheimer's disease, according to several studies.

Folic acid is found in leafy green vegetables, fruits, dried beans, peas and nuts. In addition, people can obtain folic acid from breads, cereals and other grain products enriched with folic acid, as well as folic acid supplements.

For more information on folic acid, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This story did a very nice job of indicating food sources of folic acid as well as those foods that are good sources of folic acid by virtue of food supply supplementation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Specialists at The Christie and The University of Manchester have made a breakthrough which could potentially improve detection and treatment of anal cancer, as well as have wider implications for other cancers.

Anal cancer is a rare form of cancer, but cases have increased dramatically in recent years. Research is urgently needed to improve detection and treatment and to save lives. The findings of this project will play a crucial role in these efforts going forward.

Funded by the Bowel Disease Research Foundation (BDRF) charity, the work has been published in the Lancet Oncology journal.

The study worked with data on more than 10,000 patients, examining whether current methods of checking if anal cancer has spread to lymph nodes are giving experts an accurate picture of survival rates. The research team was led from Manchester, working hand in hand with centres in Leeds and Switzerland.

Anal cancer that has spread to lymph nodes is linked to a worse prognosis and lower chance of survival.

The project's findings however have uncovered a phenomenon suggesting rates of lymph node spread are being overestimated, potentially leading to overtreatment of patients with chemo radiotherapy.

This can result in damaging side-effects, and doctors are particularly keen to avoid it in cases where it offers little benefit to the patient at potentially great cost.

The results will be crucial to future large scale trials looking at optimum care for anal cancer patients. By identifying a unique phenomenon, these results will be taken into account by future work and ultimately could lead to better diagnosis of tumour stage and thus better treatment.

Christie consultant and University of Manchester Professor of Cancer Studies and Surgery, Andrew Renehan, leads the Manchester Cancer Research Centre (MCRC) Anorectal Organ Preservation Research Group. He said: "These high-profile results will play a vital part in improving patient care. Our research team has done a wonderful job highlighting an important and as yet unrecognised issue in the staging of cases of anal cancer.

"These findings will help us to better understand how anal cancer patients should be treated, ultimately improving survival rates and quality of life. It is crucial that we tackle what is becoming an increasingly common form of cancer through research studies like this. These findings could provide learnings for other cancers too."

Christie patient Jill De Nardo, who is 58 from Buxton, was diagnosed with anal cancer in 2010. She said: "My first thought on diagnosis was that I wanted to survive, I gave little thought to long term or late effects of treatment. Fortunately my treatment has been successful and seven years on my own late effects are manageable but will only get worse. Many are not so fortunate and live daily with the discomfort and impact of side effects such as joint pain and continence issues."

Jill adds: "Anal cancer is on the increase and those of us who have been through what at times was gruelling radiotherapy regimen, welcome this study and the impact it will have on the treatment plans of patients in the future."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The only alternative the meta-analysis looked at was the difference between LNP and LNN (negative) anal cancer. It showed an association between LNP and lower survival.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Medicine That Blunts The Buzz Of Alcohol Can Help Drinkers Cut Back

If you drink more alcohol than you want to or should, you're not alone. A nationwide survey by the National Institutes of Health found that 28 percent of adults in the U.S. are heavy drinkers or drink more than is recommended.

Yet, most heavy drinkers don't get the help they need.

"The biggest problem we have in the field is that less than 10 percent of individuals with an alcohol use disorder get any treatment whatsoever," says George Koob, director of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.

Part of the challenge, researchers say, is that many drinkers don't realize that a medicine long used to help people addicted to opioids quit their drug habit can help alcoholics and other heavy drinkers cut back, too.

"I thought my only option was AA," John tells NPR. We've agreed to use only his middle name; disclosing his trouble with alcohol publicly, he says, would jeopardize his business.

He's a 47-year-old professional who says he started out as a social drinker — a few beers with his softball team after a game. But he sank into a deep depression after several deaths in his family, and sought "solace in the bottle," he says.

"I wanted to numb my thoughts," says John.

He'd often start with hard liquor in the morning, John says, and it wasn't uncommon to have eight drinks or more before the end of the day.

He worked from home, so he was able to mask the problem for a while. But eventually his wife confronted him.

"She had come home and I was rushing to hide a glass and she was furious with me," he recalls. "Just absolutely furious."

He went to see Paula DeSanto, a therapist and director of Minnesota Alternatives, in Spring Lake Park, Minn. The center provides outpatient mental health and substance use treatment services.

"I would say John's story is not unique," DeSanto tells us. "A lot of people are reluctant."

Sometimes, traditional treatments — such as residential rehab or a 12-step program like Alcoholics Anonymous — "can [lead to] a significant disruption in their lives," she explains. "There's stigma, shame and embarrassment."

DeSanto suggested a different approach to John. To help work through the loss and grief he was feeling, counseling can help, she told him. She also recommended he try naltrexone, a prescription drug.

"Naltrexone is an effective medication for the treatment of alcohol use disorders," says Koob. He points to a recent meta-analysis published in the journal Addiction that concluded that naltrexone helped reduce heavy drinking and cravings for alcohol.

The analysis included data from 64 clinical trials in which people were given either the medication or a placebo pill to test the effectiveness of the treatment. The analysis also found that another drug, acamprosate, is effective at helping people who have already stopped drinking to maintain abstinence, perhaps partly by easing the physical and emotional cravings experienced by heavy drinkers who quit.

So, how does naltrexone work? The drug seems to curb the euphoric and sedative effects of opiates in the brain. Alcohol is known to activate some of the same receptors in the brain that opioids do, and studies find that by tempering the pleasure from alcohol, naltrexone can help people drink less.

"It blunts the effects of alcohol," says Koob. "People [who use naltrexone] will say they have a drink, and it's not doing much for them."

That was exactly John's experience. After taking the naltrexone pill, he didn't get the buzz he was used to getting, so didn't want to keep drinking. "I actually didn't feel the alcohol's effects," he says. "It was startling."

It's now been about five months since he started taking the medication. He has not stopped drinking completely, but says he has cut way back.

"This is helping me," John says. "I can go out with friends and not worry that I'm going to end up inebriated or sloppy."

According to the findings of a recent review, both naltrexone and acamprosate, are safe, cost-effective and efficacious. But they are substantially underused, according to the review.

Many physicians are "unaware that there are medications to treat alcohol use disorders," says Koob. His institute is stepping up efforts to work with the medical community on that front, he says, and is also touting Rethinking Drinking, a website aimed at consumers that offers the latest research-based information on a range of treatment options.

Any health care provider who is licensed to prescribe medicine can prescribe naltrexone — not just mental health professionals or addiction specialists. As as long ago as 1997, a published study showed that treatment of alcohol dependence with naltrexone by primary care doctors can be effective; follow-up research has confirmed that the primary care approach not only works, but makes treatment much more accessible.

According to the NIAAA, "patients can now receive effective alcohol treatment from their primary care doctors or mental health practitioners by combining the newer medications with a series of brief office visits for support."

Naltrexone is certainly not a cure-all, researchers say. And it won't help everyone who has a drinking problem — especially if the disorder is severe.

"I use these medications as an adjunct to therapy, and group [sessions] and 12-step meetings" says Dr. Jeffrey Hsu, a psychiatrist at Johns Hopkins University who is certified in addiction medicine. He says that when used alone the medicines are only modestly effective.

But there's good evidence that the combination of counseling and drugs such as naltrexone can help people cut back on drinking, or move toward abstinence.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This was a tricky one–the story briefly discusses a variety of other methods that can help treat alcohol dependence, but it doesn’t compare them head-to-head. That said, we do get a sense of the options available.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - The experimental orphan drug teprotumumab significantly reduces the eye bulging associated with Graves’ disease, according to results of a small trial.

Among the 88 participants with moderate-to-severe disease who were given intravenous infusions of either teprotumumab or a dummy drug every three weeks for eight treatments, 43 percent who got the real drug had a reduction of at least 2 millimeters in eye protrusion by the sixth week compared to 4 percent in the placebo group.

“In virtually all the responders, the changes are frequently what anyone would call dramatic,” said lead study author Dr. Terry Smith of the University of Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor.

The eyes don’t have that bulging appearance, he said, and many of them return to the degree of bulging they had before they got the disease.

“That’s something that we almost never see in someone who’s manifested the degree of disease one needed to have in order to get into the study,” Smith said.

The marked reduction in bulging is similar to that reported after decompression surgery, Smith and his colleagues write in the New England Journal of medicine.

Graves’ disease is the most common cause of overactive thyroid in the United States, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). It is an autoimmune disorder, in which the immune system attacks the thyroid gland.

Certain immune-system signaling molecules also target other tissues in the body, including in the eyes, which causes their bulging appearance, sometimes known as Graves’ eyes. About 30 percent of people with Graves’ disease develop mildly bulging eyes, and 2 to 5 percent develop severe bulge. This eye condition usually lasts one to two years and often improves on its own, according to NIDDK.

Teprotumumab blocks one of these immune signaling molecules, so researchers wanted to see what effect it might have on the eyes of Graves’ patients with moderate to severe bulge.

The study “included some of the worst cases imaginable and we’re now wondering whether the drug might find expanded utility in much-less-severe disease,” Smith told Reuters Health in a telephone interview.

By week 24, the response rate was 69 percent with the drug and 20 percent with placebo. Among those who completed therapy, the rates were 79 percent and 22 percent, respectively.

More people who received the drug had sizeable reductions in disease activity and reductions of 3 mm or more in eye bulge compared to the placebo group, the researchers note.

However, while only 10 percent of patients who received the drug had double vision before the study, that rose to 50 percent by 24 weeks.

High blood sugar was also a key side effect in participants who already had diabetes, the study team notes, but adjusting diabetes medications solved that problem.

The typical treatment for Graves’ eyes is glucocorticoids, which are not always effective and also have side effects, the study team notes.

The drug, also known as RV001 or R1507, has been developed by Genmab and Roche. River Vision Development Corporation licensed the drug from Roche. On Monday, Horizon Pharma announced that it was acquiring River Vision, which paid for the new study.

Smith said FDA approval could come sometime in 2018. Enrollment in a follow-up trial is expected to begin within six weeks.

The duration of response to the autoimmune inflammatory disease, along with the quick response to initial therapy, suggests fewer infusions may be just as effective, “but future studies will sort that out,” Smith said.

The researchers also cautioned that the study only included volunteers with active disease of recent onset so “the potential of teprotumumab in benefiting patients with milder, less active, or stable disease was not assessed.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/2qSTjSn New England Journal of Medicine, online May 3, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says, “The typical treatment for Graves’ eyes is glucocorticoids, which are not always effective and also have side effects, the study team notes.”  It also says the new treatment is comparable to the effect seen with decompression surgery, another option.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The blood test that millions of men undergo each year to check for prostate cancer leads to so much unnecessary anxiety, surgery and complications that doctors should stop testing elderly men, and it remains unclear whether the screening is worthwhile for younger men, a federal task force concluded yesterday.

In the first update of its recommendations for prostate cancer screening in five years, the panel that sets government policy on preventive medicine said that the evidence that the test reduces the cancer's death toll is too uncertain to endorse routine use for men at any age, and that the potential harm clearly outweighs any benefits for men age 75 and older.

"The benefit of screening at this time is uncertain, and if there is a benefit, it's likely to be small," said Ned Calonge, who chairs the 16-member U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. It published the new guidelines today in the Annals of Internal Medicine. "And on the other side, the risks are large and dramatic."

The task force and other groups concluded previously that it was unclear whether the benefits of the prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, test outweigh the risks. The new review of the scientific literature found no evidence to alter that assessment for younger men. It did find enough new data to recommend for the first time against screening for older men.

"We felt with sufficient certainty that your risk of being harmed exceeded your potential benefits starting at age 75," Calonge said.

The recommendations come at a time when doctors are increasingly questioning whether many tests, drugs and procedures are being overused, unnecessarily driving up health-care costs and exposing patients to the risks of unneeded treatment.

"There is this idea that more is always better, and if a test is available we should use it," said Howard A. Brody, a professor of family medicine at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. "A lot of times, we're doing more harm than good."

The guidelines address perhaps the most important and contentious issue in men's health, and were praised by officials at several leading medical groups, including the National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society. But they drew strong criticism from others who are convinced that routine screening is necessary.

"I think they're really missing the boat," said William J. Catalona, a professor of urology at Northwestern University. "It's a disservice to patients. A lot of men die from prostate cancer, and there's just an overwhelming amount of evidence that screening saves lives."

Each year, prostate cancer is diagnosed in more than 218,000 U.S. men. About 28,000 die of it, making it the most common cancer and second-leading cancer killer among men.

The PSA test, which measures a protein in the blood produced by prostate tissue, has significantly increased the number of prostate cancer cases being diagnosed at very early stages. But it remains unclear whether that translates into a reduction in the death rate from the disease. Prostate cancer often grows so slowly that many men die from something else without ever knowing they had it.

Because it is not clear precisely what PSA level signals the presence of cancer, many men experience stressful false alarms that lead to unnecessary surgical biopsies to make a definitive diagnosis, which can be painful and in rare cases can cause serious complications.

Even when the test picks up a real cancer, doctors are uncertain what, if anything, men should do about it. Many men simply are monitored closely to see if the tumor shows signs of growing or spreading. Others undergo surgery, radiation and hormone treatments, which often leave them incontinent, impotent and experiencing other complications.

"People say, 'What's the harm in screening?' In fact, there are several ways in which screening can actually be harmful," said Howard L. Parnes of the National Cancer Institute.

Since the task force issued its previous recommendations in 2002, at least eight new studies have been published. Among them was a large Swedish review that found that men age 65 and older who were treated for prostate cancer were no more likely to survive than those who were not.

"If therapy isn't providing meaningful benefit, then how could screening provide benefit?" Calonge said. "And we know that the therapy produces significant harms."

Men younger than 75 should be carefully counseled about the potential risks associated with the test and the lack of evidence about any benefit before getting it, the panel said.

Men at high risk for prostate cancer, such as African Americans and those with a family history of the disease, are the most likely to benefit from PSA screening. But the panel concluded that the evidence remains inconclusive for those men as well.

Several other experts said that the new recommendations strike a careful balance, and that they hope they might discourage large-scale screenings where the risks and benefits are not carefully laid out.

"I think they are right on target," Parnes said.

Others were highly critical, noting that prostate cancer death rates have plummeted in many countries after they instituted widespread PSA screening.

"We have seen a dramatic drop in mortality," said J. Brantley Thrasher, chairman of the urology department at the University of Kansas and a spokesman for the American Urological Association. "They're not paying attention to that."

Others objected to setting an age cutoff, saying men should be evaluated individually.

"Men are living a lot longer and healthier these days. I play golf with 84-year-old guys who beat me all the time," said E. David Crawford, a professor of surgery and radiation at the University of Colorado at Denver. "You have to individualize treatment. If a 75-year-old man is found to have high-grade prostate cancer, it's going to kill him, and we can intervene and do something for him."

Two large studies are underway -- one in the United States and one in Europe -- to answer the question of whether screening reduces mortality.

"If it turns out that PSA screening and aggressive treatment saves lives, maybe all the harm that it has caused is worth it," said Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer at the American Cancer Society. "If PSA screening does not save lives, then it's clearly not worth it. We just don't know yet."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story was about the new recommendation regarding routine screening of men older than 75 years of age with PSA test;  the story presented arguments for and against the use of the test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Botox injections may provide some relief from arm tremors caused by multiple sclerosis, according to a small study published Monday. Botulinum toxin type A is sold under different brands, but it’s best known by the Allergan brand-name Botox.

Botox gained fame for smoothing aging skin — by blocking nerve signals and relaxing muscles under the skin — but the product has a number of medical uses. In the U.S., Botox is approved to treat conditions like chronic migraine, excessive sweating and certain symptoms of MS: overactive bladder and muscles spasms in the arms.

The new study, published in the journal Neurology, tested the effects of Botox injections on MS-related arm tremors, which affect up to two-thirds of people with MS. Researchers found that when they gave injections to 23 patients, the treatment typically eased their tremors and improved their writing ability.

Right now, there’s no good way to treat MS arm tremors, said Nicholas G. LaRocca, vice-president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society. Physical therapy and exercise have been studied, but are usually not very effective, said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study. Surgery is sometimes used in severe cases, but it’s risky and may not even have lasting benefits.

“Exploring new treatments is important, and it’s heartening to see there’s some promise here,” LaRocca said of the current findings. But there’s still a lot to be learned, he cautioned in an interview.

“This study is fairly preliminary, and it had a small number of patients,” LaRocca said. Larger studies, of more-diverse groups of MS patients, are needed, he said.

The study’s lead researcher agreed on the need for more work. “There are several questions that need to be answered by doing larger and longer-term studies,” Dr. Anneke van der Walt, a neurologist at Royal Melbourne Hospital in Australia, said in an email.

One is how long the benefits of repeat Botox injections might last: this study tested the effects of just one Botox treatment over three months.

In real life, the injections would have to be repeated every few months, or possibly every six months for some people, according to van der Walt. Another question is whether the side effects change over time. Muscle weakness was the most common side effect in this study, van der Walt said. It affected 42 percent of the study patients, though it went away within two weeks.

Muscle weakness is a potential concern in MS patients, LaRocca noted, since that problem often comes with the disease itself.

The study included 23 MS patients with mild to moderate arm tremors. Each patient received a round of Botox injections and a round of placebo injections (containing saline), three months apart. Half of the patients got the Botox first, the other half the placebo.

On average, the patients’ tremor “scores” had gone from a 5 to a 3 six weeks after Botox treatment — which essentially means moving from “moderate” to “mild,” LaRocca said. Their ability to write and draw a straight line had also improved by week six, and the benefits were still there at week 12.

In contrast, there were no improvements after the placebo injections.

Larger studies, van der Walt said, should look at whether Botox is more effective for some tremors than others. Tremors limited to the hand and forearm, for instance, might respond better than tremors that also affect the shoulder. If Botox is eventually approved for this MS symptom, LaRocca said it will be important for doctors to get training in how to give the injections — since the drug has to go into carefully chosen locations in the muscle.

“So practitioners will have to be up to speed,” LaRocca said. There will also be the matter of cost. That will vary from patient to patient, depending on how many injections are needed per treatment.

According to van der Walt, the cost could range from $500 to $1,000 Australian dollars, which are roughly equal to U.S. dollars. In the U.S., Botox treatments can cost $455-$575 per injection site.

Botox maker Allergan supplied the product for the study, and two of the researchers on the work have financial ties to the company. The study itself was funded by the Box Hill MS Research Fund and the Royal Melbourne Hospital.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: A VP at the National MS Society said “Right now there’s no good way to treat MS arm tremors.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A commonly-prescribed multiple sclerosis (MS) infusion medication linked to a rare but serious side effect is safer to use when dosing intervals are extended, according to a new study led by MS specialists NYU Langone Health.

The new research showed that extending dosing of natalizumab from every 4 weeks to every 5 to 12 weeks significantly reduced the risk of developing progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a rare but potentially fatal brain infection. The authors presented their findings February 2 at the Americas Committee for Treatment and Research in Multiple Sclerosis (ACTRIMS) Forum 2018 in San Diego.

The findings could influence how neurologists prescribe the medication. "Neurologists have been looking for safer ways to administer natalizumab infusions to their patients, but there hasn't been clear data on whether decreasing dosing frequency improves safety," says first study author Lana Zhovtis Ryerson, MD, assistant professor of neurology at NYU School of Medicine and an attending neurologist at NYU Langone's Multiple Sclerosis Comprehensive Care Center. "Our safety findings are clinically and statistically significant, and we believe that extending the dosing schedule of natalizumab is practice changing and may save lives."

Natalizumab, a monoclonal antibody, is used to prevent MS relapses, improve quality of life, and slow worsening disability. The medication is indicated to be prescribed in 300-milligram infusion doses every 4 weeks.

Taking the medication longer than two years, however, may increase risk PML, which is caused by the John Cunningham virus (JCV). There have been 756 PML cases reported worldwide as of January 2018, with a global incidence rate of 4.19 per 1,000 PML cases in people treated with natalizumab. Patients who test JCV antibody-positive are typically either told to not to start natalizumab, or have had treatment stopped after two years, when risk was deemed to be too high.

The new study, however, reports safety data through up to 72 months, or 6 years, when the extended dosing regimens were applied, with risk reduction for PML as high as 94 percent.

Researchers reviewed data on all patients who have been exposed to JCV who are enrolled in TOUCH, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration-mandated Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) program for natalizumab that requires manufacturers to document all uses of a medication to ensure that the benefits of a drug outweigh its risks. Since the optimal extended dose schedule is not known, researchers chose to look at the data in multiple ways, with the primary definition looking at extended dose history in the last 18 months, the secondary definition looking at extended dose occurring at any time in the dosing history, and for tertiary definition looking primarily at how extended dose history affects PML risk. The results showed clinically and statistically significant risk reductions with all definitions.

The new study did not look at drug efficacy comparing extended to standard doses. However, previous research led by Dr. Zhovtis-Ryerson's group found extending the dose up to 8 weeks did not negatively affect the medication's efficacy in a retrospective sample of 2,000 people. The authors are planning prospective efficacy studies of extended dose natalizumab.

Natalizumab is manufactured by Biogen Idec and Elan, and sold under the name Tysabri®. Biogen provided the researchers access to their data and statistical support.

Other infusion disease-modifying therapies approved to treat MS include the drugs alemtuzumab and ocrelizumab. Oral and injectable medications are also prescribed.

The study was carried out in collaboration with Biogen and academic collaborators from NYU School of Medicine's Division of Biostatics, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, and Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Clinic in Utah.

In addition to Dr. Zhovtis-Ryerson, Ilya Kister, MD, associate professor of neurology, Judith D. Goldberg, professor of population health and environmental medicine, and Xiaochun Li, PhD, research scientist of biostatistics, were co-authors at NYU Langone Health. Other co-authors include Dr. John Foley, Dr. Ih Chang, Professor Gary R. Cutter, Dr. Ryan Metzger, Dr. Evan Riddle, Dr. Bei Yu, Dr. Zheng Ren, Dr. Christophe Hotermans, Dr. Pei-Ran Ho, and Dr. Nolan Campbell.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There is no cure for multiple sclerosis. Most treatment options focus on managing symptoms or slowing progression of the disease. There are several other forms of treatment for MS other than natalizumab. Two of these alternatives (alemtuzumab and ocrelizumab) are mentioned at the very end of the news release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers at Johns Hopkins Medicine have identified in live human brains new radioactive "tracer" molecules that bind to and "light up" tau tangles, a protein associated with a number of neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease and other related dementias. Two studies will be published back-to-back in the December issue of Journal of Nuclear Medicine--one as featured article of the month--describing testing of three candidate molecules in patients with Alzheimer's disease, as well as the use of one molecule to measure the accumulation of tau proteins.

"One of the greatest public health challenges is Alzheimer's disease, for which there currently is no cure and no definitive diagnostic until autopsy," says Dean Wong, M.D., Ph.D., professor of radiology and radiological sciences, psychiatry and behavioral sciences, neurology and neuroscience, and director of the Section of High Resolution Brain PET Imaging, Division of Nuclear Medicine at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. "We have been working hard to identify new radiopharmaceuticals that can help speed the discoveries of diagnostics and treatments for these devastating neurodegenerative disorders."

Alzheimer's disease is characterized in the brain by the appearance of two abnormal protein structures: amyloid plaques and tangled fibers made up of a protein called tau. One of the biggest challenges in studying Alzheimer's disease thus far, according to Wong, is the inability to watch these so-called neurofibrillary tangles develop in real time.

As part of a longer term project funded by F. Hoffman-La Roche, the team previously tested a collection of approximately 550 potential tracer molecules and identified six promising tracers, eventually narrowing them down to three to be made and tested as candidate Tau PET radiopharmaceuticals. These three most promising tracers were previously tested in nonhuman primates, and the results looked promising enough to test in people.

The researchers recruited a total of 12 patients with Alzheimer's disease, seven younger healthy controls (ages 25-38 years old) and five older healthy controls (age 50 or older) for brain-only PET scans. An additional six older healthy controls were recruited for full-body scanning. The study was divided into three parts. In the first part, each person was injected with two of the three randomly designated tracers (on separate visits) prior to receiving a brain PET scan with subsequent evaluation to determine which molecule performed best. In the second part of the study, researchers tested the optimal tracer, called F-18 RO948, with additional brain imaging in five patients with Alzheimer's and five older controls, with follow-up of previously seen patients to evaluate the potential progression of tau protein tangling after an average span of approximately 16 months.

The third part of the study examined six older controls undergoing whole-body scanning. In total, the researchers looked at 80 different regions in the brain to evaluate how well the tracers were taken up by the brain, how well they penetrated through the tissue and how specifically they bound to the tau protein rather than just sticking indiscriminately to anything. Regions of the brain that typically contain accumulated tau protein include the temporal lobe, parietal lobe and occipital lobe, among others; grey matter in the cerebellum is thought to contain low or no tau in patients with Alzheimer's. They found that healthy brains retained little to no tracer, whereas the brains of those with Alzheimer's showed tau to be in regions of the brain consistent with previously reported postmortem data on filamentous tangles.

In the second paper, the team examined the detailed quantification of tau binding via F-18 RO948 in 11 patients with Alzheimer's disease, five young cognitively normal controls and five older cognitively normal controls. They verified that detailed quantification of the tested and retested tracer in those five patients with Alzheimer's and five older controls generated good and reproducible results. According to Wong, this body of work reveals that, as compared with the currently used Tau tracer, F-18 AV1451, the new tracer, F-18 RO948, does not bind randomly to other tissue, offering greater clarity into quantification of potential tau burden within the human brain.

"It really takes a village to make progress in biomedical research, and this project was no exception, with the involvement of the PET team at Hopkins, a CRO who helped recruit healthy subjects, colleagues in psychiatry and behavioral sciences, colleagues at the National Institute of Aging and neuroscience imaging experts at Roche," says Wong. "This is a true example of cross-disciplinary collaboration, and I'm honored to have such great collaborators."

This study was made available online in May 2018 ahead of peer-review and publication. It was published in the December 2018 issue of the journal.

Authors of the first Journal of Nuclear Medicine featured paper "Characterization of 3 Novel Tau Radiopharmaceuticals, 11C-RO-963, 11C-RO-643, and 18F-RO-948, in Healthy Controls and in Alzheimer Subjects" include Dean F. Wong, Hiroto Kuwabara, Paul B. Rosenberg, Esther Oh , Constantine G. Lyketsos, Noble George, Lorena Gapasin, Kelly Kitzmiller, Josh Roberts, Ayon Nandi, James Brasic, Chakradhar Mishra, Abhay Moghekar, Anil Mathur, Marilyn Albert and Robert F. Dannals of The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; Robert A. Comley, Susanne Ostrowitzki, Cristina Vozzi, Frank Boess, Michael Honer, Luca Gobbi, Gregory Klein, Jeff Sevigny and Edilio Borroni, Pharma Research and Early Development, Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland; and Susan M. Resnick and Madhav Thambisetty, Lab of Behavior and Neuroscience, NIH's National Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, Maryland.

This study was funded by an F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. contract to The Johns Hopkins University. Susan Resnick and Madhav Thambisetty are employees of the NIH, National Institute on Aging.

The authors report no other relevant potential conflict of interest.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release accurately notes that there is no definitive diagnostic tool for Alzheimer’s disease other than an autopsy of the brain. It also refers to a “currently used” tau tracer.
We wish it had been clearer that the research being described is not the only work being done in this area. For example, this 2015 paper in the journal Alzheimer’s and Dementia describes a number of innovative approaches being explored in this field.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most doctors say meditation can't hurt you, but now there's reassuring evidence that it may help you as well when it comes to warding off disease.

Most doctors say meditation can’t hurt you, but now there’s reassuring evidence that it may help you as well when it comes to warding off disease.

Previous studies have linked better health outcomes among heart patients who practiced meditation compared to those who did not, but none of those trials could definitively credit the brain-focusing program with the better health results. In the latest trial to address those limitations, however, meditation does appear to have an effect on reducing heart attack, stroke and even early death from heart disease, at least among African-Americans.

MORE: Losing Focus? Studies Say Meditation May Help

“The main finding [of our research] is that, added on top of usual medical care, intervention with a mind-body technique — transcendental meditation — can have a major effect on cardiovascular events,” says Robert Schneider, lead author on the study published in Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes and a professor at the Maharishi University of Management, an institution in Iowa that was founded by the creator of transcendental meditation.

He and his colleagues followed 201 African American men and women, who are at higher risk of heart disease than whites, but who also had addition reason to worry about heart attacks and strokes since they were also diagnosed with coronary heart disease. The participants were randomly assigned to participate in either a health education class about heart-friendly diet and exercise, or to attend a transcendental meditation program. Transcendental meditation involves shutting out the outside world and focusing thoughts inward, or resting while remaining alert. All of the participants continued to receive their normal medical care as well, including appropriate medication.

MORE: Medical Meditation: Say Om Before Surgery

After roughly five years of follow-up, the researchers found a 48% reduction in the overall risk of heart attack, stroke, and death from any cause among members of the meditation group compared to those from the health education group. The meditating group enjoyed an average drop of 4.9 mm Hg in systolic blood pressure compared to the control group and also reported less stress and less anger. “It’s like discovering a whole new class of medications,” Schneider says of the power of meditation in improving the patients’ health.

But while the magnitude of those results is remarkable, the study involved a relatively small number of participants, and did not reveal how meditation may be lowering heart disease risk. On the surface, it’s intuitively obvious that stress management can affect heart health for the better; anxiety and stress cause blood pressure to shoot up and leave us on edge, triggering spikes in heart-harming stress hormones like cortisol.

But many experts are skeptical of the alleged benefits of techniques such as transcendental meditation that claim to reduce stress by a substantial amount. In the past, these benefits have been hard to test scientifically, largely because study participants who volunteered for meditation programs may have been biased to see them succeed. Practitioners have also made strong and essentially unsubstantiated claims about the powers of meditation, leading heart experts and scientists to be especially skeptical. In fact, in 2005, more than 500 brain researchers signed a petition (albeit an unsuccessful one) to protest a scheduled lecture on the neuroscience of meditation by the Buddhist spiritual icon, the Dalai Lama, at a major conference organized by the Society for Neuroscience.

MORE: Mind Over Matter: Can Zen Meditation Help You Forget About Pain?

The great lengths to which the researchers of the Circulation study went to make their trial scientifically rigorous, however, should reinforce the results in the eyes of some skeptics. The scientists adjusted for the effects of weight, smoking behavior, and diet, all of which can influence heart attack, stroke and early heart death rates. And while the participants in both groups exercised more and cut back on alcohol during the study, they did so at similar rates, making these changes unlikely to be responsible for the differences in health outcomes either.

While the findings aren’t likely to resolve questions over whether meditation should become a standard part of heart disease care, the results should give more doctors confidence in discussing the practice with their patients and giving them some scientifically based information that’s an improvement over the advice that “it can’t hurt to try.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions “heart-friendly diet and exercise” and “medication” as elements of cardiovascular care. We’ll call it good enough.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For concussion sufferers, even those who never lost consciousness, physicians may now be able to predict early on who is more likely to continue experiencing symptoms months or years after the head-jarring event, using a new non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) method devised by a consortium of researchers led by UC San Francisco scientists.

In their new study, published online January 13, 2017 in the Journal of Neurotrauma, the researchers used a technique called functional MRI (fMRI), coupled with sophisticated statistical analysis, to track activity in the brain networks of 75 patients, aged 18 to 55, within the first two weeks of their having experienced concussions.

The study revealed telltale patterns of brain activity that, six months later, were associated with worse performance on behavioral and cognitive tests and were different from patterns seen in healthy control subjects.

The fMRI method and analysis developed for the study highlighted abnormal patterns of brain activity that pointed to a higher risk for long-term, post-concussive symptoms, even among the 44 study participants who had no evidence of bleeding or bruising in the brain in the immediate aftermath of brain trauma on computed tomography (CT) or ordinary MRI scans.

"This is an exploratory, proof-of-concept study showing that we can identify patients soon after mild brain trauma who may have more persistent symptoms, despite no other evidence of injury within the brain," said Pratik Mukherjee, MD, PhD, professor of radiology and biomedical imaging at UCSF and the senior author of the study. "We may be able to use this information to help guide treatment decisions and counseling of patients early on, when it may be more effective."

Only subjects who had lost consciousness for less than 30 minutes were eligible for the study, and many study subjects never lost consciousness during their injury.

Scientists refer to concussion as mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), but for some patients the harmful, sometimes insidious effects are long lasting. Common symptoms in the aftermath of concussion include confusion, headache, changes in vision or hearing, thinking or memory problems, fatigue, sleep changes and mood changes. Previously there has not been a way to predict whose symptoms will fade or persist following mTBI.

Although effective drug treatments for mTBI await discovery, rest and counseling are known to be helpful for patients, Mukherjee said.

In the new study, the researchers focused on well-known networks of activity that are observed when the brain is in a resting state. "We asked subjects to close their eyes, to relax, and to not focus their attention on anything specific -- but also to not fall asleep," Mukherjee said.

In comparison to the control subjects, who had never experienced TBI, mTBI patients displayed less connectivity in frontal areas of the "default mode network," a set of brain regions that are particularly active in the resting brain. They also exhibited less connectivity within several other networks, including those known as the executive control network, the fronto-parietal network, the dorsal attentional network, and the orbitofrontal network; they showed an increase in connectivity in the visual network. Several of these differences were associated with worse performance months later in cognitive and behavioral tests.

UCSF radiologist Esther Yuh, MD, PhD, associate professor of radiology, served as the lead neuroradiologist and also contributed to the analysis for the new study. Postdoctoral fellow and first author Eva Palacios, PhD, led the data analysis for the fMRI experiments. The study was part of the ongoing Transforming Research and Clinical Knowledge in Traumatic Brain Injury (TRACK-TBI) project, through which Mukherjee and study co-author Geoffrey Manley, MD, PhD, vice chairman of neurological surgery at UCSF and chief of neurosurgery at Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital, along with collaborators from many other research institutions are leading studies and gathering common data across research sites to more quickly advance TBI research.

Additional co-authors include researchers from UCSF, the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and University Hospital Antwerp, Belgium.

The research was funded through project grants from the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Defense.

UC San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with nationally renowned programs in basic, biomedical, translational and population sciences; and a preeminent biomedical research enterprise. It also includes UCSF Health, which comprises top-ranked hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals in San Francisco and Oakland -- and other partner and affiliated hospitals and healthcare providers throughout the Bay Area.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions that rest and counseling are helpful treatments for patients who suffered a concussion. However, effective primary drug treatments for mild traumatic brain injury don’t yet exist, the release adds.
Depending on the severity of the case, there are medications to limit secondary damage to the brain immediately following injury. These include diuretics to decrease pressure in the brain, anti-seizure drugs and coma-inducing drugs.
We feel the news release does an adequate job comparing alternatives, which is why we give it a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
More women needing the removal of one cancerous breast are having the second, healthy breast removed at the same time, despite the lack of evidence that this improves long-term survival, according to a University of Minnesota study released Monday.

Nearly 5 percent of women with cancer in a single breast had a double mastectomy in 2003, compared with 1.8 percent of women who made that choice in 1998.

U researchers confirmed the trend using federal cancer data but could only speculate why. It’s an emotional decision that women often make quickly, considering that surgeries often take place within days of their cancer diagnosis.

“I’m worried about the women who are on the fence and make a very quick decision before really considering the other options or the fact that it is an irreversible procedure,” said Dr. Todd Tuttle, the U’s chief of surgical oncology and lead author of the study in the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

When diagnosed with cancer in her right breast last year, Debra Elmore-Nesheim talked with her new husband and other relatives about the appropriate treatment. But the 43-year-old’s instinct was to have both breasts removed.

“Part of it is emotional,” said Elmore-Nesheim, a pediatric nurse who lives in St. Paul. “If I didn’t do as much as possible to eliminate the cancer, I would feel like I was almost waiting for the other shoe to drop.”

Women removing a single cancerous breast have a 1 percent chance per year of suffering cancer in the other breast. That makes removing both breasts a better option for younger women with longer life spans. Many oncologists also recommend it for women with genetic predispositions for breast cancer.

For other women, a double mastectomy might eliminate another breast cancer, but it won’t stop cancer from resurfacing in vital organs, Tuttle said. He hopes women aren’t making the choice believing it will result in longer life, because the evidence is sketchy at best.

“If that’s the case, then we have a problem on our hands, because we’re not providing adequate information to our patients,” he said.

“If it’s happening because of fear or the common reason I hear – ‘I just want to be done with it’ – that’s a different situation.”

Tuttle’s study found 60 percent of women with breast cancer chose lumpectomies, which remove only the tumors, not the whole breasts. Research has found this procedure is equally effective, particularly with smaller tumors and often when used in combination with radiation.

Of the women in Tuttle’s study who received mastectomies in 2003, 11 percent chose to have both breasts removed. That is an increase from 4.2 percent in 1998.

The rising use of magnetic resonance imaging, MRI, is likely contributing to the increase in double mastectomies, said Dr. Joseph Leach, a medical oncologist with Park Nicollet Health Services. Such scans are becoming standard for women who appear to have cancer in one breast, and half the time they raise suspicions about the other breast.

While these suspicions rarely end up as cancer, they do often result in follow-up tests such as biopsies and ultrasounds that can frighten patients, Leach said.

“Our own impression is that women in some ways are getting sort of scared into having prophylactic mastectomies because of having these uncertain tests,” Leach said.

Both Leach and Tuttle are pursuing research studies to address the why question.

Women choosing to have both breasts removed face higher surgery costs and slightly higher risks of post-surgery complications and infections.

Most women are satisfied after double mastectomies, but a Mayo Clinic survey showed that as many as 10 percent are unsatisfied because of their appearance or medical complications. The survey results came a decade ago, however, when the safety of breast implants was a major issue, said Mayo’s Dr. Lynn Hartmann.

The safety concerns have been reduced and cosmetic procedures have improved, but some women still probably regret the decision, she said.

Hartmann said doctors could take pressure off women by performing lumpectomies first to eliminate their cancer tumors. Then the women can have genetic tests and assess their risks for follow-up cancers before deciding whether to have one or both breasts removed.

“Then you’ve just put some time on the table for them rather than trying to have them make this major decision … in a brief period of time,” she said.

Elmore-Nesheim, the nurse with breast cancer, said cosmetic concerns played a role. She wondered with age what she would look like with an implant on one side and a healthy breast on the other. But mostly, she was scared for her life. Even if removing both breasts only offered a small chance at a longer life, it seemed worthwhile to her.

“It’s a survival thing,” she said. “You’re fighting for your life. If it shows up on one side, it could come back, so let’s just eliminate it.”

Jeremy Olson can be reached at jolson@pioneerpress.com or 651-228-5583.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article sufficiently compares bilateral and single mastectomy, and reports that the lumpectomy with radiation option is more common.  
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Hochman presented the results yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart Association in Chicago. The study was also published online yesterday by The New England Journal of Medicine and will appear in the Dec. 7 issue.

Her report is the latest warning from researchers who suspect that stents are being overused and may even be causing heart attacks and deaths. Manufacturers sell $6 billion in stents a year, and hospitals charge $10,000 to $15,000 per patient to implant them.

The devices, which came into widespread use in the 1990s, are made of either bare metal or metal coated with a drug meant to help keep the artery from closing again. Recent studies have found that drug-coated stents can increase the risk of blood clots, even years after they are implanted.

Use of the drug-coated stents has fallen since last spring, but they still account for more than 80 percent of stents implanted in the United States.

Stents have been increasingly used in people with clogged arteries who are not having heart attacks, but some studies suggest that those patients would be better off taking drugs to reduce cholesterol, inflammation and clotting. The reasoning is that artery disease tends to be systemic and extensive, but stents can treat it only in tiny spots.

A million Americans a year have heart attacks, and half of them die, according to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. A common symptom is severe pain in the chest, left arm, jaw or back, but about a third of patients do not have chest pain. Symptoms may also include feeling faint, sweaty, short of breath or nauseated and having a sensation that the heart is pounding.

Clots are often the cause of heart attacks, and health authorities urge people with symptoms to go to the hospital immediately so that doctors can use balloons and stents, or clot-dissolving drugs, to try to prevent heart damage. But some patients do not realize what is happening, or do not want to believe it.

About a million angioplasties a year are performed in the United States, including those in heart attack victims and those in people with blocked arteries who have not had heart attacks. The study did not address the use of angioplasty and stents in people who have not had heart attacks.

Dr. Hochman emphasized that angioplasty was still the best treatment for many heart attack patients who go to the hospital early, within 12 hours of when the attack began. The people who generally do best are those who arrive at the hospital and have angioplasty within 90 minutes of the heart attack.

Opening a clogged artery in the early stages of a heart attack — “early angioplasty” — can restore blood flow and reduce damage to the heart muscle. It can sometimes save the muscle after 12 hours, but then doctors decide case by case whether it is worthwhile. About a third of heart attack patients show up after 12 hours.

After a few days have passed, though, there is little or no chance of preventing heart damage. But many doctors open the artery anyway, thinking it may still have long-term benefits and prolong the patients’ lives. In that situation, the procedure is called late angioplasty. It can be helpful in people who are still suffering from chest pain or have certain other complications from the heart attack.

But what about people who see a doctor more than a day later and are medically stable and free of chest pain? The new study tried to determine if late angioplasty could help them. Although angioplasty is not open surgery, it is an invasive procedure with risks, and the researchers wanted to know if there was any reason to put these patients through it when they seemed to be on the road to recovery. The study showed there was no need for the procedure.

The findings may come as a rude surprise to many cardiologists, who have come to believe that opening a blocked artery, even days or weeks after a heart attack, is bound to be good for patients.

Even Dr. Hochman was surprised by the results. She said she and her colleagues expected to find that angioplasty would reduce the risks of heart failure, subsequent heart attacks and death. But their theory failed the test.

“This is why we have clinical trials,” she said. She added that cardiologists were such strong believers in angioplasty that some major medical centers in the United States and Europe had refused to participate in her study, saying it would be unethical to let some patients go without the procedure for a study.

The 2,166 patients in the study had all suffered heart attacks 3 to 28 days before, caused by a completely blocked coronary artery. The median time since the heart attack was eight days. They were in stable condition and free of chest pain, and were picked at random to receive either heart medicines only or balloon treatment and stents with heart medicines. Most got plain metal stents, but about 8 percent got drug-coated ones. The researchers tracked their health for an average of three years.

There were no differences between the groups. They had the same rates of heart attack, death and heart failure. If anything, those who had angioplasty seemed to fare a bit worse than those who did not, but the differences were not statistically significant and might have been because of chance, Dr. Hochman said.

An expert not involved in the research, Dr. Steven E. Nissen, chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic and president of the American College of Cardiology, said the study was independent and well conducted.

“Having an artery open ought to be good for you,” Dr. Nissen said. “Why not open it late? Like a lot of things in medicine, however, when you actually test it in an organized way, in a randomized, controlled trial, you find out it doesn’t work.”

He added, “It will change what I do.”

In an editorial accompanying the study in the journal, two other cardiologists say that late angioplasty may still be worthwhile for some patients. The ones who might benefit, they say, are a small minority — perhaps 10 to 15 percent — who cannot take the class of heart medicines known as beta blockers, which have been proved to increase survival after a heart attack.

A spokesman for Boston Scientific, the leading stent maker in the United States, said Dr. Hochman’s study would not have much impact because the findings applied to only a small subgroup of patients. But the company’s stock price dropped sharply yesterday morning when news of Dr. Hochman’s study first hit the news. It recovered by the end of the day, however, as analysts said the findings were likely to have little effect on stent use. By late afternoon, the rally had wiped out all the morning losses. Boston Scientific ended trading at $15.94, up 8 cents.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story presented the treatment options following a heart attack as a balloon treatment (angioplasty) and stent along with optimal medical management OR optimal medical management alone that were discussed in the study outlined.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 22, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Women who experience depression during pregnancy may have another treatment option, new research suggests.

The study found that women treated with depression-specific acupuncture had a 63 percent response rate compared to a 44 percent response rate in women treated with control acupuncture or massage.

"We tested acupuncture as a standalone treatment, and the results are very positive," said study author Rachel Manber, a professor at the Stanford University School of Medicine Sleep Medicine Center in Redwood City, Calif. But, she added, because this is the first study of its kind, and the acupuncture protocol used was specifically designed for this study, "you always need replication of the findings."

Dr. Shari Lusskin, director of reproductive psychiatry at the New York University Langone Medical Center, echoed that sentiment. "It's encouraging to see alternative treatments being studied in a scientific manner, and this study should generate further studies. It needs to be replicated on a larger scale," she noted.

"This is one treatment, and perhaps it will become another possible treatment tool in our therapeutic toolbox," said Lusskin. But, she cautioned that "acupuncture is not a substitute for the appropriate use of antidepressant therapy especially in women with a prior history of response to antidepressants."

As many as 20 percent of women may experience depression during pregnancy, according to the March of Dimes. Symptoms include sad, hopeless feelings that persist, generally for more than two weeks, Lusskin said. Women may also experience severe anxiety or feel disconnected from the baby. And, she cautioned, suicidal thoughts are never normal and are a sign that you should seek help.

Many women are cautious about using medications during pregnancy, reports the study. Interpersonal psychotherapy is an option for women who are depressed during pregnancy, but this type of therapy isn't always available, according to the study.

For the study, Manber and her colleagues recruited 150 pregnant women who were diagnosed with a major depressive disorder. All were between 12 and 30 weeks of gestation.

The women were randomly assigned to one of three groups: depression-specific acupuncture (52 women), control acupuncture (49 women) or massage (49 women). The depression-specific protocol was designed just for this study, and the control acupuncture was specifically designed to avoid using acupuncture needles in any areas known to affect depression.

The treatments lasted for eight weeks. Women received treatment twice a week for the first four weeks, and then once a week for the next four weeks. The treatments lasted an average of 25 minutes.

The researchers found a 63 percent response rate in women who received the depression-specific acupuncture, while the response rate was 44.3 percent in the control acupuncture and massage groups. A response rate was defined as a 50 percent reduction in depression symptoms, Manber said.

Results of the study are scheduled to be published in the March issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

"We found our acupuncture protocol was helpful, but that does not mean that any acupuncture for depression treatment will be effective. The quality of what you get can differ from one practitioner to another," said Manber.

"Our goal is always to find treatments that have the maximum benefits and minimum risk," said Lusskin. "Many women think it's safer for the baby to go off antidepressants, but there's a real risk to the baby for untreated depression in pregnancy. And, we have enough safety data about antidepressant use in pregnancy that we can make informed choices about managing treatment during pregnancy."

The bottom line, she said, is to talk with your doctor to find the right combination of treatments that can help you. "Depression is not a one-size-fits-all illness, and treatment won't be one-size-fits-all either. If acupuncture ends up being helpful for you, that's great, but make sure you're treated into remission."

To learn more about depression during and after pregnancy, visit the National Women's Health Information Center.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story appropriately discusses antidepressant medication and psychotherapy, two very important and helpful treatments for partum depression.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philippe Autier is willing to bet that taking vitamin D supplements will never be proved to do anything beyond helping to build strong bones — and certainly not to prevent heart disease, cancer, diabetes, depression, multiple sclerosis or the common cold, as many claim. In fact, the physician has wagered a few good bottles of champagne that none of three large randomized trials now underway will find proof of positive effects.

To Autier, a researcher at the Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences in Glasgow, Scotland, the widespread faith in vitamin D’s benefits is like a religion. “People want to have a simple story they can believe in,” he says.

Cedric Garland, meanwhile, hews just as strongly to the opposite view — that vitamin D supplements confer a slew of benefits, including warding off colon cancer, breast cancer, even Type 1 diabetes.

“The science is, in my opinion, unassailable,” says Garland, an adjunct professor of epidemiology at the University of California at San Diego. “It’s just preposterous to say it’s not proven.”

In January 2014, Autier published a statistical analysis of results from hundreds of studies of vitamin D. He concluded: “Unfortunately, there is probably no benefit to expect from vitamin D supplementation in normally healthy people.”

Garland, on the other hand, is the co-author of dozens of studies showing a strong, inverse association between vitamin D levels and seemingly every disease under the sun. Indeed, sun exposure is Garland’s explanation for why rates of cancer, Type 1 diabetes and other diseases tend to be higher the farther people live from the equator. Vitamin D, after all, is the “sunshine vitamin,” synthesized from cholesterol in the skin in response to sunlight.

“It’s a mathematical relationship,” he said in a telephone interview. “The higher your latitude and the greater your area’s average cloud cover, the higher your rates of cancer.” Since he and his late brother, Frank Garland, published the first study, in 1980, revealing that relationship, hundreds of other studies have explored the link between vitamin D, including supplements, and health — but none were large enough, long enough or designed well enough to convince the skeptics.

Now three nationally recognized researchers are leading landmark studies designed to settle at least some of the questions about vitamin D once and for all. The one thing the research leaders are certain of is that the public’s faith in vitamin D as a modern panacea has far outpaced what the scientific evidence proves.

“There’s been a rush to judgment on vitamin D,” says JoAnn E. Manson, chief of the division of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. “Everyone has gotten on the bandwagon. Unfortunately, the lessons of history have shown repeatedly that many of these supplements that appeared to be very promising did not pan out in more rigorous testing.”

Manson should know. She has led or collaborated on more than a dozen large, randomized, placebo-controlled studies, dating back more than two decades, which found none of the expected protection against cancer, heart disease, dementia or other diseases that scientists once attributed to beta carotene, vitamin E or vitamin C supplements. (She did find, however, that supplementation with folic acid, vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 offered modest protection against age-related macular degeneration and, for those with a diet low in B vitamins to begin with, a hint of protection against the loss of cognitive abilities.)

Now Manson is co-directing the Vitamin D and Omega-3 Trial (VITAL), testing whether, compared with placebo, a daily supplement of either 2,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D or one gram of fish oil (another widely touted substance) reduces the risk of stroke, cancer, heart disease and other health problems. The five-year study, involving 25,874 men and women, is scheduled to end in October 2017.

Another trial is testing whether a daily supplement of 4,000 IU of vitamin D will prevent Type 2 diabetes. The so-called D2d study, which will run for four years, is seeking to enroll 2,382 people older than 30 who are at high risk of developing diabetes due to weight or blood-sugar levels but who have not yet been diagnosed with the disease.

“I would call myself an optimistic skeptic,” says Anastasios Pittas, principal investigator of the D2d study and a professor of medicine at Tufts School of Medicine in Boston. “The indirect evidence is very strong. People with higher levels of vitamin D in their blood have been shown again and again to have a lower risk of developing diabetes in the future. These studies are as consistent as we have ever seen with any nutrient.”

But, he adds, “those studies do not prove cause and effect. Before we make a blanket recommendation for the 86 million people in the United States who are at risk for Type 2 diabetes to go out and buy vitamin D supplements, we need to know for sure if they help.”

A third trial, designed to test whether 5,000 IU of vitamin D per day will slow the progression of multiple sclerosis in 172 patients, is being led by Ellen Mowry, an associate professor of neurology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

“I do discuss vitamin D with my patients,” Mowry says. “But I point out that we don’t yet have randomized, controlled-trials data to back it up. That’s why there are no official recommendations yet from any medical organizations. We have to be sure.”

So what are people to do in the meantime? Four years ago, Manson sat on a committee established by the Institute of Medicine to review how much vitamin D and calcium Americans need each day to maintain health and prevent disease. The report concluded that both are necessary for bone health but that as for preventing cancer, heart disease, diabetes and autoiummune disorders, the evidence was “inconsistent, inconclusive as to causality, and insufficient to inform nutritional requirements.” Even so, the committee recommended that children and adults up to age 70 get 600 IU of vitamin D daily — from food and, if necessary, supplements — and that adults age 71 and older get 800 IU.

Some studies have found no ill effects from taking far higher amounts, and many of the prospective but not proven benefits against cancer and other diseases are believed to require doses ranging from 2,000 to 5,000 IU. Manson urges people to rely on the Institute of Medicine report, which set a safe upper limit of 4,000 IU of vitamin D per day.

“It’s fine to take that amount,” Manson said. “But keep in mind, there isn’t yet evidence that taking those higher amounts will confer any benefits beyond the recommended daily allotment of 600 to 800 IU.”

Some studies, she noted, have even found evidence that very high levels of vitamin D circulating in the blood might be just as unhealthful as very low levels. A 2014 study, for instance, found that people with the highest levels of vitamin D in their blood (more than 60 nanograms per milliliter) were significantly more likely to die in the three months following a hospitalization as were people whose levels were between 30 and 49.9 ng/mL. Such findings are why she, Mowry and Pittas strongly advise people against taking more than the currently recommended upper daily limit of 4,000 IU, even though doses as high as 10,000 IU are available online and at many stores.

Frustrated by the uncertainty? Pittas takes it in stride.

“This is the beauty of medical research,” he says, “where you have some people convinced that vitamin D does nothing and others who believe it’s already proved to work. There is such controversy now that the only way to convince people who sit on those sides of the equation is to complete rigorous, randomized trials. We’ll see what happens. I have a hypothesis that vitamin D will work, but we have to test it. At the end of the studies, one of us will be right. I just don’t know which one.”

Hurley is a science journalist and author of “Natural Causes: Death, Lies and Politics in America’s Vitamin and Herbal Supplement Industry” (Broadway Books, 2007).
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternative here is to obtain vitamin D from foods, or not to supplement at all. The study covers both these options when it outlines the Institute of Medicine recommendations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Each year, thousands of Americans suffer a traumatic brain injury. In 2013, about 2.8 million TBI-related emergency department visits, hospitalizations and deaths occurred in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Most of these are what are called mild traumatic brain injuries, or mTBIs — head injuries that don't cause a coma. People with an mTBI typically get better within a few weeks, but for as many as 20 percent, problems can linger for months or years.

Many of these patients find themselves stuck with depression, cognitive problems, headaches, fatigue and other symptoms. Known as post-concussion syndrome, this phenomenon is often difficult to treat. Antidepressants can lift moods, painkillers can ease headaches and physical therapy may ease dizziness, but most researchers agree that these remedies don't heal the injury within the brain.

Could oxygen do the trick? A growing group of scientists and physicians say that hyperbaric treatment, which exposes patients to pure oxygen at higher-than-normal air pressure, may work.

"These patients don't have enough oxygen to heal the injured parts of their brains," said Shai Efrati, a researcher and physician at Tel Aviv University in Israel and a leading hyperbaric scientist. "Hyperbaric treatment massively increases the amount of oxygen available to the brain."

But other researchers believe that the treatment has no merit and should not be recommended.

"People want to believe that hyperbaric can fix [brain injuries], and it can't," said David Cifu, a researcher at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, who has spent much of his career treating veterans with brain injuries.

Compressed air has been used by doctors since the 17th century. In 1917, two German inventors first used pressurized pure oxygen to treat decompression sickness, which occurs when undersea divers return to the surface too quickly. For the past 50 years, hyperbaric therapy has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a treatment for non-healing wounds, carbon monoxide poisoning, burns and decompression sickness. Over the past decade, doctors in the United States and internationally have begun using it to treat mTBIs.

MTBIs include sports-related concussions and head injuries caused by traffic accidents. Also, between 2000 and 2017, 308,853 American service members suffered mild traumatic brain injuries, according to the Department of Defense.

Patients with an mTBI typically experience symptoms that include headache, dizziness, fatigue, depression, anxiety and cognitive impairment. Known as post-concussion syndrome (PCS), this phenomenon is difficult to treat. Doctors use antidepressants, pain medications, biofeedback and physical therapy, but these strategies do not always work.

The nature of the human brain makes it particularly susceptible to chronic injury. The organ requires large amounts of energy under normal circumstances, and even more to heal when injured. And often, the initial trauma damages blood vessels that supply the brain with oxygen. So, just as the brain needs extra resources, it faces an energy crisis. Often, Efrati and others say, injured brain cells don't die, but may persist for years or decades, alive but hobbled. Hyperbaric therapy, he said, can return them to full function, even years after the injury.

"Oxygen is different, because it has a direct biological effect on brain tissue," said Paul G. Harch, a physician in New Orleans who over the past three decades has used hyperbaric oxygen to treat hundreds of people with chronic brain injury as well as stroke.

Patients typically receive between 40 and 60 hour-long hyperbaric treatments spread over two to three months. During each treatment, they sit or lie inside a hyperbaric chamber, which varies in size from a person-size tube to a large room that can hold several patients. While in the chamber, patients breathe in pure oxygen, typically pressurized to about twice the density of sea-level air; in this environment, the lungs take in about 10 times as much oxygen as under normal conditions.

Researchers say it remains unclear how hyperbaric oxygen affects injured brains. Efrati and others argue that it probably works through several biological pathways. The extra oxygen appears to trigger the healing of brain cells, and switches on genes specifically related to brain repair. It increases the number of stem cells that migrate to sites of brain injury, promotes the growth of new blood vessels in the brain, and boosts the activity of mitochondria, which provide energy to cells throughout the body. Scientists have linked increased mitochondrial activity to healing in many kinds of tissue.

Efrati said the brain is no different from any other part of the body. Pressurized oxygen has the power to repair many kinds of tissue damage. "A non-healing wound in the leg and a non-healing wound in the brain," he said, "they are the same basic thing."

Efrati came to the field accidentally. Eight years ago, as director of research at Assaf Harofeh Medical Center in Tel Aviv, he was asked to oversee the hospital's small hyperbaric chamber. He knew little about hyperbaric medicine and wasn't especially interested in it. But he soon noticed that pressurized oxygen seemed to have an unexpected effect. A patient had come for treatment of foot wounds that wouldn't heal — a common symptom in diabetes. The man had also suffered a traumatic brain injury several years earlier, which left him unable to speak more than a few words. The hyperbaric treatment healed his feet — and also revived his ability to speak. Other patients with wounds and brain injuries had similar surprising results. He began to examine how hyperbaric treatment affects the brain, and this work has become his focus. In 2008. Efrati founded and now directs the Sagol Center for Hyperbaric Medicine and Research at Tel Aviv University and Assaf Harofeh, where he oversees and collaborates with a range of scientists and manages a large hyperbaric treatment facility.

As the use of hyperbaric therapy for brain injury has grown, it has become increasingly controversial. Critics argue that it remains unproven and that desperate patients are wasting thousands of dollars — the treatment typically costs between $200 and $400 per session and is rarely covered by insurance — on a technique that rarely if ever helps. Between 2009 and 2015, Cifu oversaw three studies for the Department of Veterans Affairs — reportedly at a taxpayer cost of about $70 million — of about 60 active-duty service members with post-concussion syndrome. The studies found that hyperbaric treatment had little effect on their symptoms.

Overall, there is relatively little research on hyperbaric treatment for brain injury, in part because pressurized oxygen can't be patented, which limits its potential profitability. "It's very difficult to get funding for studies on this topic," Harch said.

A few studies besides Cifu's have looked at humans. In a paper published in October, Efrati and colleagues examined 15 post-concussion syndrome patients who had received hyperbaric treatment. Using brain imaging, the scientists found that after treatment, the subjects had increased cerebral blood flow as well as more activity in brain areas that had previously been dormant. They say that this indicates that hyperbaric treatment triggered regeneration of nerve fibers and blood vessels in the brain. In addition, tests showed that the subjects had improved memory and processing speed. In another study, published in 2015, researchers gave hyperbaric oxygen to 56 patients with prolonged post-concussion syndrome. They found that many patients showed significant improvements in cognitive function and overall quality of life.

While the research remains inconclusive, some American doctors are using oxygen to treat chronic brain injuries.

Ziad Mirza is one of them. For most of his career, he dispensed hyperbaric treatment for hospitals around Baltimore. Two years ago, he became chief medical officer for Hyperheal Hyperbarics, a company with three clinics in the Baltimore area. Since then, he said, he has treated about a half-dozen brain-injury patients, with mostly positive results.

One of these patients is Parisa Cook, 29, who in 2016 was found to have a tennis ball-size tumor in her brain. Surgeons removed it, but the operation was not a complete success. Cook, who lives in Baltimore, began to suffer from debilitating symptoms: She had problems with her short-term memory; she had constant headaches and couldn't concentrate; her vision became blurry and dark; and her hearing was altered, so that all sounds were jumbled and very loud. Specialists told her the operation probably had caused collateral brain trauma.

Over the course of a year, she went to eight doctors and tried more than a dozen medications and a variety of other treatments. Nothing helped. A policy analyst for the Maryland Department of Health, she worried that she would have to quit her job. She began to consider suicide. "I felt completely hopeless," she said.

Then Cook read about hyperbaric oxygen treatment. She got in touch with Mirza and began treatments. After a single session, she said, her vision was no longer wobbly; after 20 sessions over a month, she felt "perfect." "It was a complete 180," she said. "This treatment saved my life."

Cook's primary-care doctor, Sujay Pathak, an internist in Baltimore, first saw her in February. "Her life was totally interrupted by this. She couldn't function," Pathak said.

But a few weeks after starting hyperbaric therapy in September, she "got suddenly and rather miraculously better," Pathak said.

Of course, such anecdotes are not the same as rigorous scientific research. Efrati agreed that hyperbaric treatment requires more research. "Definitely, we need more science," he said. "We have a lot to learn. But we are seeing the results with our patients. It works, again and again and again."

Hyperbaric wound treatment, often for diabetics, is booming. Is that a good thing?

A short bike ride put him on a long road to recovery
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: It’s mentioned that post-concussion syndrome has proven difficult to treat, with existing therapies having varied success at targeting symptoms, but not addressing the cause.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An ibuprofen patch that delivers the painkiller directly through the skin to the site of pain, at a consistent dose for up to 24 hours, has been developed by UK researchers.

Scientists at the University of Warwick and spin-off company Medherant say their TEPI patch could revolutionize the transdermal drug delivery market.

University of Warwick research chemist Professor David Haddleton told Reuters that the polymer matrix in the patch acts as a reservoir for the drug, capable of releasing between five and ten times the amount of drugs used in gels and patches currently on the market, for periods of six hours, 12 hours, and even 24 hours.

“What we do is dissolve the active ibuprofen, for example, into the adhesive so we can have quite a high loading - so up to 30 percent of the adhesive will be the ibuprofen,” said Haddleton. “When that’s placed on the skin just like an elastoplast then the drug will actually diffuse across the skin into the body at the site of the pain and then relieve the pain in the same way as current gels and creams. We’re controlling the dosage and we’re keeping it there for a prolonged period of time.”

The patches could help treat conditions like chronic back pain, neuralgia and arthritis without the need to take potentially damaging doses of the drug orally. The team says that popular ibuprofen gels make it difficult to control dosage and can be easily rubbed off.

Although TEPI patch remains highly tacky and adheres well to skin, it is not uncomfortable to peel off, unlike many traditional plasters.

According to Andrew Lee, co-founder of Medherant, “we’ve only been in the lab about 12 months, but in the 12 months we’ve essentially assessed about 90 percent of the drugs that are currently available as either creams or patches. We’ve tested them in our polymers with very good results, we’ve been able to get increased loadings of drugs in the polymer and we’ve shown almost across the board that we can get a steady release rate of that drug from the polymer as well.”

The team says TEPI patches could go on sale within three years, and Medherant is working with some large, unnamed, pharmaceutical companies to get them ready for market.

Haddleton says the technology has exciting potential for other medications, such as opioid painkillers. “What’s important is to be able to extend the range of drugs that are available by patches because at the moment we’re limited to about 20 different drugs, and there are thousands of drugs out there, and only about 20 are used in patches at the moment, which is limited by the technology of the adhesive, essentially,” he said.

Lee told Reuters that many commercial patches do not contain pain relief agents at all, and merely sooth the body with a warming effect. He said Medherant’s technology would eliminate most side effects created by oral medication.

“One of the interesting areas that we plan to explore in partnership with large companies is actually using our platform technology to include other drugs that previously maybe haven’t been suitable for topical or transdermal delivery - or drugs which may have not got through the regulatory filings because, for instance, they might have caused stomach irritation or other side effects when taken orally,” said Lee.

The TEPI patch incorporates new adhesive technology developed by global adhesive company Bostik. Lee believes ibuprofen strips could be useful for sports participants, helping alleviate conditions such as tendonitis, and repetitive strain injuries. Nutrition companies have also shown an interest in adapting Medherant’s technology for transmitting minerals and vitamins through the skin.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There was a decent amount of discussion about alternatives like ibuprofen administered orally or topically as a gel.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE: 11 A.M. (ET), WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 5, 2015

Media Advisory: To contact corresponding author Gretchen A. Brenes, Ph.D., call Marguerite Beck at 336-716-2415 or email marbeck@wakehealth.edu. To contact editorial author Eric J. Lenze, M.D., call Jim Dryden at 314-286-0110 or email jdryden@wustl.edu.

To place an electronic embedded link to this study in your story Links will be live at the embargo time: http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.1154 and http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.1306

Telephone-based cognitive behavioral therapy was better at reducing worry, generalized anxiety disorder symptoms and depressive symptoms in older adults who live in rural areas, where access to mental health treatment may be limited, according to an article published online by JAMA Psychiatry.

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is one of the most common anxiety disorders in older adults and is associated with poor quality of life, increased health care utilization and impaired memory. Medications and psychotherapy are the primary treatments. Many older adults prefer psychotherapy to medication for the treatment of anxiety. However, older adults who live in rural areas can face a number of barriers, including living in an area where psychotherapy is not available, so alternate methods of providing treatment could increase utilization, according to the study background.

Gretchen A. Brenes, Ph.D., of the Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, N.C., and coauthors compared telephone-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) with telephone-delivered nondirective supportive therapy (NST) in a randomized clinical trial of 141 adults 60 or older with generalized anxiety disorder. The participants (70 were assigned to telephone CBT and 71 to telephone NST) were followed up at two months and four months.

Telephone CBT consisted of up to 11 sessions (nine required) and focused on, among other things, anxiety symptom recognition, cognitive restructuring, relaxation, coping statements and problem solving. Telephone NST was 10 sessions where participants discussed their feelings but no direct suggestions for coping were provided.

The clinical trial demonstrated both treatments reduced symptoms of worry, depression and GAD, but telephone CBT was superior to telephone NST and resulted in a greater reduction of symptoms.

At four month’s follow-up there was greater decline in worry severity among telephone CBT participants but no significant differences in general anxiety symptoms. At four months’ follow-up there also was greater decline in self-reported GAD symptoms and depressive symptoms among participants in the telephone CBT, according to the results.

“Telephone-delivered psychotherapy is one way to overcome some barriers to mental health treatment that rural older adults face,” the study concludes.

This work was funded by a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Editorial: Solving the Geriatric Mental Health Crisis in the 21st Century

In a related editorial, Eric J. Lenze, M.D., of the Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, writes: “Therefore, we are in the midst of the following two unprecedented trends: the aging of the population and the transformation of everything in our lives by mobile technology. These two trends are inextricably linked in the area of geriatric mental health and our search for better, more effective treatments with greater reach.”

The author made conflict of interest disclosure. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and funding from the Taylor Family Institute for Innovative Psychiatric Research. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release points out that the study focuses on older adults living in rural settings where psychotherapy may be unavailable.  It also points out that older adults may prefer psychotherapy over medications.  We wonder about other approaches to address loneliness in the elderly, especially in rural areas, that could improve a person’s quality of life.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two big studies suggest possible new ways to screen healthy people for cervical or prostate cancers, but a third disappointed those hoping for a way to detect early signs of deadly ovarian tumors.

-For women 30 and over, a test for the virus, HPV, is better than a Pap smear for predicting cervical cancer risk, and those who test negative on both can safely wait three years to be screened again.

-A single PSA blood test at ages 44 to 50 might help predict a man's risk of developing advanced prostate cancer or dying of it up to 30 years later. The PSA test is notoriously unreliable, but using it this way separates men who need a close watch from those who are so low-risk that they can skip testing for five years or more.

-Screening women with no symptoms for ovarian cancer with a blood test and an ultrasound exam is harmful. It didn't prevent deaths and led to thousands of false alarms, unneeded surgeries and serious complications.

The last study is a warning to people who get screening tests that aren't recommended, or who question whether screening can ever hurt.

"The answer is, it could hurt a lot," said Dr. Allen Lichter, chief executive of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. The group published these and 4,000 other studies Wednesday, ahead of its annual meeting next month.

Cervical cancer is easy to prevent. It's very slow-growing and screening finds precancerous cells and allows early treatment. The new study was the first big one to examine a newer screening tool, HPV tests, with or without Pap smears in routine practice.

For a Pap test, cells scraped from the cervix, the gateway to the uterus, are checked under a microscope. But this can miss problems or raise false alarms.

HPV tests detect the human papillomavirus, which causes most cases of cervical cancer. But HPV is "the common cold" of the nether regions — most sexually active young people have been exposed to it, said Debbie Saslow, the American Cancer Society's director of breast and gynecologic cancer. Most infections go away on their own; they're only a cancer risk when they last a year or more.

Younger women tend to have short-term infections, so Pap tests are a better way to screen them. HPV tests are approved as an option along with Paps for women 30 and older, and the cancer society says that if a woman tests negative on both, she can wait three years to be screened again. Few take this advice, though.

"Women still want their annual Pap and doctors still want to give them," and think it's rationing care to test less often, Saslow said.

The new study gives "very, very solid support" for screening less often, Lichter said.

Hormuzd Katki of the National Cancer Institute studied more than 330,000 women getting HPV and Pap tests through Kaiser Permanente Northern California for five years.

Only about three out of 100,000 women each year developed cervical cancer after negative HPV and Pap tests. HPV tests were twice as good as Paps for predicting risk. Adding a Pap after a negative HPV test did little to improve risk prediction.

However, if an HPV test was positive, a Pap test helped confirm or rule out the need for follow-up.

The study didn't look at the downside of HPV testing — how many false alarms and needless procedures it triggered. HPV tests cost $80 to $100 compared to $20 to $40 for Paps.

The prostate study sought a better way to use PSA tests, which are troublesome because PSA can be high for many reasons besides cancer, and doctors don't know which cancers need treatment or whether screening saves lives. Most groups don't recommend PSA tests, but most men over 50 get them anyway.

The new study "is not going to end the controversy, but it suggests a very interesting middle ground," Lichter said.

Researchers at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York used stored blood samples that 12,000 Swedish men gave for a heart study decades ago, when most were 44 to 50 years old. They also had second samples from some of them six years later, and samples from other 60-year-old men.

Looking 27 years later, researchers saw that 44 percent of cancer deaths occurred in men whose initial PSAs had been in the top 10 percent when they were 44 to 50 years old.

Conversely, scoring below the median meant very little cancer risk years later.

"They're identifying a group of guys who don't need to be screened, or need to be screened less often," said Dr. Otis Brawley, the cancer society's chief medical officer.

The results are "provocative," but this type of study can't prove that screening prevents deaths, said Dr. Matthew R. Smith of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center. Few of the Swedish men were treated for prostate cancer as most men are today, which can affect survival.

The National Cancer Institute, the Swedish Cancer Society and several foundations paid for the work, and one researcher holds patents for two PSA-related tests.

Baseline PSA tests for men in their 40s can't be recommended yet, Brawley said. The cancer society says men should be informed of the risks and benefits of PSA tests starting at age 50, and sooner for blacks and those with family history of prostate cancer.

The government-funded ovarian cancer study involved nearly 80,000 women. Half were screened annually with an ultrasound for four years and a blood test for six years. The blood test looked for CA-125, a substance often elevated in ovarian cancer.

After 13 years, there were no major differences in ovarian cancers found or deaths from the disease. Screening found only 212 cancers while giving 3,285 false alarms that led to 1,080 unneeded biopsy surgeries and 163 serious complications.

"So many people say `how can cancer screening be harmful?' This thing documents it," Brawley said.

The results don't apply to using these tests on women with symptoms of ovarian cancer or abnormal physical exams. That's still the best way to check for ovarian cancer in those cases.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Alternative screening strategies for cervical cancer were discussed. 
The option of not being screened for prostate cancer came through in this quote:”They’re identifying a group of guys who don’t need to be screened, or need to be screened less often,” said Dr. Otis Brawley, the cancer society’s chief medical officer.
For ovarian cancer the story emphasized that the study in question was “a warning to people who get screening tests that aren’t recommended, or who question whether screening can ever hurt.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Any artificial hip can occasionally make a variety of noises. But until Stryker, a medical products company, began marketing highly durable ceramic hips in the United States in 2003, squeaking was extremely rare.

Now, tens of thousands of ceramic hips later — from Stryker and other makers that entered the field — many patients say their squeaking hips are interfering with daily life. One study in the Journal of Arthroplasty found that 10 patients of 143 who received ceramic hips from 2003 to 2005, or 7 percent, developed squeaking. Meanwhile, no squeaks occurred among a control group of 48 patients who received hips made of metal and plastic. “It can interrupt sex when my wife starts laughing,” said one man, who discussed the matter on the condition that he not be named.

Beyond annoyance and embarrassment, many patients and their surgeons fear that the squeaky ceramic hips may signal that the joints are wearing out prematurely. That could force patients to undergo the very operation — a second replacement of the same hip joint — they had hoped to avoid by choosing ceramics.

Already, dozens of patients have elected to endure subsequent surgeries to replace the noisy hips. Some have sued Stryker, the pioneer and market leader, which some doctors say has been slow to take their patients’ concerns seriously.

Last fall, the Food and Drug Administration issued a warning to Stryker, saying it had failed to take the steps needed to prevent squeaking and other problems. Clouding things further, Stryker last year recalled ceramic hip parts made at its factory in Cork, Ireland, after determining that some did not meet its sterility specifications.

Stryker says that none of the problems underlying the recall or the warning letter from the F.D.A. reflect problems that cause squeaking, which it contends occurs in less than 1 percent of implants.

Whatever the actual frequency, some investigators who have looked at the problem say the squeaking seems to be associated with extreme flexing of the ceramic implants, but exactly how is unclear. In X-rays, many of the squeaking hips appear to be perfectly aligned. Nor is there a clear relationship between squeaking and hip pain or other conditions some patients say they have encountered, like the sensation that the hip disengages slightly when a patient walks.

Some patients squeak even they are walking normally, like Ms. O’Toole or Michael Mueller, a software executive in Scottsdale, Ariz. Mr. Mueller is so frustrated with squeaks, pain and popping noises for which he blames his ceramic hip that he has displayed his problem on YouTube.

While there have been no reported cases of serious mishaps, some surgeons fear that the ceramic material might shatter at some point, leaving a patient with so many inflammatory shards in the hip that a doctor could never find them all.

“Catastrophic failure has been a concern in the past, with older ceramic components,” said Dr. James M. Bried, a surgeon in Poway, Calif. Ceramic materials have been used since the 1960s. Dr. Bried, who implanted Mr. Mueller’s hip last year, said he was concerned that squeaking might be “a harbinger of something similar.”

Mr. Mueller said Dr. Bried had told him to consider getting the hip replaced “sooner rather than later.”

Stryker says such fears are overblown.

“It is important to keep this in perspective,” said Aaron R. Kwittken, a spokesman for Stryker. “Published research shows squeaking is rare compared with other total-hip-related risks like infection, dislocation and leaving patients with uneven leg length.”

But plaintiffs lawyers, who have already filed scores of lawsuits on behalf of ceramic hip patients, are gearing up to argue that squeaking is not a minor problem for many who experience it.

“We’re in the infancy of this,” said Douglass A. Kreis, a personal injury lawyer in Pensacola, Fla., whose clients include Ms. O’Toole and Mr. Johnson, who has had his ceramic hip replaced.

Most artificial hips, whatever material they are made of, share a basic design: a socket implanted in the pelvis, into which a spherical head is fitted. The head is attached to a spike that is driven into the femur, or thigh bone, to anchor it.

Durability is paramount with artificial hips. Patients worry that they will outlive their artificial hips and require a second, more extensive and even more expensive procedure at an age when their bodies may be less able to cope with the trauma. Ceramic hips were promoted as lasting much longer than the 15 years or so for conventional artificial joints made of steel and plastic.

Now that the squeaking has raised caution flags, researchers are weighing the noted durability of ceramic-on-ceramic hip joints like Stryker’s Trident model against products with other combinations of materials.

Each combination has known or suspected drawbacks. Metal-on-metal devices, for instance, slowly shed tiny ionized particles that some researchers say might promote cancer. And even the newest plastics are still not as durable as other materials, raising the risks of fragments that can lead to bone-destroying inflammations.

For patients who have already received ceramic hips that have started to squeak, many orthopedic surgeons advise nothing more than watchful waiting unless there are also signs that the hip is slipping out of place or that ceramic particles are breaking loose from the head or the socket. Doctors who have removed ceramic hips say they find dark stripes that indicate accelerated wear on the ceramic heads. But durability tests have suggested that even those extracted hips would have outlasted conventional metal-and-plastic replacement joints, according to researchers.

“There is no evidence that the wear associated with squeaking would lead systems to fail,” said Dr. James A. D’Antonio, an orthopedic surgeon outside Pittsburgh, who was a chief investigator on the clinical trials that led to regulatory approval for Stryker’s Trident.

Dr. D’Antonio, whose longstanding role in Stryker’s product development efforts earned him $1.1 million in consulting payments from the company last year, said he had implanted 400 Tridents since the clinical trials began in 1996. He said that only four of his patients had noticed squeaks and that none of them were able to reproduce them in his office.

But Dr. Fabio Orozco, a surgeon at the Rothman Institute, a major orthopedics group in Philadelphia, said that a recently completed review of about 1,500 Rothman patients with ceramic hips had found that the squeaking condition occurred in 49 of them, or about 3 percent.

“I’m very hesitant to use ceramic-on-ceramic now,” Dr. Orozco said, “unless we are talking about somebody very young.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story points out that the alternatives to a ceramic total hip replacement include hip replacements with implants made from metal and plastic. It doesn’t mention whether there are nonsurgical alternatives to hip replacement, but this is beyond the scope of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Beyond The Nasty Needle: Trying To Make Vaccines More Comfy And Convenient

News this summer of a flu vaccine patch sparked a lot of chatter. Could getting vaccinated be as easy as putting on a bandage? Could there be fewer, or at least smaller, needles in our future?

Some companies and academic labs are working to make those things happen.

They're refining technologies that involve tiny needles, less than a millimeter long, and needle-free injectors that can send a dose of vaccine through your skin in a fraction of a second.

Some of these technologies are already available on the market, while others are still being tested.

A flu vaccine patch is not yet available to the public. But one version developed by Georgia Tech's Laboratory for Drug Delivery showed promising results in its first human clinical trial, according to a study published in The Lancet in June.

The patch, about the size of a small square bandage, has tiny, dissolvable needles filled with a dose of flu vaccine. It's placed on the arm and activated through pressure. The microneedles dissolve into the skin, releasing the vaccine.

In the study, 100 participants received either the flu vaccine patch, a standard flu shot or a placebo via a patch.

Six months later, no one involved in the study had gotten the flu. People in the microneedle patch groups reported some redness, itching and tenderness but no serious side effects.

People who received the flu patch had comparable immune responses to people who had gotten the flu shot.

About 70 percent of the patients in the study preferred the patch to the regular shot, says Yasmine Gomaa, the lab's associate director.

Now, Gomaa's lab is looking beyond the flu vaccine. She says the microneedle patch could be particularly helpful in developing countries because it uses a form of vaccines that doesn't need to be kept as cold as regular vaccines. It can be stored at temperatures as high as 104 degrees Fahrenheit for up to a year, she says.

And the patch can be administered by people who aren't trained health professionals. A number of the people in the flu patch study applied it to themselves.

In 2015, Georgia Tech and the pharmaceutical company Micron Biomedical won $2.5 million in grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to develop a patch for polio immunization.

Gomaa's hope is that vaccine patches will cost less than vaccinations do now.

A 2016 study from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that the use of vaccine patches could save on cooling costs and could cut down on waste. Its analysis concluded that a dose of measles vaccine with the patch would cost just under $1, while a typical shot would cost $1.65. But that didn't take into account the costs of getting the patch to market.

The potential cost savings wouldn't happen until the patches were in "routine use," the CDC noted.

Others in the vaccine-delivery business are taking a different approach, using a new twist on a needle-free device called a jet injector that has been around for more than half a century.

Portal Instruments, a company that is developing jet injectors, uses technology based on work done by Ian Hunter at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

"Initially, we worked on microneedles," says the company's CEO Patrick Anquetil. "And then Ian realized that why don't we just remove the needle altogether? And that's how this project came to be."

Needle-free jet injectors were actually used in the 1960s in mass smallpox vaccination campaigns. As described by the CDC, these devices use a high-pressure, narrow stream of fluid to penetrate the skin. The diameter of the stream is comparable to a mosquito bite.

The devices were used to quickly vaccinate large numbers of people, including members of the armed forces.

Anquetil notes that the older devices sometimes made patients feel as if they had been punched.

"To create the jet, you have to instantaneously create 100 times more pressure than you've got in the tire of a car," he says. "Patients actually hated them because they were more painful than a needle and syringe."

"My 85-year-old neighbor still remembers how painful it was," says Ron Lowy, CEO of PharmaJet, a company that makes an FDA-approved jet injector that administers a flu vaccine.

The older devices had another problem. They used the same nozzle for multiple injections, leading to concerns about the transmission of bloodborne pathogens between patients.

Today's devices have made a lot of progress, Lowy says. Now, the syringe is changed for each patient and the injections are gentler.

"It feels like somebody snapped me with a rubber band," he says, adding that the injection happens too fast for some patients to register any sensation at all. It lasts about one-tenth of a second.

He says hundreds of thousands of people in the U.S. have already received the flu vaccine via one of PharmaJet's injectors.

"If you have your choice, you want to get poked with a needle or you want to try this? Most of the people say, 'Yeah, I'll try that,' " he says.

Cost remains an issue for some jet injectors. Portal is aiming to get its cost down to $3 or $4 per injection.

"In vaccines, what's really hard is that there's a very, very high volume, and you're competing with a needle and syringe, which is tremendously low cost," Anquetil says.

PharmaJet says the ability to give precise doses helps to save money. The company says its flu vaccine "starter kit," which can vaccinate 500 people, costs $900.

FluMist, an FDA-approved flu vaccine delivered through a nasal spray, was widely used in the U.S. and, at one point, was even the preferred method of vaccination for children.

Then last year, in a sharp turnaround, the CDC recommended that it not be used during the 2016-17 flu season after a study found it had not been very effective in the previous year, particularly among kids.

The vaccine's effectiveness was just 3 percent, so low that "no protective benefit could be measured" for children ages 2 to 17, the CDC said in a statement.

In contrast, the effectiveness of the flu shot was about 63 percent for kids in that age group.

AstraZeneca, the parent company behind FluMist, says the CDC's data contradicts data from several other studies, which show the vaccine was about 48 percent effective during the same flu season. And the same vaccine continues to be recommended and used in European Union markets, AstraZeneca says.

In the U.S., the CDC continues to recommend against the nasal spray vaccine for the upcoming flu season. AstraZeneca hopes to reverse that decision before flu season begins.

"We continue to pursue a broad-based investigation to identify potential causes of lower effectiveness" in recent years, the company said in a statement, adding that one of the four flu virus strains it used in the vaccine during the past two flu seasons may have been the problem.

The company has chosen a new strain of live virus that is similar to other strains that have proven effective in studies and clinical trials.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This story is all about alternatives. In places it could provide more complete information, as noted above, but it definitely considers several options.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This website is archived for historical purposes and is no longer being maintained or updated.

Allowing more basic emergency medical service (EMS) staff to administer naloxone could reduce drug overdose deaths that involve opioids, according to a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) study, “Disparity in Naloxone Administration by Emergency Medical Service Providers and the Burden of Drug Overdose in Rural Communities,” published in the American Journal of Public Health.

In 2013, more than 16,000 deaths in the United States involved prescription opioids, and more than 8,000 others were related to heroin. Naloxone is a prescription drug that can reverse the effects of prescription opioid and heroin overdose, and can be life-saving if administered in time.

According to the study findings, advanced EMS staff were more likely than basic EMS staff to administer naloxone. A majority of states have adopted national guidelines that prohibit basic EMS staff from administering the drug as an injection. As of 2014, only 12 states allowed basic EMS staff to administer naloxone for a suspected opioid overdose; all 50 states allow advanced EMS staff to administer the overdose reversal treatment.

“Opioid overdose deaths are devastating families and communities, especially in rural areas,” said CDC Director Tom Frieden, M.D., M.P.H. “Many of these deaths can be prevented by improving prescribing practices to prevent opioid addiction, expanding the use of medication-assisted treatment, and increasing use of naloxone for suspected overdoses. Having trained EMS staff to administer naloxone in rural areas will save lives.”

To reduce opioid overdose deaths, particularly in rural areas, CDC recommends expanding training on the administration of naloxone to all emergency service staff, and helping basic EMS personnel meet the advanced certification requirements.

“Naloxone can be given nasally to a person suspected of overdose, allowing basic EMS staff to administer the drug without injection,” said CDC Senior Health Scientist Mark Faul, Ph.D., M.A. “Naloxone is non-addictive, and expanding training on how to administer the drug can help basic emergency medical service staff reverse an opioid overdose and save more lives.”

National Emergency Medicine Service Information System data for 2012 were reviewed to better understand factors associated with naloxone administration, including demographic data, 911 call information, and details about the scene of an injury or illness as reported by EMS staff.

The findings indicate naloxone was most likely to be administered to women, people between the ages of 20 and 29, and people living in suburban areas.

In general, the rate of opioid overdose death was 45 percent higher in rural areas compared with urban areas. The use of naloxone by rural EMS staff, however, was only 22.5 percent higher when compared with urban EMS naloxone use.

Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell has made addressing opioid abuse, dependence, and overdose a priority and work is underway at multiple HHS agencies on this important issue. HHS’ Health Resources Services Administration recently released a grant opportunity aimed at reducing opioid overdose deaths in rural communities through funding for communities to purchase naloxone and train health care professionals and emergency medical staff on its use.

CDC works with states, communities, and prescribers to prevent opioid misuse and overdose by tracking and monitoring the epidemic and helping states scale up effective programs. CDC also improves patient safety by equipping health care providers with data, tools, and guidance so they can make informed treatment decisions. Learn more at www.cdc.gov/DrugOverdose.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’re giving the release points here because it does something that most releases never do. It actually gives a nod to alternatives. In a quote from CDC Director Tom Frieden, it says, “Many of these deaths can be prevented by improving prescribing practices to prevent opioid addiction, expanding the use of medication-assisted treatment, and increasing use of naloxone for suspected overdoses.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
HOUSTON - For patients with advanced, inoperable stage 3 lung cancer, concurrent chemotherapy and the specialized radiation treatment, proton therapy, offers improved survival compared to historical data for standard of care, according to a new study from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

The research, published in JAMA Oncology, reported an overall survival (OS) of 26.5 months. In contrast, the historical OS rate with standard of care concurrent chemotherapy and traditional radiation was 16 months at the time when the study was designed.

The findings are the final results of the single institution, Phase II study and represent the longest follow-up to date of stage 3 lung cancer patients who have received proton therapy, said Joe Y. Chang, M.D., professor, Radiation Oncology and the study's corresponding author.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women in the U.S. According to the American Cancer Society, more than 222,500 people will be diagnosed and 155,870 will die from the disease in 2017, with the majority of patients still being diagnosed when the disease is in an advanced stage.

"Advanced lung cancer patients with inoperable disease traditionally have been treated with concurrent chemotherapy and conventional photon radiation therapy. However, the therapy can be very difficult for patients due to associated toxicities and because many patients are also dealing with comorbidities," explained Chang.

Proton therapy is an advanced type of radiation treatment that uses a beam of protons to deliver radiation directly to the tumor, destroying cancer cells while sparing healthy tissues. Protons enter the body with a low radiation dose and stop at the tumor, matching its shape and volume or depth. They deposit the bulk of their cancer-fighting energy right at the tumor, thereby reducing the dose to cardiopulmonary structures, which impacts the toxicity, functional status, quality of life and even survival for patients, explained Chang.

"With our study, we hypothesized that proton therapy would offer a survival benefit to patients and reduce treatment-associated toxicities, which can be very serious," he said.

The study opened at MD Anderson in 2006; in this research, Chang and his colleague report on the study's five-year results.

For the prospective Phase II trial, 64 patients with inoperable, Stage III non-small-cell lung cancer were enrolled. The study's primary endpoint was OS. The researchers hypothesized that the median OS would increase from historical data of 16 months on standard therapy to 24 months. Secondary endpoints included distant metastasis and local and regional recurrence rates. Toxic effects of treatment in both the acute and late settings also were analyzed.

Median follow up was 27.3 months for all patients, and 79.6 months for alive patients. At five years, the median OS was 26.5 months, and the corresponding five-year OS was 29 percent. Median progression-free survival was 12.9 months, with a five-year progression-free survival of 22 percent.

In sum, 39 patients experienced a relapse, with distant sites representing 62 percent of all recurrences. Local and regional recurrence rates were low, 16 percent and 14 percent, respectively.

Among the acute and late toxic effects diagnosed in patients were: esophagitis, pneumonitis and cardiac arrhythmia. Of note, said Chang, no patients developed the most severe, or grade five, toxicities, as seen in patients who receive standard of care.

Chang noted his study is not without limitations. Of greatest significance: the study was designed more than a decade ago. While the study's survival, recurrence rates and toxic effects are still favorable when compared to rates associated with the most advanced traditional photon radiation therapy, intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), technology to diagnose and stage the disease, as well all treatment modalities have significantly improved.

"When the study opened, PET imaging had just been approved for lung cancer staging. The image quality was poor and didn't include a CT component in most facilities across the country," said Chang. "Obviously, the technology has improved dramatically over the last decade and has made a significant impact on diagnosis and staging. Also, delivery of both the conventional intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and proton therapy (IMPT), have improved, thereby reducing side effects for both treatment modalities."

For example, MD Anderson proton therapy patients with advanced lung cancer now can receive IMPT. The technique uses an intricate network of magnets to aim a narrow proton beam at a tumor and "paint" the radiation dose onto it layer by layer. Healthy tissue surrounding the tumor is spared, and side effects are even more reduced than earlier proton delivery, said Chang.

Chang also noted the advancements in cancer biology and immunotherapy and that both are important areas of research focus in combination with proton therapy.

In addition to Chang, other authors on the all-MD Anderson study include: Stephen Hahn, M.D., Ritsuko Komaki, M.D., Pamela K. Allen, Ph.D., Zhongxing Liao, M.D., Steven H. Lin, M.D., Ph.D., Daniel Gomez, M.D., James Welsh, M.D., Melenda Jeter M.D., James Cox, M.D., Michael O'Reilly, M.D., Ming Li, M.D. and Wencheng Zhang, M.D., all of Radiation Oncology; John V. Heymach, M.D., Ph.D. and Charles Lu, M.D., both of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology; Ronald X. Zhu, Ph.D., Xiaodong Zhang, Ph.D., Heng Li, Ph.D., Radhe Mohan, Ph.D., all of Radiation Physics; and Ara A. Vaporciyan, M.D., Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. Vivek Verma, M.D., now at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, also contributed to the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release states that results were compared to historical controls, but then goes on to detail all of the limitations with this comparison. The release does mention intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) at the end and states the historical control was chemotherapy with conventional radiation.
The alternatives could have been presented in a more straight-forward way.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Also, eteplirsen would be appropriate for only about 13 percent to 15 percent of Duchenne patients, those with the particular genetic mutation the drug is meant to counteract. However, a similar approach might work for some other mutations.

Duchenne, which affects as many as 15,000 Americans, mainly boys and young men, is the most severe common form of muscular dystrophy, a disease made more prominent by years of Jerry Lewis telethons. Those with the disease make barely any dystrophin, a protein necessary for muscles to function. Patients typically lose the ability to walk as teenagers and die by age 30.

While steroids, which reduce inflammation, can slow progression of the disease, they have undesirable side effects. Eteplirsen, which Sarepta says has shown no side effects so far, is vying with a similar drug being developed by GlaxoSmithKline to become the first medicine that works by directly countering the cause of the disease.

Eteplirsen could also be the first drug to reach the market for Sarepta since it was founded 32 years ago. It changed its name recently from AVI BioPharma to distance itself from its underachieving past.

Shares of Sarepta nearly tripled on Wednesday, closing at $44.93. And the stock had already roughly quadrupled since July, when Sarepta announced some interim results from the study.

The study measured how far the boys could walk in six minutes. Those who received the higher dose walked an average of 21 meters farther after 48 weeks of treatment than at the beginning of the trial, a gain of about 5 percent. The boys in the placebo group walked 68 fewer meters at the end than at the beginning, a decline of about 17 percent.

One possible reason for skepticism is that two of the boys on a lower dose of the drug rapidly lost the ability to walk, even though the level of dystrophin in their muscles increased substantially.

While the company excluded those boys from its analysis as outliers, the Food and Drug Administration might not do so. That could make it harder for the Sarepta to win approval for the drug based only on this small trial, something the company hopes to do.

“If you wait and require this company to do another two-year study, a lot of these boys are going to be in a wheelchair,” Christopher Garabedian, the Sarepta chief executive, said in an interview.

Patient groups may also put some pressure on the Food and Drug Administration to approve the drug quickly. But some also want Sarepta to make the drug available to more patients on a compassionate basis even before approval.

Ten-year-old Max Leclaire of Saxtons River, Vt., who has been receiving the highest dose in the trial, can now walk up stairs without having to pull himself up by the handrail, according to his mother, Jenn McNary. “He’s no longer riding the handicap bus to school,” she said.

But Ms. McNary said Sarepta had refused to provide the drug to Max’s 13-year-old brother, Austin, who could not be in the trial because he already could not walk.

Mr. Garabedian said Sarepta did not have the money or the manufacturing capacity to make the drug available outside of clinical trials. “That would be the quickest path to insolvency,” he said.

If eteplirsen gets to market, it would come nearly three decades after the 1986 discovery of the gene responsible for Duchenne. It would also represent a success, after decades of setbacks, for the technology eteplirsen uses, called antisense, which is a way of turning off specific genes.

Eteplirsen actually turns off just one part of the dystrophin gene, known as exon 51, which contains a mutation that in some patients stops production of dystrophin. By skipping over this exon, muscle cells can produce an imperfect form of dystrophin that nonetheless is at least partly functional.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story noted that there is at least one other drug in development and that there is a rather ineffective treatment available in the form of steroids.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Study published in the Journal of the American Osteopathic Association finds OMT plus antibiotics reduces risk of death for the most severely ill patients

CHICAGO--August 29, 2016-- An analysis of multicenter randomized controlled clinical trial found osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) for pneumonia reduced length of hospital stay in adults 50 to 74 years old and lowered in-hospital mortality rates for patients 75 and older. The study results published in The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association.

The study analyzed 375 patients ages 50 or older who were randomly assigned to three groups, either receiving OMT, a light touch or conventional care only. Differences between treatment groups were evaluated for subgroups of participants based on their age, Pneumonia Severity Index and type of pneumonia. The data were analyzed by intention-to-treat analysis of all participants and by per-protocol analysis of participants who finished the study without missing any protocol treatments.

Key findings by per-protocol analysis of the younger subgroup found that OMT decreased hospital stay by 1.1 days compared to those who received conventional care only. By intention-to-treat analysis of the older subgroup, in-hospital mortality rates were 11 percent lower to the conventional-care only group. OMT also reduced the in-hospital mortality rates of those with the highest severity of illness.

"Osteopathic manipulative therapy was developed in the pre-antibiotic era specifically for the management of pneumonia. While antibiotic therapy is the current standard of care, the emergence of resistant bacteria is a global threat and provides an incentive to explore adjunct treatments that can improve their efficacy," said James Bailey, DO, assistant professor in physical medicine and rehabilitation at Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine. "This study should encourage physicians to use their osteopathic techniques when treating older patients with pneumonia."

Pneumonia is a leading cause of death for elderly patients, with over 90 percent of pneumonia-related deaths among those 65 and older. Previous studies have also shown that OMT can improve the efficacy of antibiotics in pneumonia patients.

Osteopathic manipulative techniques can help treat structural and tissue abnormalities, relieve joint restriction and misalignment, restore muscle and tissue balance and promote the overall movement blood flow throughout the body. When appropriate, it can complement, and in some cases replace, medications or surgery.

Disclosures: The basis for this analysis, The Multicenter Osteopathic Pneumonia Study in the Elderly (MOPSE) clinical trial, was funded by a consortium of foundations including the Foundation for Osteopathic Health Services. Please see the study for full details.

About the Journal of the American Osteopathic Association

The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association (JAOA) is the official scientific publication of the American Osteopathic Association. Edited by Robert Orenstein, DO, it is the premier scholarly peer-reviewed publication of the osteopathic medical profession. The JAOA's mission is to advance medicine through the publication of peer-reviewed osteopathic research.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release explains the comparison groups in the study and offers the graphic chart. This category would have been improved with more detail, particularly what exactly is involved the treatment arms (OMT and light touch).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"As the U.S. health care payment system shifts from volume to value, we are focused on identifying new approaches to health service delivery that provide better care and improve patient outcomes while lowering costs," said Troyen A. Brennan, MD, study author and Chief Medical Officer, CVS Health. "Our research shows that home infusion care is a promising model that is both cost- and clinically-effective and is overwhelmingly preferred by patients when intravenous therapy is required."

Researchers conducted a systematic review of existing peer-reviewed research evaluating infusion care for several conditions, including cystic fibrosis, antibiotics following orthopedic surgery and several cancers requiring infused chemotherapies. Researchers compared measures of quality, safety, clinical outcomes, quality of life and costs of home infusion services to those provided in medical settings. The research showed that patients receiving intravenous therapy at home had as good or better clinical outcomes as those patients who received the same therapy in a traditional health care setting. In addition, patients overwhelmingly preferred receiving their infusion therapies at home, reporting fewer disruptions in personal schedules and responsibilities. The costs associated with home infusion were also consistently lower than services provided in a health care facility, with savings ranging between $1,928 and $2,974 per course of treatment.

"At CVS Health, we provide important home infusion services to patients through Coram, which is just one of the ways we are expanding our clinical delivery model and helping to move important health services to lower cost sites of care," added Alan Lotvin, MD, Executive Vice President, CVS Specialty. "In fact, our patients report high satisfaction with our Coram home infusion services, citing convenience and comfort as key elements that improved their overall experience."



Home infusion services are a rapidly growing delivery model in the health care system with rising rates of chronic and acute conditions that require intravenous therapy. Despite this, clinical outcomes and quality of care have not previously been systematically evaluated. While many commercial health plans provide comprehensive coverage for home infusion services, Medicare has limited reimbursement for this type of care, and Congress is discussing how to implement a comprehensive home infusion benefit for Medicare beneficiaries.

Coram, a service provided by CVS Health, provides vital infusion care and support to tens of thousands of Americans each month with a range of conditions including immune deficiencies, rheumatoid arthritis and serious infections requiring intravenous antibiotic therapy. Care is administered by experienced infusion nurses and pharmacists, and in addition, patients receive additional disease management education and support throughout their treatment.

The CVS Health Research Institute is focused on contributing to the body of scientific knowledge related to pharmacy and health care through research collaborations with external academic institutions, participation in federally-funded research, analysis and sharing of CVS Health data sources and coordination of pilot programs and initiatives. CVS Health Research Institute findings support a continuous quality improvement environment, which encourages product innovation and development to benefit CVS Health patients, clients and their members.

About CVS Health 

CVS Health (NYSE: CVS) is a pharmacy innovation company helping people on their path to better health. Through its more than 9,600 retail pharmacies, more than 1,100 walk-in medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with nearly 80 million plan members, a dedicated senior pharmacy care business serving more than one million patients per year, and expanding specialty pharmacy services, the Company enables people, businesses and communities to manage health in more affordable and effective ways. This unique integrated model increases access to quality care, delivers better health outcomes and lowers overall health care costs. Find more information about how CVS Health is shaping the future of health at .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release explains the alternatives of clinic or hospital infusion compared to home infusion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>

• Effectiveness shown in tests on ovarian and bowel cancer
• Developed by researchers at the University of Warwick’s Warwick Cancer Research Centre
• New drug could be cheaper to produce and less harmful to healthy cells

Tests have shown that a new cancer drug, FY26, is 49 times more potent than the clinically used treatment Cisplatin.

Based on a compound of the rare precious metal osmium and developed by researchers at the University of Warwick’s Department of Chemistry and the Warwick Cancer Research Unit, FY26 is able to shut down a cancer cell by exploiting weaknesses inherent in their energy generation.

The researchers argue that the drug could be cheaper to produce, less harmful to healthy cells than existing treatments and has been shown to be active against cancer cells which have become resistant to platinum-based drugs.

The experiments conducted by the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute comprising 809 cancer cell lines found that FY26 was 49 times more potent than cisplatin. Similar results were obtained by the National Cancer Institute USA in tests conducted on 60 cell lines.

The new drug works by forcing cancer cells to use their mitochondria, the ‘power house’ of a cell, to generate the energy necessary to function. Whilst healthy cells use mitochondria to generate energy, cancer cells contain defective mitochondria which are incapable of sustaining the cell’s energy requirements.

In the absence of FY26, cancer cells switch from using their defective mitochondria to using metabolic activity in their cytoplasm to generate energy. By stopping this switch of energy source, the drug causes the cancer cell to die.

Lead researcher Professor Peter Sadler, of the University of Warwick’s Department of Chemistry, said explains:

“Healthy cells generate their energy in organelles called mitochondria, but cancer cells have defective mitochondria and are forced to generate energy through glycolysis in the cytoplasm. Our new compounds work by attacking the energy balance in cancer cells”.

Commenting on the drug’s benefits when compared to existing platinum-based drugs, such as Cisplatin, Professor Sadler says:

“Platinum-based drugs are used in nearly 50% of all chemotherapeutic regimens and exert their activity by damaging DNA and cannot select between cancerous and non-cancerous cells. This can lead to a wide-range of side-effects from renal failure to neurotoxicity, ototoxicity, nausea and vomiting.”

“Existing platinum-based cancer treatments often become less effective after the first course, as cancer cells learn how they are being attacked, but our new osmium compound with its different mechanism of action, remains active against cancer cells that have become resistant to drugs such as Cisplatin”.

The research could also lead to substantial improvements in cancer survival rates, suggests co-researcher Dr Isolda Romero-Canelon:

“Current statistics indicate that one in every two people will develop some kind of cancer during their life time, with approximately one woman dying of ovarian cancer every two hours in the UK according to Cancer Research UK and two deaths every hour from bowel cancer.

“It is clear that a new generation of drugs is necessary to save more lives and our research points to a highly effective way of defeating cancerous cells”.

The research, supported by the European Research Council and titled Potent organo-osmium compound shifts metabolism in epithelial ovarian cancer cells, is published by PNAS. The paper describes the comprehensive systems biology approach used to elucidate the mechanism of osmium action of FY26, led by PhD student Jess Hearn. Importantly this analysis also pinpointed 3 mutations in the mitochondrial DNA of ovarian cancer cells.

Following the successful test results the researchers have been awarded a Wellcome Trust Pathfinder grant to begin preclinical development of organo-osmium compounds.

The researchers thank the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (Grant 324594, Systems Biology studentship for J.M.H.), the European Research Council (Grants 247450 and 324594), and the Wellcome Trust (Grants 086357 and 102696) for support, as well as the European Union COST Action CM1105.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: One researcher does talk about a comparison with existing treatments and why new therapies are needed.
“Existing platinum-based cancer treatments often become less effective after the first course, as cancer cells learn how they are being attacked, but our new osmium compound with its different mechanism of action, remains active against cancer cells that have become resistant to drugs such as Cisplatin”.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Christine Curtis of Sterling says she is a “happy mom” again, crediting her recovery from debilitating depression to an expensive treatment that sends magnetic pulses into the brain.

“I can’t put a price on it,” said Curtis, 36, who said she feels better than she has in a decade after completing 30 days of the procedure, called repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, or rTMS.

An increasing number of psychiatrists and hospitals — as well as entrepreneurs opening rTMS centers around the country — are betting that there are millions of people like Curtis, discouraged by depression treatments that have proved unsuccessful and willing to pony up thousands of dollars for the possibility of relief. The treatment, which has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration, is covered by Medicare in five states, but few private insurers pay for it routinely.

While rTMS has ardent supporters, its effectiveness is still debated, and there is little evidence showing how long the results last. The technique has been shown to work better than a placebo, but the proportion of patients who show complete relief ranges widely, from as few as 10 percent to as many as 57 percent, according to various studies.

The debate has huge implications, not just for many of the 14 million Americans who suffer from major depression every year but also for businesses eyeing a potentially lucrative market and insurers weighing whether to cover it.

About half of those 14 million Americans seek relief through psychotherapy and prescription drug treatment, according to an evaluation by the federal Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. But studies show that antidepressants provide complete cessation of symptoms only about a third of the time. Magnetic stimulation is aimed at patients with such “treatment-resistant depression.”

Supporters say rTMS is worth the cost — between $6,000 and $12,000 for the four-to-six-week treatment — because it enables people such as Curtis to resume productive lives.

Skeptics question the price tag in light of uncertain benefits.

“The majority of studies that evaluated rTMS failed to find evidence of an enduring treatment effect after the initial response . . . and some . . . failed to find any significant treatment effect,” concluded Health Plan of Nevada, a UnitedHealthcare insurer, which rejected coverage in March.

With the nation’s health-care spending expected to top $2.7 trillion this year, the battle over paying for rTMS demonstrates why it is so difficult to rein in health-care costs. New technology is generally allowed into the market after studies show it is reasonably safe and more effective than placebos. But that’s not the same as showing it works better than current approaches.

Experts differ over whether it’s smart to cover new techniques if they haven’t proved superior to established methods. And they can also disagree over the medical research itself: Was a study done well? Were there enough patients enrolled? Did it ask the right questions? Insurers often call for more research, while doctors and patients — many desperate for help — warn against delay. And costs are rarely discussed publicly.

‘What did I have to lose?’

In December, when Curtis first had a magnetic coil placed on her scalp while a $70,000 machine sent pulses into part of her brain, she had already spent a decade trying seven different prescription medications in her battle with depression.

Getting no relief but gaining weight and feeling sluggish and “out of it” because of the drugs’ side effects, she eagerly agreed to the month-long series of five-day-a-week treatments. Most patients have between four and six weeks of near daily sessions.

Curtis’s psychiatrist, Niku Singh, who is also the medical director at TMS NeuroHealth, suggested that she try the procedure. “I was all for it,” said Curtis, whose insurance did not cover the treatment. “It’s a matter of nothing else had worked, so what did I have to lose?”

As the very first patient treated at the Tysons Corner facility, which opened in December, Curtis paid only $3,000 because the center needed a test patient to meet the requirements of the device manufacturer. The fee is generally about $10,000, but officials say they work with patients who can't afford that. Founders of the center compare rTMS’s potential to that of the now-ubiquitous laser eye clinics; they aim to open a chain of centers nationally that will take walk-ins and accept referrals from physicians. Walk-in patients without a doctor referral would be screened by the center’s medical director to determine if they are in fact appropriate candidates for rTMS treatment.

“We looked at the Lasik model and said, ‘Can we do this with depression? Can we do this with TMS?’” said Bill Leonard, president of the company.

During a treatment, a patient sits in a chair like one in a dentist’s office while an electromagnetic coil is placed against her head. The machine sends four seconds of magnetic pulses into the brain in 26-second intervals, making a woodpecker-like tapping noise. The whole procedure takes about 40 minutes and is monitored by a technician. Patients say it does not hurt. Studies have shown that side effects are few and generally minor, such as headaches and scalp irritations.

Singh said rTMS works by having the pulses stimulate a region of the brain that helps control mood; researchers say the pulses help depression by activating the release of neurotransmitters such as serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine. (Singh, who owns two psychiatry practices in the region, says he does not have an investment interest in TMS NeuroHealth.)

The use of rTMS for altering mood or affecting the brain has been studied since at least the early 1990s. After reviewing data from a study of 301 patients, the FDA cleared the device in 2008 for the treatment of major depression in adults who had failed to improve after at least one round of drug therapy.

That study was funded by the device’s manufacturer, Neuronetics, a company based in Malvern, Pa. It found that up to 17 percent of patients treated with the device for six weeks became symptom-free, about twice as many as those treated with a sham rTMS machine.

Subsequent studies have shown a range of results, with about a third of patients reporting complete relief. One 2010 study of 199 “moderately treatment resistent” patients funded by the National Institute of Mental Health found that rTMS was four times as likely to get patients symptom-free as was a sham procedure. Patients in that study were treated five times a week for three to five weeks. One key measure — known as the “number needed to treat” — found that one patient became symptom-free for every 12 who were treated. Five percent of the patients in the sham group became symptom-free.

Supporters such as those at TMS NeuroHealth say they are seeing better results than that among their patients, who can continue taking antidepressants along with their treatment. Curtis, for example, still takes a daily antidepressant four months after completing her treatment, but she has been able to sharply reduce the dosage.

Curtis said she noticed no change in her depression at the very start of her rTMS treatment, but she began feeling better after about two weeks of treatment. “I’m not up and down anymore,” she said.

For patients who don’t respond to prescription drugs and talk therapy, the other major option is electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT, in which an electrical current is sent through the brain to deliberately cause a seizure. The procedure, which is more widely used than rTMS, requires two to three treatments a week for three to four weeks and is effective for many patients. But it requires anesthesia and sometimes causes memory loss or confusion. rTMS does not require anesthesia, and its side effects are generally mild. A few small studies have looked at its effects on cognitive function and found either no effect or slight improvement, according to the AHRQ analysis. The costs of ECT — typically about $3,300 for four weeks of thrice-weekly treatments, according to AHRQ data — are covered by most private insurers as well as by Medicare and Medicaid. The cost is higher, however, if a patient must be admitted to the hospital.

Linda Carpenter, an associate professor of psychiatry and human behavior at Brown University, who has conducted medical studies using rTMS for depressed patients, says the treatment is effective for some patients, possibly even better than simply trying another medication. But she says questions remain about how long the effects last and how often a patient should return for additional sessions.

“What’s the range of booster treatments people need?” she asks. “Is it once a week, or every couple of years? There’s a huge range in my clinical experience.” Carpenter, a physician, says research has not found any safety issues for patients returning for additional treatments, but cost is a factor.

Uncertainty about its long-term effectiveness is why most insurers do not routinely cover rTMS. Medicare also has mainly rejected coverage, though in January, the administrator of the program’s New England region became the first to approve it, citing the AHRQ report and an assessment from an independent regional advisory board.

That 19-member panel voted 10 to 5 last year that studies of the treatment showed it to be as good as or better than usual care for depression. Six of the 10 said it represented a “reasonable” value for its cost; four saw it as a low value. (The same panel voted 9 to 6 that rTMS’s health benefit was equal to that of ECT.) A similar coverage decision proposal is being considered by the Medicare office serving the Washington region.

Even with limited insurance coverage, about 8,000 patients have had the treatment, and the number of treatment centers has doubled to a total of about 400 nationwise since 2010, according to reports by the device’s maker. Centers include some big names, such as Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

Still, some are not convinced. “The initial treatment with rTMS is $12,000: That’s a lot of generic Prozac or Effexor,” which are cost-effective antidepressants with long track records, said Joel Rubinstein, associate medical director of Harvard Pilgrim HealthCare, an insurer that does not cover rTMS. “Managed care has an obligation to a population. You’re shepherding a fixed amount of resources across a large population and trying to do it according to some sort of evidence-based system.”

Kaiser Health News is an editorially independent program of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit, nonpartisan health policy research and communication organization not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job comparing rTMS with the major treatment alternative for patients who do not respond to antidepressant medication: electroconvulsive therapy. ECT has a much longer track record of use and is more effective, but has more risks and side effects and may not be feasible for patients who are not good candidates for anesthesia.
The story could have compared rTMS to FDA approved vagal nerve stimulation (also evaluated in the AHRQ report) – which has even weaker evidence for benefit.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ultrasound waves applied to the whole brain improve cognitive dysfunction in mice with conditions simulating vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease. The research, conducted by scientists at Tohoku University in Japan, suggests that this type of therapy may also benefit humans.

The team, led by cardiologist Hiroaki Shimokawa, found that applying low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) to the whole brain of the mice improved blood vessel formation and nerve cell regeneration without having obvious side effects.

"The LIPUS therapy is a non-invasive physiotherapy that could apply to high-risk elderly patients without the need for surgery or anaesthesia, and could be used repeatedly," says Shimokawa.

Dementia affects about 50 million people worldwide, with 10 million new cases occurring every year. But there are currently no curative treatments available for vascular dementia or Alzheimer's disease, the most common causes of dementia. Also, the cells lining the brain's blood vessels are tightly packed, forming a blood-brain barrier that prevents large molecules from crossing into the brain tissue. This limits the types of drugs and cell therapies that could be made available to treat dementia.

Shimokawa and his team had conducted previous studies showing that LIPUS improved blood vessel formation in pigs with myocardial ischemia, a condition where there is reduced blood flow to the heart. Other studies have reported that LIPUS increases the production of proteins involved in nerve cell survival and growth, in addition to a role in promoting nerve regeneration. Focusing LIPUS treatment on a region in the brain called the hippocampus, which is involved in memory, has also been found to improve dementia in mice, but the details of how it does this need to be more fully investigated.

The Tohoku University team wanted to find out if whole-brain rather than focused LIPUS is effective in treating mouse models of dementia, and if it was, what was happening at the molecular levels to achieve this.

They found that cognitive impairment markedly improved in mice with conditions similar to vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease when LIPUS was applied to the whole brain three times a day for 20 minutes each time. The mice with vascular dementia received the treatment on the first, third and fifth days following a surgical procedure that limited the brain's blood supply. The mice with a condition simulating Alzheimer's disease in humans received 11 LIPUS treatments over a period of three months.

At the molecular level, genes related to the cells lining blood vessels were turned on. Also, there was increased expression of an enzyme involved in blood vessel formation and a protein involved in nerve cell survival and growth.

The researchers conclude that their study, recently published in the journal Brain Stimulation, provides the first experimental evidence that whole-brain LIPUS therapy markedly improves cognitive dysfunctions without serious side effects by enhancing specific cells related to dementia's pathology.

The first clinical trials to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of the LIPUS treatment are already underway.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release states that “there are currently no curative treatments available for vascular dementia or Alzheimer’s disease, the most common causes of dementia.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) The first large head-to-head comparison of two opioid addiction medications found that, although they were equally effective in getting people off of high levels of opioids, users had a significantly more difficult time starting a regimen of naltrexone, compared with buprenorphine.

Buprenorphine is commonly known by the the brand name Suboxone, and naltrexone is sold under the brand name Vivitrol.

The study, published Tuesday in the Lancet , looked at 570 patients with opioid addiction at eight inpatient treatment centers across the country for 24 weeks. Half of the group was assigned to naltrexone and the other half to bupenorphine.

Six percent of those enlisted to use buprenorphine were unable to start their treatment, whereas 28% of those assigned to naltrexone dropped out before starting the therapy.

That hurdle is attributed to the fact that in order to start naltrexone, a person has to have detoxed or not used opioids for several days, whereas a user can transition from opioids to buprenorphine seamlessly. "If you're currently opiate-dependent ... (naltrexone) takes more work," said Dr. Joshua Lee , the lead author of the study, who studies opioid addiction behavior and treatment at New York University.

Once on either of the medications, people fared equally well. "They tend to stay on medications about the same rate. They report good outcomes, avoiding heroin use," Lee said. However, both groups also reported similar challenges staying with the regimens: Just 40% of patients still used the drugs after 24 weeks.

What was important, Lee said, was for opioid addicts as well as treatment providers to understand that addiction isn't one-size-fits-all. "Much like you would expect if the doctor told you 'you have cancer' or 'you have diabetes,' then there are different ways you could pursue treatment," he said.

Public health experts consider medicated-assisted treatment the gold standard of opioid addiction treatment. It combines medication with counseling to help addicts wean off of high opioid use. Public health experts say it can help solve the staggering opioid overdose epidemic.

Methadone may be the best-known form of medicated-assisted treatment, but it requires patients to have the drug administered daily in a clinic. Two other options have become increasingly popular: buprenorphine, which can be taken outside a clinic, and naltrexone, which is administered monthly.

Legally prescribed opioid drugs like oxycodone and hydrocodone work in the same manner as illicit drugs like heroin. They all chemically bind to the opioid receptors in the brain to help dull pain and, in some people, provide euphoria.

The body also produces natural opioids, but the more narcotics a person takes, the less opioids the body naturally produces. Without the opioids, people can go into withdrawal, all contributing to a cycle of dependency.

"To feel normal, they need opiates on those receptors," Banta-Green said. Buprenorphine and methadone, which are opioids, work by reducing people's cravings. "They bind to prevent withdrawal, giving some opiate effect," he said.

On the other hand, naltrexone works by chemically blocking those receptors, which is why someone needs to detox before starting the regimen. "You're not getting an opiate effect," Banta-Green explained.

If a person takes an opioid while on naltrexone, it is unlikely they will feel any opioid sensation. If a person is using opioids and takes naltrexone, it can induce a feeling of withdrawal. "It addresses craving in a different way. The person knows they can't use," he said.

So, for example, a person who is actively using opioids and can't manage the withdrawals may be better suited for buprenorphine, while someone coming from a facility where he or she has detoxed and who doesn't want to use opioids may be better suited for naltrexone.

What is key, said Dr. Miriam Komaromy, is meeting a patient where they are and understanding what best meets their needs.

Addiction "is an incredibly deadly disease," said Komaromy, an addiction specialist at the University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center. And as public policymakers, prisons and drug courts play a larger role in treating addiction, public health experts like Komaromy argue that it is imperative to look at "evidence-based ways instead of having a moralistic view."

Banta-Green says he talks to a lot of judges who are trying to understand addiction treatment. "I say this a lot to judges: You can't just offer one medication. Just like any other medication, some people are going to feel right with one as opposed to the other."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story compares two treatment drugs, as well as methadone. That’s sufficient, although non-medication-assisted alternatives were not discussed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Australian researchers have developed an experimental blood test they say is the first blood test capable of detecting melanoma -- an aggressive form of skin cancer -- in its early stages with a high degree of accuracy.

The test could speed up the diagnosis process, saving thousands of lives.

Scientists at Edith Cowan University in Western Australia tested blood samples for the antibodies typically created by the immune system in response to melanoma and identified them with significant accuracy.

Antibodies "are easily accessible in the blood, so it provides a fantastic test to identify an early-stage cancer," said project lead Professor Mel Ziman, leader of the university's Melanoma Research Group on Monday.

In the study , published Tuesday in the journal Oncotarget, Ziman's team screened 245 blood samples from both melanoma patients and healthy volunteers. The researchers were able to identify people with melanoma with 79% accuracy and people without a melanoma with 84% accuracy.

"In order for it to be valued by clinicians we would need to get to 90% accuracy in detection," she said. "So we are doing a clinical trial with 1000 participants to refine our test to get to this point."

If further trials are successful, Ziman estimates the test could be distributed internationally in up to five years.

Patients who returned a positive result would still need a biopsy to confirm the blood test and determine how far the cancer had developed, Ziman said.

The Australian team believe theirs would be the first to detect melanoma.

'In the wrong place with the wrong skin color'

Melanoma cancers are dangerous, abnormal growths on the surface of the skin caused by sun damage, which can spread throughout the body if left untreated.

The problem is particularly serious in Australia, where melanomas were the fourth most commonly diagnosed cancer in 2017 and cause about 1,700 deaths a year, according to the university.

"We're in the wrong place with the wrong skin color. We've had a lot of migrants from European nations, so they're fair-skinned ... and we do have a very intense sun here," Ziman said.

If detected early, skin cancers have a survival rate as high as 95%, the research team said, but it drops to just 50% if diagnosed late.

Surgery to remove the growth is the most common form of treatment.

Ziman said current methods of melanoma detection are expensive and invasive, involving a trip to a clinician, who must biopsy the lesion to discover whether it is cancerous.

For potential sufferers in remote areas, away from skin specialists, diagnosis can be especially tricky, he said, making a simple blood test an easy alternative to identify those at risk.

Over three years, the research team identified a combination of 10 types of antibodies that best signal the presence of a melanoma.

Antibodies are the products of the body's immune system, created to battle not only bacteria and viruses but abnormal cancer cells, Ziman said.

Dr. Jodie Moffat, head of early diagnosis at Cancer Research UK, agreed that a test which finds melanoma earlier could help reduce deaths from the disease, adding that "melanoma can be more than skin deep, and it's much harder to treat when diagnosed at a late stage after it has spread."

However, she stressed the fact this new test has not undergone clinical trials.

"We need to know how accurate it is, if it can save lives, and how it could work in practice. So, although a blood test to find skin cancer earlier is certainly exciting, research in this field still has hurdles to overcome," she said.

In the meantime, "people can help spot skin cancer early by knowing what's normal for their skin," said Moffat. In turn people should talk to a health professional about any "unusual or lasting changes to a mole, freckle or normal patch of skin."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job in providing the current diagnostic methods.
The story seemed to give mixed messages about the value of screening with the new blood test. An investigator is quoted as noting that current methods of melanoma detection are expensive and invasive, involving a trip to a clinician, who must biopsy the lesion to discover whether it is cancerous.  Elsewhere, the release notes that you still need a biopsy to evaluate a positive blood test.  Clearly, a clinician visit and biopsy will always be required to diagnosis a cancer.
Aside from self-examination, having a clinician perform a skin exam during routine examinations is another alternative to the blood test–but is not addressed in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Acupuncture No Better Than Placebo for Hot Flashes

The search for a benign, effective alternative treatment for hot flashes -- which has included the use of soy products, Chinese herbs and hypnosis -- has hit another roadblock.

A new study of acupuncture by Mayo Clinic researchers has found that sham treatments were no better than real acupuncture in relieving the daily drenching sweats that some women find disabling during menopause.

The new research, presented last month at the North American Research Conference on Complementary and Alternative Medicine in Edmonton, Alberta, is scheduled to be published in the journal Menopause early next year, according to lead researcher Ann Vincent, an assistant professor of medicine at the Rochester, Minn., clinic.

Vincent said she and her colleagues were disappointed by the results of the study, which was funded by Mayo and prompted in part by the findings from the Women's Health Initiative (WHI), a federally funded study of more than 36,000 women ages 50 to 79.

"We were hoping for something better," she said.

Beginning in 2002, WHI researchers reported that estrogen was beneficial in reducing hot flashes, but that the hormone, routinely prescribed to middle-aged women for years, also raised the risk of cancer, heart disease, stroke, dementia and other ailments.

As a result, federal health officials have recommended that women bothered by menopausal symptoms such as unpredictable sweats, sleep disturbances and vaginal dryness take the lowest dose of estrogen for the shortest possible time. Hot flashes, one of the most common symptoms of menopause, affect an estimated 75 percent of women, most of them in their forties and fifties.

It is unclear what causes hot flashes, which range in severity from barely noticeable to embarrassingly obvious and can leave some sufferers red-faced and wrung out. In most cases they are transitory, lasting only a few months or years, but in some cases they can last a decade or more. Hot flashes typically begin in the year or so before menopause and tend to abate in the years afterward.

Experts in women's health say they are one of the most common ailments for which women use alternative medicine and that interest in non-hormonal treatments has increased as a result of the WHI findings.

The study of acupuncture as a remedy for hot flashes was sparked by reports from women who had undergone the ancient Chinese therapy for other problems and reported that their hot flashes seemed to moderate.

Acupuncture involves the use of hair-thin disposable metallic needles inserted into various parts of the body; treatments are supposed to be painless and are designed to correct energy imbalances.

The 2,000-year-old treatment is widely used around the world, according to the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM), part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

A 1997 NIH consensus statement on acupuncture found that its success has been mixed, but some studies have found that it might be effective in blunting postoperative pain and in reducing the vomiting and nausea that often follows chemotherapy.

To prove it is effective in reducing hot flashes, the Mayo team needed to demonstrate that it was superior to sham, or placebo, treatment. That requirement has hobbled other alternative treatments, including the herb red clover and vitamin E supplements. That's because hot flashes have a high placebo-response rate: Symptoms often improve, at least temporarily, with a dummy treatment. Researchers believe this may result from the perception of patients that they are being treated with something that is likely to be effective.

Vincent's group recruited 103 women between the ages of 45 and 59 who reported that they had at least five hot flashes per day and were not using any other treatments for them. Half were randomly assigned to receive a series of 10 standardized acupuncture treatments -- needles were placed at the same spots in the arms, legs and lower belly; the other half received sham treatments in which needles were placed superficially near the same locations but away from so-called pressure points.

Researchers knew who was receiving sham treatment, but the women, who completed questionnaires detailing the extent of their hot flashes, did not.

By the end of six weeks, there was no difference between the groups: 61 percent of the sham group was experiencing hot flashes, while 62 percent who got actual acupuncture reported them.

That doesn't surprise Adriane Fugh-Berman, associate professor in the complementary medicine program at Georgetown University School of Medicine.

"Hot flashes are one of the most placebo-responsive conditions," she said. Some herbs and supplements seem to work, she added, but improvement has proven to be temporary. ?
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Other options for dealing with menopausal hot flashes are reviewed, along with their shortcomings. However, this section was brief and could have discussed many other options which have known benefit. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Developing a vaccine to stop HIV is thought to be among the most daunting challenges in medicine for one big reason: The virus is extraordinarily genetically diverse, even more so than the flu. So it’s difficult to think about how a single shot might work against all the different HIV subtypes circulating around the world.

But scientists may be inching toward a vaccine that could tackle HIV’s genetic diversity and prevent the virus from taking hold in people.

Researchers from the National Institutes of Health and Johnson & Johnson at the International AIDS Society conference in Paris Monday morning presented data on a clinical trial of what’s called the “Ad26-env mosaic vaccine.”

The mosaic vaccine was developed using a computer algorithm to analyze HIV data from around the world and select a range of HIV sequences to include in a shot. It’s called a “mosaic” because it involves taking pieces of different viruses and sticking them together to generate immune responses that can cover a broad range of HIV subtypes.

“One of the great challenges for development of HIV vaccine is viral diversity,” said Dan Barouch, a lead researcher on the vaccine and director of the Center for Virology and Vaccine Research at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. “The mosaic strategy is one way to attempt to deal with the global virus diversity.”

A word of caution, though: We’re only in the early phase of human testing, and the vaccine could ultimately fail to prevent the virus from spreading among people. But so far, the HIV community is carefully watching the Ad26 vaccine research because the approach seems quite promising.

The mosaic approach seems promising in very early clinical research

In the 35 years of the HIV epidemic, only four HIV vaccine concepts have been tested in humans. The mosaic strategy is the fifth concept, and one of only two HIV vaccines that’s currently part of clinical trials of efficacy in humans. (The other is the HVTN 702 HIV vaccine candidate, now underway in Thailand.)

In the study of the Ad26 mosaic vaccine, called the APPROACH trial, 393 volunteers in the United States, Rwanda, Uganda, South Africa, and Thailand were randomly assigned to receive one of seven experimental vaccines or a placebo. The mosaic vaccine was the best tolerated and also capable of generating anti-HIV immune responses in all the people who received the shots.

Before this, studies of the mosaic vaccine in rhesus monkeys showed a 66 percent efficacy rate, meaning 66 percent of monkeys that got the shot were protected from the virus. (With HIV, 50 to 60 percent is about the efficacy range researchers hope for.) Interestingly, in the early human study, the immune response was comparable to the rhesus monkey one, which gave the researchers hope that the vaccine might be similarly effective in people.

We need more human studies of this HIV vaccine

But we still don’t know if the vaccine will protect humans from the virus, since the studies so far have only looked at safety and immune responses, not efficacy. And many medicines that look promising in animals, and safe in humans, don’t pan out in clinical trials focused on efficacy.

“I wouldn’t use the word excited too much,” said Anthony Fauci, director of the NIH’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. “It’s a step forward toward getting another candidate into trial that could have some promise.” It’s too soon to say if and when the mosaic vaccine might work to prevent the virus from spreading in humans, he added.

As for next steps, if the researchers continue to see promising data on the mosaic vaccine from another ongoing study, a larger human efficacy trial will move forward toward the end of the year in southern Africa, involving some 2,600 healthy, HIV-negative women.

Deaths from AIDS have halved since 2005 — but there’s still a ton of work to be done

We’ve made remarkable progress against HIV around the world. In 1996, as HIV prevalence was peaking around the world, the United Nations established UNAIDS, the first global health body focused on a single disease. In 2000, the UN Security Council convened an unprecedented meeting to address the out-of-control AIDS crisis. This led to a massive concentration of resources into HIV/AIDS research, and triggered global and coordinated efforts to stem the disease.

Researchers and doctors figured out how to get people tested and diagnosed quickly, and uncovered effective treatments that allowed those with HIV to live long, relatively healthy lives. Public health officials also waged awareness campaigns about prevention, reminding people to practice safe sex with condoms and get tested, and that early HIV treatment can save lives. Recently, researchers even discovered a pill to prevent HIV.

Deaths from AIDS have halved to 1 million since 2005, and UNAIDS estimates almost 20 million people now have access to treatment. (Some of that access is now in jeopardy, however, given that President Donald Trump has proposed cutting $800 million from a key US government AIDS program called PEPFAR in the 2018 budget.)

An HIV vaccine has long been elusive. The other HIV vaccine in human testing, the HVTN 702 candidate, is a newer version of the only other HIV vaccine to show any efficacy in humans, called RV144. In a trial on the RV144, 31 percent of people who got the vaccine did not develop HIV — too small a number to be useful. But with the new HVTN trial, researchers hope some tweaks to the vaccine might boost the efficacy rate.

“A safe and effective HIV vaccine would be a powerful tool to reduce new HIV infections worldwide and help bring about a durable end to the HIV/AIDS pandemic,” Fauci said in a statement. “By exploring multiple promising avenues of vaccine development research, we expand our opportunities to achieve these goals.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions many of the other important public health measures to control HIV (education, public awareness campaigns, condom use, etc) and other vaccines in trials.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study looked at the effects of weight-loss surgery on obese women most at risk for cancer. It found that bariatric surgery:
• produced a mean weight loss of more than 100 pounds

CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va., Oct. 1, 2015 - A study evaluating the effects of bariatric surgery on obese women most at risk for cancer has found that the weight-loss surgery slashed participants' weight by a third and eliminated precancerous uterine growths in those that had them. Other effects included improving patients' physical quality of life, improving their insulin levels and ability to use glucose - which may reduce their risk for diabetes - and even altering the composition of their gut bacteria.

The study speaks both to the benefits of bariatric surgery and to the tremendous toll obesity takes on health. "If you look at cancers in women, about a fifth of all cancer deaths would be prevented if we had women at normal body weight in the U.S.," said Susan C. Modesitt, MD, of the University of Virginia Cancer Center. "When you're looking at obesity-related cancers, the biggest one is endometrial cancer, but also colon cancer, breast cancer, renal cancer and gall bladder cancer. We think about 40 [percent] to 50 percent of all endometrial cancer, which is in the lining of the uterus, is caused by obesity."

The study looked at 71 women with a mean age of 44.2 years and a mean body mass index (BMI) of 50.9. Women are considered obese at a BMI of 30 and morbidly obese at 40 (which is typically about 100 pounds over a woman's ideal body weight), yet almost a third of women presenting for bariatric surgery did not identify themselves as obese.

The study looked at the effects of bariatric surgery in a relatively short timeframe, one to three years after surgery. A total of 68 participants underwent the procedure; two opted out of the surgery, and another died of a heart condition prior to surgery. The effects of surgery on body weight were dramatic: Mean weight loss was more than 100 pounds.

Ten percent of study participants who had not had a hysterectomy showed precancerous changes in the lining of the uterus, and all of those resolved with weight loss. "We're talking about small numbers, really tiny numbers" of study participants, Modesitt said, noting one limitation of the study. "So I could never say that effect is definitive, but it is suggestive, given that we know already the incredibly strong link between endometrial cancer and obesity."

Modesitt, of the UVA's Division of Gynecologic Oncology in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, was most surprised by the dramatic changes seen in the patients' metabolic profiles derived from the gut microbiome, the population of microorganisms living inside us. "The study results demonstrate that there is a huge alteration, but I don't even know what to say about that, except it is really new and intriguing area to look at in the link between obesity and cancer. For example, before groundbreaking work by Dr. John Marshall at UVA in the past, no one knew that ulcers were from bacteria. Who knows what role the gut bacteria play in promoting obesity, but metabolic parameter/markers of the bacteria definitely changed after [study participants] lost weight."

While the study speaks to the transformative effect bariatric surgery can have, Modesitt urged people to avoid gaining weight in the first place and for those seeking to lose weight to exercise and eat more healthily before turning to surgery. "We really should be working on diet and exercise from the get-go in our entire society, starting with our children. And exercise does seem to be protective -- even if you don't lose all the weight, it absolutely has beneficial effects," she said. "There are lots of studies showing if you exercise, it improves your insulin, your glucose, all of those sorts of things that go along with the cancer-causing effect. Almost everybody agrees adding exercise would be wonderful and improve health on many levels. But losing excess weight would also be good."

The findings have been published as a lead article in the scientific journal Gynecologic Oncology. The article was written by Modesitt, Peter T. Hallowell, Jill K. Slack-Davis, Ryan D. Michalek, Kristen A. Atkins, Sarah L. Kelley, Sanja Arapovic, Margaret A. Shupnik and Kyle Hoehn.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There is a nice admonition at the end of the release encouraging people to keep their eye on the main way to avoid complications from being overweight or obese: avoid eating too much and exercise more. The release says:
While the study speaks to the transformative effect bariatric surgery can have, Modesitt urged people to avoid gaining weight in the first place and for those seeking to lose weight to exercise and eat more healthily before turning to surgery. “We really should be working on diet and exercise from the get-go in our entire society, starting with our children. And exercise does seem to be protective — even if you don’t lose all the weight, it absolutely has beneficial effects,” she said. “There are lots of studies showing if you exercise, it improves your insulin, your glucose, all of those sorts of things that go along with the cancer-causing effect. Almost everybody agrees adding exercise would be wonderful and improve health on many levels. But losing excess weight would also be good.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For centuries pathologists have relied on the microscopic examination of tumors to distinguish between atypical moles and melanoma. By analyzing the level of proteins within mole cells, mass spectrometry can aid in the diagnosis of atypical moles. In this study, mass spectrometry correlated better than the gold standard of histologic examination to determine if an atypical mole was in fact benign or a melanoma. Early diagnosis of melanoma is critical to cure and long term survival.

​​​​California Skin Institute — A recently developed test for assessing suspicious moles for melanoma is more accurate than standard analyses, according to Dr. Rossitza Lazova, a former Yale investigator. The test, which analyzes proteins in cells, could provide more reliable results for clinicians with patients who might be at risk for this deadly cancer.

The study was published on August 5th in the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology.

Melanoma is one of the most common forms of cancer and the most serious type of skin cancer. The gold standard for diagnosing melanoma is skin biopsy followed by microscopic examination of sampled tissue. However, in up to 1 in 4 cases, the results are inconclusive.

For the study, a former associate professor of Dermatology and Pathology at Yale University, Rossitza Lazova, M.D., collaborated with a national and international team of researchers to determine whether atypical moles could be more accurately diagnosed as either benign or cancerous (melanoma) using imaging mass spectrometry (IMS) — a technology that enables pathologists to focus in on individual proteins within sampled skin cells. In a prior study, the researchers used IMS to identify a molecular signature comprised of five proteins to differentiate between one type of benign mole and melanoma.

The research team retrospectively analyzed more than 100 cases of atypical moles. They compared results from IMS diagnosis to results based on standard microscopic examination of biopsies and correlated them with clinical outcomes.

The researchers found that in nearly all cases, the IMS analysis was a more accurate predictor, both of benign lesions and melanomas, than standard microscopic examination.

“Instead of pathologists being dependent solely upon the physical appearance of the cells, they now have the additional advantage of molecular information regarding the protein makeup [of cells] provided by mass spec imaging,” said Dr. Lazova, who is corresponding author on the study. “This test integrates anatomic pathology and analytical chemistry in a very useful and meaningful way.”

The finding suggests that IMS analysis, based on proteomic signatures, may improve both diagnosis and prediction of outcomes for patients with ambiguous moles, the researchers said.

The study was supported in part by a grant from the National Institutes of Health.

Dr. Lazova is currently the Director of Dermatopathology at California Skin Institute in San Jose, California.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions the current standard of practice but does not offer a data-based comparison, as we note in the “quality of evidence section.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In 1992, Harvard neuroscientist Richard Davidson embarked on an unusual research project to study the brains of Buddhist monks who spent thousands of hours meditating. He found that not only did the practice activate different parts of the brain, it also seemed to impact the body in ways that matter for health.

That pivotal study has led to a number of research projects in recent years that look at what calming the brain does for specific medical conditions and diseases.

The results of one of those studies are out Tuesday in JAMA. The study looks at adults with chronic low back pain, one of the leading cause of disabilities in the United States and one reason why more and more people are addicted to painkillers.

Led by Daniel C. Cherkin of Group Health Research Institute in Seattle, the experiment involved randomly assigning 342 adults with the condition to meditate, talk with a psychologist or continue with their normal techniques for addressing the pain, such as medication. The first group engaged in yoga and mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), which focuses on being aware of and accepting physical discomfort. The second group participated in cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) to change pain-related thoughts and behaviors during eight weekly two-hour group sessions.

The participants in the small study ranged in age from 20 to 70 and had suffered from back pain for an average of 7.3 years.

The results for both techniques were very positive. At 26 weeks, 61 percent of those in the meditation group reported improvement in the activities they could do, compared with 58 percent in the CBT group and 44 percent of those who stuck to their usual routines. The results for pain improvement were similar, with 55 percent in the meditation group reporting improvement compared with 45 percent in the CBT group and 27 percent in the usual-care group. The numbers were similar when rechecked at 52 weeks.

"These findings suggest that MBSR may be an effective treatment option for patients with chronic low back pain," the authors wrote.

The study did caution that 30 of the 103, or about one-third, of the participants in the meditation group reported an "adverse event," most often an increase in pain due to yoga.

In an editorial, Madhav Goyal and Jennifer A. Haythornthwaite of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine said that the mechanisms for why meditation might work on back pain is still a mystery but that this question is merely "academic" for many clinicians and their patients who need immediate relief.

The two wrote that despite this and other unknowns, the study provides "a compelling argument for ensuring that an evidence-based health care system should provide access to affordable mind-body therapies."

MIT scientists find evidence that Alzheimer’s ‘lost memories’ may one day be recoverable

’Siri, I want to commit suicide’ and other statements likely to yield unhelpful responses from your phone

Roots of Napoleon complex may be justified: Study finds short men get short of end stick in life.



Kids with August birthdays are more likely to get an ADHD diagnosis. Here’s why.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story is effectively all about comparing alternatives, though–again–it should have made clear that MBSR and CBT were used in conjunction with conventional medical treatment, and it left out discussion of other well-known non-medication treatment methods, such as exercise.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The study, published Thursday in The , looked at what happened in before and after 1996, when the country began rolling out mammograms for women ages 50 to 69 along with special breast cancer teams to treat all women with breast cancer.

The study is not perfect. The ideal study would randomly assign women to have mammograms or not. But, cancer experts said, no one would do such a study today when mammograms are generally agreed to prevent breast cancer deaths. In the study, which is continuing, women were followed for a maximum of 8.9 years. It is possible that benefits may emerge later.

Nonetheless, the new study is “very credible,” said Dr. Barnett Kramer, associate director for disease prevention at the .

“This is the first time researchers used real populations to compare the effects of treatment and mammography in the modern era of treatment,” Dr. Kramer said. “It shows the relative impacts of screening versus therapy in an era in which therapy has been improving.”

Dr. Otis Brawley of the said in a statement that the investigators used “careful methodology.” The society, Dr. Brawley said, “believes that the total body of the science supports the fact that regular mammography is an important part of a woman’s .”

Dr. Carol Lee, a radiologist at and chairwoman of the breast imaging commission of the American College of Radiology, said the new study affirmed that mammography saves lives.

“Mortality from breast cancer is decreasing, and I have to believe that screening mammography has played a part,” Dr. Lee said.

In their study, the investigators analyzed data from all 40,075 Norwegian women who had received a diagnosis of breast cancer from 1986 to 2005, a time when treatment was changing markedly.

In that period, 4,791 women died. And, starting in 1996, Norway began offering mammograms to women ages 50 to 69 and assigning multidisciplinary treatment teams to all women with breast cancer, similar to the teams at many major medical centers in the . The question was, Did the program of mammograms and optimal new treatment with coordinated teams of surgeons, pathologists, oncologists, radiologists and nurses lower the breast cancer death rate?

The investigators found that women 50 to 69 who had mammograms and were treated by the special teams had a 10 percent lower breast cancer death rate than similar women who had had neither.

They also found, though, that the death rate fell by 8 percent in women over 70 who had the new treatment teams but had not been invited to have mammograms. And Dr. Kramer said he knew of no evidence that breast cancer was more easily treated in women over 70 than in women ages 50 to 69.

That means, Dr. H. Gilbert Welch of Dartmouth wrote in an additional analysis in an accompanying editorial, that mammography could have reduced the breast cancer death rate by as little as 2 percent, an amount so small that it is not really different from zero.

Two percent is an estimate, Dr. Welch said. But, he said, whatever the effect of mammograms is, “all the signals here are that it is much smaller than we believed.”

Dr. Laura Esserman, a professor of surgery and radiology at the in , said it tells her that “if you get the same treatment and the outcome is the same if you find it earlier or later, then you don’t make a difference when you find it early.”

And screening has a cost, Dr. Welch said. Screening 2,500 50-year-olds for a decade would identify 1,000 women with at least one suspicious mammogram resulting in follow-up tests. Five hundred would have biopsies. And 5 to 15 of those women would be treated for cancers that, if left alone, would have grown so slowly they would never have been noticed.

When the study was planned, the scientists expected that screening would be even more effective than it was in studies from decades ago. After all, mammography had improved and, in Norway, each mammogram was independently read by two radiologists, which should make it less likely that cancers would be missed. The researchers expected mammograms to reduce the breast cancer death rate by a third.

“We were surprised,” said Dr. Mette Kalager, the lead author of the paper who is a breast surgeon at University and a visiting scientist at the Harvard School of Public Health.

Marvin Zelen, a statistician at the Harvard School of Public Health and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, who was a member of the research team said even though the mammography benefit is small, if he were a woman he would get screened.

“It all depends on how you approach risk,” Dr. Zelen said. His approach, he says, is “minimax” — he wants to minimize the maximum risk — which, in this case, is dying of a cancer.

Dr. Kalager came to the opposite conclusion. She worries about the small chance of benefit in light of the larger chance of finding and treating a cancer that did not need to be treated.

“Since I’m a breast cancer surgeon, I know what being treated is like,” she says. The decision to be screened, she says, “is a matter of personal preference. Is it worth it to risk becoming a patient without it being necessary?”

Many women may still want mammograms, she says, and that is fine.

“I think we have to respect what women want to do.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 


The story notes that improved treatments appear to have reduced the breast cancer death rate even among women who did not have regular screening mammograms. Not being screened was clearly acknowledged as an alternative, something not all competing stories explicitly addressed. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When a suspicious lesion shows up in the lungs on a CT scan, the first thing your doctor wants to know is whether it's cancerous. A specialist will pass a long, thin bronchoscope into your airway in the hope of grabbing a few cells of the growth so they can be examined under a microscope.

But some of these lesions or nodules are deep in the small branches of the lungs, out of reach of the bronchoscope, which is about the diameter of a pen. Other times, the results are inconclusive. That has left only two ways to determine whether the abnormality is cancerous: inserting a needle through the chest wall and into the tumor, or surgically opening a patient's chest to find it (and remove it if necessary).

The first procedure carries a 15 percent risk of collapsing a lung (pneumothorax), as well as infection. The second is serious surgery that requires general anesthesia and results in the loss of lung tissue. Both are in-patient procedures that carry the cost and other risks of hospitalizations. In about a third of the surgeries, the growth turns out to be benign, meaning the surgery was unnecessary.

But now, according to a study published Sunday in the New England Journal of Medicine, there appears to be a new, much less invasive way of determining whether a growth is malignant. Researchers at Boston University have discovered that the thin epithelial cells that line the entire airway show changes that indicate whether a growth is malignant. With small brushes on the bronchoscope, they can take some of those cells and, using genomic testing that has been available only in recent years, reach a conclusion.

[Breast cancers predicted to rise by 50 percent by 2030]

The study released Sunday showed that the tests were about 97 percent accurate on 639 subjects. A private company has purchased the technology and is making it available to hospitals across the country.

"Even though lung cancer tends to develop deep in your lung, all the cells that line your airway are exposed," said Avrum Spira, a professor of medicine at Boston University who led the research. "They have changes in their genome."

Spira's test focuses on messenger RNA, the molecules that express genes' instructions to cells. He called the technology "a canary in the coal mine" for lung cancer, which kills about 160,000 people in the United States each year.

If the test is negative, its accuracy will allow doctors to wait and watch a lesion. If it shows a malignancy, a biopsy still would be needed to confirm the cancer. "There will still be a small number of biopsies," Spira said. "But we're going to reduce them significantly."

Other research is being conducted to find markers for lung cancer, though much of it focuses on substances that can be found in the blood, Spira said. With the vast majority of lung cancer victims being smokers, the epithelial cells show changes that could be tracked once the technology became available, he said.

The next logical question is whether those changes might be detected early enough to predict and prevent lung cancer. Spira said his team already is working on research to determine whether that's possible.

The current advance was a long time in coming and shows the difficulty of bringing research from the lab to the consumer. Spira said the initial discovery was made 12 years ago, but he couldn't find any private group willing to put up the millions of dollars needed to conduct studies, work through the government and academic regulatory process and bring his idea to market.

Seven years ago, he formed his own company, raised venture capital and eventually proved that his idea worked. Now his company has been purchased by Veracyte, which will take over the production and marketing of the "Bronchial Genomic Classifier."

"We were adding 30 seconds to a minute" to the length of a bronchoscopy, Spira said. ". . . Even then, the regulatory hurdles were significant. We got over them all, but they were significant."

Correction: The original version of this post incorrectly named the company that is distributing the Bronchial Genomic Classifier. This version has been corrected.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article does a good job of describing current tests and what they can and cannot do. And it notes that although there are serious efforts to develop blood tests that can predict response to treatment and even early cases of lung cancer, these are likely years away from clinical use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES, Jan. 25, 2018 -- Clot removal may be beneficial up to 24 hours following stroke in carefully selected patients, but every hour delayed after symptoms begin may be associated with more disability, according to preliminary research presented at the American Stroke Association's International Stroke Conference 2018, a world premier meeting dedicated to the science and treatment of cerebrovascular disease for researchers and clinicians.

The international DAWN trial previously demonstrated that patients with a small area of irreversible brain damage and a large area of brain at jeopardy of being lost if the clot remains are more likely to recover with minimal disability if the clot is removed up to 24 hours after symptoms begin or were noticed. It is already well-established that the benefit of clot removal declines each hour during the first 6 hours after symptoms are detected.

In the current analysis of treatment between 6 and 24 hours after symptoms were observed, or after the person was last seen to be well, researchers found:
• each 1-hour delay reduces the chance of recovery with minimal or no disability by 11 percent; and
• treatment remains beneficial through 24 hours, with patients who had their clots removed being 35.5 percent more likely to have minimal or no disability 90 days later, but the overall effect of treatment declines with time.

The current results demonstrate the importance of prompt imaging and treatment of patients with clot-caused stroke, even in those who wake up having experienced a stroke or who for other reasons are not identified in the first few hours after the onset of symptoms.
• Available downloadable B-roll, animation and images to this news tip are on the right column of the tip link https:/
• For more news at AHA International Stroke Conference 2018, follow us on Twitter @HeartNews #ISC18.

Statements and conclusions of study authors that are presented at American Heart Association scientific meetings are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect association policy or position. The association makes no representation or warranty as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations are available at http://www. .

The American Stroke Association is devoted to saving people from stroke -- the No. 2 cause of death in the world and a leading cause of serious disability. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat stroke. The Dallas-based association officially launched in 1998 as a division of the American Heart Association. To learn more or to get involved, call 1-888-4STROKE or visit StrokeAssociation.org. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release does a good job of explaining the comparison of doing the procedure between 6 and 24 hours after a stroke and not doing it. Theoretically, they could have compared the procedure to clot-busting medication which is sometimes used in these settings, but that would have been a different study altogether.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COLUMBUS, Ohio - Results from an international, randomized study show that an implanted nerve stimulator significantly improves symptoms in those with central sleep apnea, without causing serious side effects.

Dr. William Abraham, co-lead author and director of the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, presented findings from the study at the recent European Society of

Cardiology Congress in Rome. The study is published today by The Lancet. Unlike the more common obstructive sleep apnea, in which the airway partially collapses and causes pauses in breathing, central sleep apnea (CSA) occurs when the brain fails to control breathing during sleep.

"CSA is a serious concern because it affects about a third of people with heart failure and it's known to make the condition worse," Abraham said. "Currently, we don't have good treatments available. Positive airway pressure devices have been used, but many patients don't tolerate them well and a recent study showed them to be harmful."

Abraham, along with lead author Dr. Maria Rosa Costanzo at Advocate Heart Institute in Naperville, IL, led the study at 31 hospitals in the United States, Germany and Poland. The research team tested the safety and effectiveness of a transvenous phrenic nerve stimulator made by Respicardia Inc. Much like a pacemaker, it sends a regular signal telling the diaphragm to breathe during sleep.

In the randomized study, 151 patients were implanted with the device. Ten were excluded due to non-study related medical issues or deaths, exiting the study or missing visits. During the first six months of evaluation, 68 devices were activated for treatment, while 73 were left inactive as the control group. Between six and 12 months of follow-up, all patients received the neurostimulation treatment.

At the six month evaluation, the device reduced CSA events per hour by half or more for 35 of the 68 members (51 percent) of the treatment group. Only eight (11 percent) of those in the control group achieved the same reduction. Other important sleep measures, such as the amount of time spent with a low blood oxygen level, were also significantly improved. About a third of patients in the treatment group reported therapy-related discomfort that was resolved with some reprogramming of the device.

"Not only did we see this reduction in events per hour, the patients also rated themselves better on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (meaning they were less sleepy during the day) and on a global assessment of their overall quality of life," Abraham said. "This tells us the effects of neurostimulation are clinically relevant and this could be a promising therapy for those with central sleep apnea."

In addition to Abraham, Ohio State's Dr. Rami Khayat and Dr. Ralph Augostini participated in this research, making Ohio State one of the high enrolling centers participating in the study worldwide.

The study was funded by Respicardia. Abraham is a consultant for the company.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We give this a borderline satisfactory rating. The release gives brief mention to a common treatment for sleep apnea — continuous “positive airway pressure,” or CPAP devices —  but it provides little context other than to say “many patients don’t tolerate them well and a recent study showed them to be harmful.”
The release could have included more context to help a reader evaluate the traditional treatment compared to the surgical implant, or weigh risks vs. benefits of having the implant.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the 1950s through the early ’70s, research began to show that psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin, the active ingredient in magic mushrooms, could be quite effective at treating mental health disorders like addiction.

“In the ’50s and ’60s psychedelics were the cutting edge of psychiatric research,” says Charles Grob, a physician and researcher at UCLA.

But at the same time, many of these substances were taken in uncontrolled settings by large numbers of people, and certain proselytizers (like Timothy Leary) advocated their widespread use. Then President Richard Nixon declared drugs “public enemy No. 1” and the so-called “war on drugs” began. All this combined to give psychedelics a bad name at the time and led to most of them being outlawed. For nearly a generation, science on these substances shut down.

But that’s changing. In the past 20 years or so, a small amount of research has once again begun to focus on these chemicals, showing that they have promise for treating a range of conditions, from addiction to depression and anxiety, says Evan Wood, a psychiatric researcher at the University of British Columbia.

In 2006, researchers at the University of Arizona published a study showing obsessive-compulsive patients who ingested psilocybin had immediate and lasting reductions in problematic symptoms. The same year, Johns Hopkins University physician and researcher Roland Griffiths showed that in healthy volunteers, psilocybin produced lasting benefits like improved mood and peacefulness six months after ingestion. Study participants “made claims to be more sensitive, compassionate, tolerant, to have increased positive relationships, an increased need to serve others,” according to Griffiths. “Those kinds of changes are not delusional, because blinded interviews with family members, friends and work colleagues [confirm these reports].”

Similar work has shown psilocybin can help treat anxiety associated with cancer, at UCLA and New York University. Grob says work by his group and others has shown that psilocybin can help treat “terminal cancer patients with overwhelming existential anxiety, an area that traditional medicine struggles with.” And a study in late 2014 found that LSD permanently reduced anxiety in a small number of patients.

Wood says he’s most excited about research into using psychedelics to treat addiction, and he published a review on September 8 in the Canadian Medical Association Journal covering recent work in this field. One study from earlier this year in the Journal of Psychopharmacology found, for example, that 10 alcoholic patients given psilocybin in a controlled setting had greatly reduced cravings for and intake of alcohol in the months after the treatment. Another study, authored in 2014 by Griffiths and Matthew Johnson at Johns Hopkins and published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology, found the substance helped people give up cigarettes. Twelve out of 15 patients in this small study had given up smoking six months after a psilocybin-assisted therapy session.

Ayahuasca, an Amazonian brew containing dimethyltryptamine that causes hallucinations and often intense spiritual experiences, has also shown promise in treating addictions, besides anxiety and depression, Wood says. Another chemical, called MDMA, the active ingredient in the drug Ecstasy, can help treat post-traumatic stress disorder.

Psychedelics generally are thought to work by allowing individuals to have a spiritual or “mystical” experience, during which time people can have profound realizations that permanently change their behaviors, Wood says. The idea that you can take a medicine one or a few times and become “cured,” or at least significantly helped, conflicts with current standard practices, which often involve taking medications every day for years, or life.

“With even minor mental health conditions like minor depression or anxiety...or more serious problems like addiction, the existing paradigm is to frame these as chronic, lifelong diseases” that require continuous medication with drugs like serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitors, Wood says. But not so with psychedelics, which represent “a total paradigm shift in the way that mental illness is treated,” he adds.

He points out that psychedelics should never be used carelessly, and that the “set and setting” (meaning the dose, mood, environment, company and surroundings) where a person takes them are of paramount importance. That said, when studied under controlled and supervised conditions, these chemicals have not been found to cause lasting negative health consequences, the Canadian Medical Association Journal review noted. All of which adds up to a compelling argument that psychedelics “should be the focus of intensive study for treating mental illness,” Wood says.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Although it mentions that mental health problems are often treated with drugs like serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitors, it doesn’t discuss how the psychedelic drugs compare to those drugs or each other, or other types of non-drug therapy. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here, though we wished for more detail.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philadelphia, PA, June 2, 2016 - Basal cell carcinoma is one of the most common cancers and its incidence is increasing worldwide, putting a significant burden on health services. Topical treatments are available for superficial basal cell carcinoma (BCC) but there has a lack of long-term follow-up data to guide treatment decisions. A three-year randomized controlled clinical trial has found that two topical creams are effective in most primary, low-risk superficial BCC, comparing favorably with photodynamic therapy (PDT), as reported by investigators in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology.

More than 80% of all skin cancers are BCC, arising from the basal cells (i.e., small, round cells found in the lower layer of the epidermis). There are over two million cases a year in the U.S. and the lifetime risk of developing a BCC before the age of 85 years is one in five people. The prognosis is excellent, but it can cause significant disfigurement by invading surrounding tissues.

While most types of BCC require surgery, superficial BCC can be treated topically with noninvasive treatments such as PDT, imiquimod cream, fluorouracil cream, cryosurgery or electrodessication and curettage.

Investigators in the Netherlands report the results of a three-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial that compared three noninvasive treatments that included imiquimod and fluorouracil cream. "The main advantages of noninvasive treatments are good cosmetic outcome, preservation of surrounding tissue, and potential for home application of either creams," explained lead investigator Marieke Roozeboom of the Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Center in the Netherlands. "Throughout the last two decades there has been a growing interest in these non-surgical therapies, which offer the possibility of avoiding surgery and reducing demands on busy medical practices."

However, prior to this study there has been a lack of randomized controlled trials with a long-term follow-up that compare the effectiveness of noninvasive treatments. Consequently, there is no consensus in international BCC guidelines on the first choice of noninvasive therapy for superficial BCC.

A total of 601 patients with a superficial BCC participated in this study: 202 patients were treated with methylaminolevulinate photodynamic therapy (MAL-PDT), 198 with imiquimod cream, and 201 with fluorouracil cream. The three study groups had a similar distribution of baseline characteristics, with the exception of tumor size.

Around 80% of patients with superficial BCC were tumor free after imiquimod treatment after three years. The clearance rate was 68% for patients treated with fluorouracil and 58% for individuals receiving PDT.

"Based on our findings, both imiquimod and fluorouracil are effective noninvasive treatments in most primary, low-risk superficial BCC, but the data provide no definite evidence for superiority of imiquimod to fluorouracil," commented Dr. Roozeboom. "Both creams have an equal cosmetic outcome and risk of local adverse events. Fluorouracil has the advantage of being less expensive than imiquimod. However, between one- and three-year follow-up, more recurrences were diagnosed in the fluorouracil group compared with the imiquimod group."

"When choosing a treatment for an individual patient with a superficial BCC, other factors like age, compliance, and patient preferences should always be taken into account. For example, we have found that in superficial BCC on the lower extremities in older patients, PDT should be prescribed rather than imiquimod. Our evidence indicates that a personalized treatment approach is necessary," added Dr. Roozeboom.

"Three year follow-up results of photodynamic therapy versus imiquimod versus fluorouracil for treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma: a single blind, noninferiority, randomized controlled trial," by Marieke H. Roozeboom, MD, Aimee H.M.M. Arits, PhD, Klara Mosterd, PhD, Anja Sommer, PhD, Brigitte A.B. Essers, PhD, Michette J.M. de Rooij, PhD, Patricia J.F. Quaedvlieg, PhD, Peter M. Steijlen, PhD, Patty J. Nelemans, PhD, and Nicole W.J. Kelleners-Smeets, PhD (doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.03.043), published online in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology by Elsevier.

Full text of this article is available to credentialed journalists upon request. Contact George Woodward at 1-215-605-3050 or g.woodward@elsevier.com to obtain copies. Journalists who wish to speak with the authors should contact Marieke H. Roozeboom at 31-433-877 295 or mh.roozeboom@mumc.nl.

About the Journal of Investigative Dermatology

Journal of Investigative Dermatology (JID), with an Impact Factor of 7.216, is the leading journal in dermatology*. The journal publishes reports describing original research on all aspects of cutaneous biology and skin disease. Topics include biochemistry, biophysics, carcinogenesis, cell regulation, clinical research, development, embryology, epidemiology and other population-based research, extracellular matrix, genetics, immunology, melanocyte biology, microbiology, molecular and cell biology, pathology, percutaneous absorption, pharmacology, photobiology, physiology, skin structure, and wound healing. http://www. ,org *2014 Journal Citations Report published by Thomson Reuters ©2015

Elsevier is a world-leading provider of information solutions that enhance the performance of science, health, and technology professionals, empowering them to make better decisions, deliver better care, and sometimes make groundbreaking discoveries that advance the boundaries of knowledge and human progress. Elsevier provides web-based, digital solutions -- among them ScienceDirect, Scopus, Elsevier Research Intelligence and ClinicalKey -- and publishes over 2,500 journals, including The Lancet and Cell, and more than 33,000 book titles, including a number of iconic reference works. Elsevier is part of RELX Group, a world-leading provider of information and analytics for professional and business customers across industries. http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study notes that several topical agents are available in addition to surgery. It might also have mentioned that surgery can be done as a one time thing and probably has better outcomes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Autism has always been a tricky disorder to diagnose. There’s no such thing as a blood test, cheek swab or other accepted biological marker so specialists must depend on parent and teacher reports, observations and play assessments. Figuring out a child's trajectory once he or she is diagnosed is just as challenging. The spectrum is wide and some are destined to be on the mild end and be very talkative, sometimes almost indistinguishable from those without the disorder in some settings, while others will suffer from a more severe form and have trouble being able to speak basic words.

Now scientists believe that they have a way to distinguish between those paths, at least in terms of language ability, in the toddler years using brain imaging.

In an article published Thursday in the journal Neuron, scientists at the University of California-San Diego have found that children with autism spectrum disorder, or ASD, with good language outcomes have strikingly distinct patterns of brain activation as compared to those with poor language outcomes and typically developing toddlers.

"Why some toddlers with ASD get better and develop good language and others do not has been a mystery that is of the utmost importance to solve," Eric Courchesne, one of the study’s authors and co-director of the University of California-San Diego's Autism Center, said in a statement.

The images of the children in the study -- MRIs of the brain -- were taken at 12 to 29 months while their language was assessed one to two years later at 30 to 48 months.

Such research has become critically important as the number of children diagnosed with autism has soared in recent decades to 1 in 68. Scientists have looked at numerous possible causes, from genetics to environmental exposure, but no definitive answers. Autism is considered by most experts to be a lifelong condition, but numerous studies have found that children's outcomes improve with early therapy. Hundreds of millions of dollars of state and federal funding are being spent each year to provide help to children and adults with autism and being able to pinpoint children at risk in the early years could help direct those public resources to where they could do the most good.

Brain imaging has become a popular subject of research in recent years as the technology to be able to scan, store and analyze the terabytes of information in the pictures has become more affordable. Scientists at a growing number of research centers are pinning their hopes that these images will help them unlock some of the secrets of everything from what causes childhood disorders like Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder to how neurons in the brain process vision and memory.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: While noting that there are currently no blood tests or biological markers available to autism specialists, the story shares that specialists who treat children with autism currently rely on “parent and teacher reports, observations and play assessment” to make a diagnosis.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are We Overselling The Sunshine Vitamin?

Dr. Cliff Rosen of Portland, Maine, knows a lot about vitamin D. It's necessary for strong bones, and Rosen is a leading bone specialist. So he was surprised recently when his wife's new physician thought she might be deficient in vitamin D.

"She's a runner. She's in great shape," Rosen says. "She drinks dairy. She gets a lot of sun exposure." Sun exposure is key for vitamin D, known as the sunshine vitamin. When skin is exposed to sun, it makes vitamin D.

Still, the doctor wanted to run a blood test to see if Rebecca Rosen had adequate vitamin D.

"So my wife said, 'Well, why do I need to have a vitamin D [test]?' And the physician said, 'Well, that's part of our measurement for wellness.' "

It's not just Rebecca's doctor, and it's not just in Portland, Maine. Increasingly, doctors all over the country are convinced that checking patients' vitamin D levels is as important as monitoring their cholesterol.

Medicare payments for vitamin D testing, at $40 a pop, nearly quadrupled between 2006 and 2008, to $129 million. A decade ago, Medicare payments were only about $1 million. The figures for 2009 and this year are bound to be higher.

"There's overwhelming evidence ... that increasing your vitamin D intake can make substantial improvement in your overall health and welfare," says Dr. Michael Holick of Boston University. "And there is no downside to increasing your vitamin D intake. As a result I think that most people are now getting on the bandwagon."

Holick is leading the band. Forty years ago, he discovered the active form of the vitamin, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. He has written several popular books on the subject and has another one, The Vitamin D Solution, coming out next month. Its cover calls vitamin D deficiency "our most common health problem."

"In my opinion, everybody should be taking either a vitamin D supplement, take a prescription that the doctor recommends," Holick says. "All adults should be taking at least 1,000 to 1,500 international units a day." Dietary intake, mainly through sources such as vitamin D-fortified dairy products and juice, may add up to 200 to 400 units a day.

Holick is convinced that if people boost their vitamin D levels, they'll be substantially less likely to develop not only osteoporosis but also many types of cancer, heart attack, diabetes (both types), autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, Alzheimer's, autism, even tuberculosis and the flu.

Not so fast, other experts say.

Dr. JoAnn Manson, chief of preventive medicine at Harvard-affiliated Brigham and Women's Hospital, points out that nearly all of the proliferating studies involving vitamin D are what scientists call "observational." That is, they compare people with high and low levels of vitamin D and correlate those levels with whether or not the person has a disease.

But these studies, she points out, are fraught with possible error. People with higher vitamin D levels may be healthier because they exercise more, have better diets, are out in the sun more. Those who are sick may have low levels because they don't have those healthy habits.

"We don't yet have the large-scale, randomized clinical trials showing benefits in terms of prevention of cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, hypertension, cognitive decline, depression, autoimmune disease," Manson says.

Manson and her colleagues are launching such a trial. The National Institutes of Health is devoting $22 million for a five-year study. Twenty-thousand people across the country will be randomly assigned to take daily doses of vitamin D, omega-3 fatty acid — also linked in many studies to lower levels of heart disease — together or alone. Others will be assigned to take inert placebo pills. Neither study subjects nor investigators will know until the end which regimen they are on.

'Promising But Not Yet Proven'

Manson says she thinks there is promising evidence that vitamin D supplements may protect against heart disease and perhaps some cancers. The evidence is strongest for colorectal cancer, she says. The fact that the government is funding the study is an indicator that the idea has traction.

Until those results are in, Manson advises patients and doctors to view vitamin D claims as "promising but not yet proven."

"We need to keep in mind the lessons of history," she says. "It was believed that megadoses of vitamin E, beta-carotene, selenium, folic acid and the B vitamins would confer a large array of health benefits. And in fact, the trials were very disappointing for all those nutrients."

In the case of beta-carotene, scientists were surprised to find that when the results of randomized trials were in, those taking the supplement actually had a higher risk of lung cancer.

Holick and others say there is little or no downside to ingesting even high levels of vitamin D.

"I've been treating patients with 50,000 units of vitamin D once a week for eight weeks followed by 50,00 every other week for over a decade, and I've not seen any untoward toxicity," Holick says.

He says he has seen dramatic results in patients he has treated with vitamin D supplements for disorders such as fibromyalgia, involving generalized muscular aches and pains, and multiple sclerosis. He is convinced that the vitamin D supplements lower patients' risk of cancer and heart disease, although he acknowledges that's harder to show.

How Much Is Enough?

Holick himself takes 3,000 international units of vitamin D every day.

Set by the National Institute of Medicine in 1997, the current recommended intake is 400 units a day for adults ages 50 to 70, and 200 units a day for younger adults. The American Academy of Pediatrics currently recommends 400 units a day for infants.

The recommendations may change soon. An Institute of Medicine panel is working on a vitamin D update, which may come out this summer. The panel may raise the Dietary Reference Intake, which has replaced the old Recommended Dietary Allowance. But the group is not expected to embrace the newer claims being made for vitamin D supplementation.

The Institute of Medicine panel has a difficult task. "We don't know exactly where to draw the line in terms of calling someone deficient in vitamin D," says Manson, who is a member of the committee, as is Rosen, the Maine bone specialist.

Meanwhile, an increasing number of patients are getting their vitamin D levels tested, and more are being told they need to take supplements.

"I've been surprised at the number of patients who are significantly vitamin D deficient," says Dr. Elizabeth Ross, a cardiologist in Washington, D.C., who has been testing patients routinely for the past year. "Whether or not we'll affect the incidence of cardiovascular disease or other diseases remains to be seen. But it appears to be a relatively benign intervention, and we may be benefiting people."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned a variety of sources for obtaining vitamin D.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Complementary and alternative medicine options may help men manage premature ejaculation, according to a new review of existing research.

The improvements were small, and the studies were of varying quality, but preliminary evidence suggests that acupuncture, Chinese herbal medicine, Ayurvedic herbal medicine and a Korean topical cream may all have desirable effects, researchers conclude in the journal Sexual Medicine.

“There are a range of treatments available for premature ejaculation, including drug treatments, behavioral techniques and counseling, however, some men may not want to visit the doctor, take drugs long-term or be on a long wait list for counseling,” said lead author Katy Cooper of the University of Sheffield in the UK.

“It’s important to evaluate the evidence for other therapies,” she told Reuters Health by email. “To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to assess complementary and alternative medicine for premature ejaculation.”

According to the International Society for Sexual Medicine, premature ejaculation can be a lifelong problem, and this primary form of the problem is usually defined as ejaculation happening within one minute of initiating vaginal intercourse every time a man has ever had sex. A man’s “latency time” can also become reduced later in his sexual life, and this secondary form is usually defined as ejaculation within three minutes or less.

In the current study, researchers evaluated 10 randomized controlled trials that included comparisons either to another type of treatment or to a placebo, or dummy, treatment. Two studies were of acupuncture, five were of Chinese herbal medicine, one of Ayurvedic herbal medicine and two of Korean topical “severance secret” cream.

Together, the two acupuncture studies found that the treatment slightly increased intravaginal ejaculatory latency time (IELT) by about half a minute compared to placebo.

Chinese herbal medicine increased IELT by about two minutes, Ayurvedic herbal medicine increased IELT by nearly a minute and topical cream increased IELT by more than eight minutes.

In some instances, a combination of traditional and alternative options was the most effective. For example, Chinese medicine paired with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) increased IELT by two minutes longer than SSRIs alone and nearly three minutes longer than the Chinese medicine alone.

“There are no approved treatments for premature ejaculation,” said Donald Patrick, vice chair for research at the University of Washington in Seattle. “This is a common condition that has serious psychological effects on relationships,” said Patrick, who wasn’t involved in the study. “We need treatments to address it, and it should be treated with equal seriousness as erectile dysfunction.”

The prevalence of premature ejaculation is difficult to measure because of the differing definitions of the problem and some men’s reluctance to report it. Some studies suggest that between 20 and 30 percent of men report early ejaculation concerns, but the International Society for Sexual Medicine estimates that about 4 percent of men have a lifelong condition.

“Although it is not openly discussed in the media - at least not as much as erectile problems have been discussed in the post-Viagra era - numerous studies report men feel frustrated, depressed and anxious because of this problem,” said Ege Can Serefoglu of the Bagcilar Training and Research Hospital in Istanbul, Turkey.

The main limitation of the study is the underlying weakness of the studies evaluated. Bias was unclear in most of the studies, and only five used stopwatches to measure IELT, which is the “gold standard” for premature ejaculation studies, Patrick said.

In addition, the authors write, the studies are so different, it’s tough to draw conclusions about the different options. For example, the five Chinese medicine studies tested different substances, including Qilin pills, Yimusake and Uighur.

Some studies, but not all, discussed side effects such as gastrointestinal discomfort, dizziness, mild pain and decreased libido. When they were reported, the adverse effects were generally mild, the study team writes.

“Nowadays, I am encountering alternative medicine-obsessed patients more than I used to, and it doesn’t make sense to argue with them about the treatment they want,” Serefoglu told Reuters Health by email. “After all, the placebo is a well-known clinical phenomenon, and some of my patients report surprisingly favorable outcomes.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study noted that the various alternatives were compared against placebo or alternative treatments. It would have been useful to know how the various herbal remedies compared against what is considered by many physicians to be a reference standard–the off-label use of an SSRI antidepressant, such as paroxetine.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — RESEARCH TRIANGLE PARK, NC— Major depressive disorder affects more than 32 million Americans, and their first stop for treatment is often their primary care provider. A recent evidence review of several alternatives to medication found that using cognitive behavioral therapy as the first treatment for depression can be equally effective as using a second generation antidepressant.

The research from the RTI International-University of Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center was published today in the British Medical Journal. The authors focused specifically on comparing second generation antidepressants, such as Wellbutrin, Lexapro and Prozac with cognitive behavioral therapy, which includes several in-person or phone sessions with a therapist to examine how actions and thoughts can impact depression. Second-generation antidepressants refers to newer antidepressants introduced primarily in the 1980s and 1990s.

"Major depressive disorder is a disabling and prevalent form of depression, experienced by more than 16 percent of U.S. adults during their lifetime," said Arlene Bierman, M.D., Director, Center for Evidence and Practice Improvement, at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which funded the study. "Most patients will be prescribed antidepressants. However, the evidence shows that cognitive behavioral therapy can be just as effective, providing important information for patients and their physicians to consider when choosing among available treatment options."

After conducting a full review of the scientific literature available, the researchers examined 11 randomized controlled trials with 1,511 patients that compared a second generation antidepressant with cognitive behavioral therapy. They found that symptom improvement and rate of remission were similar between the two options, whether used alone or in combination with each other.

"Primary care clinicians and their patients may not automatically consider alternatives when discussing treatment," said Halle Amick, research associate at the RTI International-University of Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center and lead author. "Our findings indicate that both options should be considered effective initial treatment strategies."

Side effects from antidepressants can include constipation, diarrhea and dizziness. Patients also sometimes express concerns about becoming addicted to medications and therefore prefer psychotherapy. However, psychotherapy can be time-consuming and may be substantially more expensive, depending on the patient's insurance benefits.

"Given comparable effectiveness, doctors need to discuss advantages and disadvantages of both treatment options with their patients. Such shared and informed decision making might enhance treatment adherence which is one of the main challenges of treating major depressive disorder," said Gerald Gartlehner, M.D., associate director of the RTI-UNC Evidence-based Practice Center, who was the principal investigator of the evidence review, which was also published today by AHRQ.

A journal article describing all the review findings will be published in the Annals of Internal Medicine in January.

"Bringing psychotherapy into discussions of treatment may also enhance coordination of care between primary care and mental health care providers in addition to addressing the issue of patient-centered care," Amick said. "If primary care providers discuss psychotherapy with their patients as a valid treatment option, it may empower patients to voice their preferences and truly participate in medical decision-making and encourage them to adopt and adhere to effective treatment of their depression."

RTI-UNC Evidence-based Practice Center is a collaboration between RTI and the five health professions schools and the Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research at UNC. It is funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: While the release is about comparative trials it didn’t delve into what improvement means.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There was a time when the optimal exercise speed was however fast you had to run to get away from a saber-tooth tiger. Even today, in much of the developing world, people exercise through activities such as farming and fetching water that are necessary for survival.

However, in the developed Western world, where exercise tends to be an extracurricular activity, there is apparently tremendous interest in just how fast you should move in order to improve your health. Consider, for example, the many posts on The New York Times’ Well blog on the topic (walking versus running, the “right dose of exercise,” “walk hard, walk easy”), all of which focus on the relative benefits of walking versus jogging versus running.

So is it better to walk? To walk fast? To run slow? To run fast? On its face, this question is poorly posed, since it says nothing about our goals or our constraints. Am I aiming to lose weight? To live longer? To win road races? Am I willing to exercise for three hours a day? Twenty minutes? Almost never? Clearly, these considerations matter when trying to determine the optimal speed. Here is how I would think about asking the question instead: What is the easiest way to reduce my chance of death?

To analyze the impact of walking or running, researchers need a way to describe the effort exerted. The ideal measure would combine the length of time spent exercising with the amount of energy expended — basically, we want to figure out a way to credit people who walk at half the speed for twice as long the same amount as those who walk faster for less time.

The way researchers do this is with a measurement known as MET — metabolic equivalent of task — which gives a numeric value to various activities depending on their energy intensity. By multiplying an activity’s METs by the time you engage in it, you can get an overall measure of how much energy you expend.

The goal here is to use these METs and their relationship to health to analyze the value of walking compared with jogging or running. At least in this article, I won’t say anything about other kinds of exercise — no yoga or SoulCycle — though these have their own MET measures.

Let’s first look at the results from two papers — here and here — that relate energy expenditures from walking (in MET hours per day) to the risk of death.

Doing this analysis is a little complicated. You can’t look at the relationship between exercise and the chance of ever dying, because ultimately everyone dies. Instead, these studies look at whether exercise changes the risk of death at a given time. But since the people in the studies are of different ages, researchers can’t just look to see whether they have, say, a 2 percentage point lower risk of death in a given year, since that lower risk would mean a lot more for someone who is 30 than for someone who is 90. Results in these two papers — and basically all the others we’ll look at here — therefore report their results in “hazard ratios.” A hazard rate of 0.90, for example, means a 10 percent reduction in the risk of death. If there is a 10 in 1,000 chance you’ll die in the next year without exercise, this means by exercising you’d reduce that chance to 9 in 1,000.

This research shows that those who walk have a lower risk of mortality relative to people in the comparison group, who don’t walk for exercise at all (they probably do still walk some, just not for exercise). This risk of death is lower even with a very minimal energy expenditure. The lowest-energy-expenditure group in each study is walking at about 3 mph for 20 to 40 minutes per day. In other words, a mile or two of walking. In exchange, their risk of death goes down by 10 percent.

Walking a bit farther — say, 2 to 3 miles at 3 mph — gets you an additional death reduction of about 30 percent. But walking more than that, or more than an hour a day at this speed, is no better.

Other studies of walking find similar magnitudes. A large meta-analysis found that, on average, walking 1 to 3 miles at about a 20-minute-mile pace results in a reduction in death risk of about 10 percent.

Many of these studies do not separate out speed and duration, but to the extent they do, it seems like walking faster may be better than walking slower. Here is one study that shows large mortality reductions for fast walking even for short periods, and here is another showing that very slow walking has fewer benefits than faster walking.

At first glance, it may seem obvious that the harder you exercise, the better. If walking faster is more energy-intensive than walking slower, and running is more energy-intensive than walking, it seems like the health benefits of running would be even greater. In some sense, you’d hope so, since most of us find running more difficult than walking.

Broadly, over some range, this seems to be right. The chart below shows results for two studies of runners that, again, relate METs to hazard rates of death. Running — even slowly, like 5 mph — is far more energy-intensive than walking. An energy expenditure of 1.19 METs per day (the lowest-energy-expenditure group in the second study here) means about 20 minutes of running a 12-minute mile, three times a week.

Slow running like this appears to have a much larger impact on mortality than walking. A hazard rate of 0.48 — compared with a sedentary group — suggests a much larger reduction in the risk of death than a hazard rate of 0.90. What is a bit surprising about this chart is that running faster or farther doesn’t seem to reduce death rates any more than running slowly and, in fact, in both cases is slightly worse.

In one of these studies it looks like running very intensely (faster than an eight-minute mile, more than four hours a week) increases your risk of death relative to not running at all. But a closer look at the data suggests that this is probably just a statistical artifact: This intense running group contains only 36 people and two deaths, versus hundreds of people in the more casual running groups.

Even if we dismiss the possibility that running harder is worse, it is probably useful to note that running harder or farther doesn’t seem to be better. I have occasionally felt guilty about my thrice-weekly 25-minute runs, especially in comparison to my brother, who runs a 2:45 marathon and once attempted the Leadville Trail 100. It is comforting to know that I can still outlive him.

One general problem with all of this research is that none of these studies is randomized. People who exercise are different from those who do not, and those who exercise more are different from those who exercise less. This should, as usual, give us some pause in trumpeting the virtues of exercise. However, I’d argue that the comparisons the studies make among runners are still valid.

To be more concrete: In most of these studies, the more intense runners are healthier (for example: less likely to smoke and thinner) than the less-intense runners. We may tend to attribute the health of this group to their running habits. The fact that even with this bias we see no large benefit — indeed, seemingly no benefit at all — to running more rather than running less reinforces the value of moderate running.

If we take this research at face value, we learn a few things. First, some exercise reduces your risk of death. Second, the optimal walking/jogging exercise is light to moderate jogging. The optimal speed is between 5 and 7 mph, and if you do 25 minutes about three times a week, you’re all set. Nothing in the data suggests that running more — farther, or faster — will do more to lower your risk of death.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story makes clear early on that it is not looking at other forms of exercise, but explains the concept of “metabolic equivalent of task” measurements (or METS) which can be used to determine the “energy intensity” of various activities. It does mention a few other activities, such as yoga and cycle spinning, that may also be associated with mortality benefits. Presumably, one could use the METs associated with other exercises — such as bicycling, swimming or rowing — to find which exercises/paces are comparable to jogging 5-7 mph. However, that would take some homework, because while the story explains what METs are, it doesn’t tell readers how many METs are associated with the “optimal” moderate jogging pace.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Got Low Back Pain? Massage Therapy May Rub It Out

Low back pain is second only to cold symptoms when it comes to complaints that send people to the doctor. Sooner or later, back pain seems to get most of us.

Now, a study in the July 5 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine shows that massage is an effective treatment for lower back pain. In some cases, researchers report, the benefits of massage lasted for six months or longer.

Researchers headed by epidemiologist Daniel Cherkin, a senior investigator at Group Health Research Institute in Seattle, enrolled 401 people with chronic low back pain and no identifiable reason for the pain.

Study participants were randomly assigned to one of three treatments. One group received full-body relaxation massage. A second received targeted deep tissue massage. The third group got the usual care — medication and physical therapy.

In relaxation massage, often referred to as Swedish massage, a variety of maneuvers are used to promote a feeling of relaxation throughout the body and muscles. Structural massage, commonly referred to as deep tissue massage, targets specific pain related tissues, ligaments and joints.

After 10 weeks, the results were dramatic: Nearly two-thirds of the patients who received either type of weekly massage said their back pain was significantly improved or gone altogether. Only about one-third of patients receiving the usual care experienced similar relief.

"We found that both types of massage were equally effective in helping people improve their function and diminish their symptoms," Cherkin says. He says massage relieved the pain for six months or more.

Prior studies of massage for back pain had tested only structural forms of massage, not relaxation massage. But relaxation massage is more widely available, and it's often less costly.

Peggy O'Brien-Murphy was among the study participants. In her late 60s, a retired state employee, O'Brien Murphy tried just about everything to get rid of the pain in her lower back. The massage therapy finally seemed to do the trick.

"I'm so very lucky," she says.

Prior to the study, O'Brien-Murphy says she had found herself increasingly debilitated by back pain. At one point, she says she could hardly get out of a chair.

"It was really bad," she says. "In fact, I was pulling myself up the stairs by the banister." It was difficult getting into the car. And she could no longer walk the hills where she lives. For an active person, this was devastating.

So when she came upon an ad in her HMO's newsletter, Group Health Cooperative in Seattle, she jumped at the chance to take part in the massage study.

After just two or three sessions with massage therapist Loretta Lanz, O'Brien-Murphy said she felt better. After each session she walked around the block, standing straighter and walking further each time. By the end, she felt "back to normal," with a "spring to my walk and some energy in it!"

For O'Brien-Murphy, the massage-therapy experience has been life-changing: She has traveled to China, where she walked all over without problems, and she's already planning her next trips.

No one knows exactly how massage works to relieve pain, says Dr. Richard Deyo of Oregon Health Sciences University, who also took part in the study.

"It may be that it helps with relaxation of muscles that are tense," Deyo says. "But it may also be there are simply more generalized effects of relaxation — in the caring and attention and someone laying hands on — that may all be important."

Researchers say future studies should look more closely at the benefits of massage and focus on cost-benefit analysis.

As for O'Brien-Murphy, she remains free of back pain, but not without some effort on her part. Other studies have shown that building strong and flexible muscles can help prevent back pain. O'Brien-Murphy never exercised before. But now she does weight training, muscle stretches and aerobic exercise — activities all shown to help prevent recurrence of lower back pain.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We like how the story ended, explaining more about the patient profiled in the story:
“she remains free of back pain, but not without some effort on her part. Other studies have shown that building strong and flexible muscles can help prevent back pain. O’Brien-Murphy never exercised before. But now she does weight training, muscle stretches and aerobic exercise — activities all shown to help prevent recurrence of lower back pain.”
However, these facts put her story in a different light.  The wonderful results of massage for this patient may have a lot to do with other treatments she received after the massage was over. So massage may not have cured her. It provided a means to engaging in physical activity which she hadn’t been able to do. That’s dramatic – not the massage, but that she has been able to maintain her improvement through hard work!
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO, March 4, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Chrono Therapeutics, a pioneer in digital drug therapy, today announced that clinical data for the company's smoking cessation technology showed a statistically significant reduction in nicotine cravings in a trial of adult male smokers. The data were presented today at the Society for Research on Nicotine & Tobacco's 22nd Annual Meeting.

Chrono's wearable transdermal drug delivery device times nicotine delivery to when smokers have their strongest cravings. For example, 75% of all smokers reach for their first cigarette within 30 minutes of waking up. The Chrono Solution is designed to deliver the first dose of nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) shortly before a smoker wakes up and then creates a pattern of "peaks and troughs" of nicotine delivery throughout the rest of the day to assure the smoker has more nicotine support when cravings are predicted to be strongest.

"In the United States, 70 percent of smokers want to quit, but quitting is extremely difficult. In fact, most people try 8 to 10 times and this includes quit attempts with standard cessation medications like nicotine patch and gum and prescription drugs like varenicline," said Alan Levy, Ph.D., chairman and CEO of Chrono Therapeutics. "Gums and patches are designed to help manage cravings, but they are only 5 to 9 percent effective. Our goal is to solve this crisis of public health with an innovative, integrated smoking cessation solution, and the data we presented demonstrates that we are on the right path."

The clinical trial was a randomized, double blinded study of 24 adult males who smoked 11 or more cigarettes per day, indicating a high level of nicotine dependence. The subjects were divided into two groups. Test group subjects had nicotine administered over a 30-hour time period via Chrono's prototype device that delivered nicotine according to Chrono's "peaks and troughs" profile. Control subjects had a placebo solution, with no nicotine, administered at the same intervals via the same prototype device. Across both groups, subjects showed no serious adverse events or study withdrawals due to an adverse event. Skin irritation assessment showed no signs of irritation or erythema.

Cravings were assessed via three different methods: the Questionnaire for Smoking Urges (QSU), the Mood and Physical Symptoms Scale (MPSS) and a single craving question, each of which is a validated tool to assess cravings. When compared to subjects treated with placebo, test subjects had a statistically significant and clinically meaningful reduction in cravings for all assessment methods (p=0.035; p=0.034 and p=0.016, respectively).

"Achieving statistical significance in a 24-subject trial is very striking and happens infrequently in biopharma; so these results are very encouraging," noted Wende Hutton, general partner at Canaan Partners and a member of Chrono's board of directors. "Quitting smoking is one of the simplest ways to improve global public health, but as the dismal efficacy of current therapies demonstrates, it is also one of the hardest. I'm very excited to be working with a company that has the potential to solve such a serious problem."

Effective care of the most hard-to-treat conditions requires approaches beyond simply taking medicine. Chrono's team is developing the first wearable transdermal drug delivery device that optimizes drug dosing, is embedded with sensor technology to track usage and is connected via Bluetooth to an evidence-based smartphone application that delivers real-time personalized behavioral support to keep users on track to achieve their goals. Chrono's first application is in smoking cessation, enabling smokers to overcome the world's deadliest addiction. For more information, visit www.chronothera.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here. The news release does indeed compare this new device to nicotine patches, gum and prescription drugs, but it does so inaccurately. The issue being discussed here is craving control and this trial is moot regarding the control of smoking.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Viruses are usually thought of as agents of disease. But for the first time, scientists are poised to bring to the US market a virus that can help thwart cancer, a development that could herald a new age of viral therapies.

Approved by the Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday for treating advanced-stage melanoma, the virus — called Imlygic, which was developed in part in a Massachusetts lab — is a modified version of the herpes virus that both attacks the cancer and sparks the immune system into action against tumors.

In clinical trials, it has helped some cancer patients achieve remission with few of the nasty side effects common to existing treatments. And as the first tumor-killing virus to receive the FDA’s blessing, Imlygic could accelerate the development of other viral therapies.

“This is huge for the whole field, and for cancer patients,” said John Bell, a senior scientist at the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute in Canada. “The field is exploding, and this would be another arrow in the quiver that oncologists use.”

Imlygic is part of a new group of immune-stimulating viral therapies that could change how cancer is treated and managed. One involves a genetically tweaked poliovirus being tested in patients with brain tumors, while another, based on a version of the common cold virus, is now under evaluation in people with bladder cancer.

Melanoma is a deadly form of skin cancer that kills around 10,000 people per year in the United States. In a trial of 436 patients with the disease, 16 percent of participants who received Imlygic saw their tumors shrink for at least six months, compared with just 2 percent of those who received an older immune-boosting drug. Among those whose cancer had spread locally but not to internal organs, the response rate was better — 33 percent.

“It’s a low-toxicity treatment, and for the right patients you see quite stunning results,” said Robert Coffin, a virologist who created Imlygic at BioVex, the Woburn-based company he founded.

In 2011, the California biotech giant Amgen bought BioVex — and the rights to Imlygic, known generically as talimogene laherparepvec, or T-VEC — in a deal worth up to $1 billion. Amgen will charge patients $65,000 for a course of treatment, which analysts said is in line with expectations.

“These days in oncology we’ve seen some prices quite a bit higher than that,” said Eric Schmidt, an analyst with Cowen & Company. “And Amgen’s not a company that likes to price gouge.”

Schmidt said Imlygic’s market potential as a standalone drug is “very, very modest. It’s being developed in combination with other immunotherapies, where we think there’s a little more of a commercial opportunity, but we still need to see more data.”

Imlygic is approved for skin tumors that are inoperable in patients whose cancer has returned following surgery.

Sue Bohlin, a retired small-business owner in Farmingdale, N.J., is one of those patients. She received the viral therapy in early 2011 after conventional treatments failed to eliminate the skin tumors that had spread from her back to her breast.

“The first time I took it, I got a really serious case of the chills and a high fever, but only for six or eight hours,” said Bohlin, now 62. “After that, there were no side effects.”

Such muted side effects point to a major benefit of this new approach, doctors and patients said. Aside from chills and fever, the other common symptom cited in the study was skin irritation.

Bohlin’s doctors planned to inject each of her tumor sites every two weeks, but after several rounds of treatments more tumors appeared. In a last-ditch effort meant to jump-start Bohlin’s immune system, they injected her on consecutive weeks. The tumors started shrinking in the following weeks, and about three months later they were gone.

“I think we’re on the cusp of potentially curing patients” with these viruses and other immune therapies, said Dr. Howard Kaufman, chief surgical officer of the Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey and a lead researcher on Bohlin’s trial. “But short of that, this might be like diabetes, where we can control it and people live normal lives.”

Imlygic is based on a form of the herpes simplex virus that commonly causes cold sores. It is genetically altered to replicate only in tumor cells while also producing a protein that activates T-cells, the search-and-destroy specialists of the immune system. Those T-cells pick up melanoma cells’ molecular scent and hunt them down before going off in search of tumor cells hiding elsewhere in the body.

“This wakes up the immune system and says, ‘Hey! Active infection here, come check this out!’ ” said Dr. Antonio Chiocca, chairman of neurosurgery at Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

In many of the newer experiments, researchers are combining cancer-killing viruses like Imlygic with other immune-activating agents known as checkpoint inhibitors. These therapies typically open gateways that tumors have used to block immune cells.

In one small study of 19 advanced melanoma patients treated with both Imlygic and a checkpoint inhibitor called Yervoy, nearly half of the patients responded. “It’s nothing short of dramatic,” said Dr. Jason Chesney, an oncologist at the University of Louisville, who is involved in running a larger, follow-up study of this combination approach.

John O’Donnell, a retired math teacher in Piscataway, N.J., was one of those who tried the combination therapy, but ultimately responded only to Imlygic. More than 20 years ago, a dermatologist told him not to worry about the two tan, irregularly shaped spots near his clavicle. Three years ago, however, he noticed a small raised area on one of them.

Surgeons removed the melanoma, but it returned last year under his arm and in his lung. O’Donnell, who is 67, started the combination therapy shortly thereafter, then stopped taking Yervoy after developing severe diarrhea, a common side effect of the treatment.

But he kept with the Imlygic, and the lung tumors soon disappeared. The nodule under his arm also grew small enough to be removed by surgery.

Through it all, O’Donnell remained healthy enough to achieve one of his primary goals: to continue to lead Tuesday Bingo night at a local senior center without the residents discovering his condition.

“I know it sounds vain, but I’m too visible, and I’m too close to them,” he said. “They’re old and easily upset, and I can’t look sick.”

Earlier this month, a new scan revealed shadows that could be signs of melanoma. “My doctor isn’t convinced, though, so she said we’ll just sit and wait,” O’Donnell said. “Even if it is something, there are other things to try.”
• WHO advisers say first malaria vaccine needs more real-world study
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions another drug called Yervoy and also mentions conventional treatments. It also describes other virus-based treatments that are under development.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, May 12, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Blood thinners are often prescribed to prevent strokes in people with the abnormal heart rhythm known as atrial fibrillation. But a new study suggests these drugs may also help keep dementia at bay.

The researchers said that the key is to start blood thinners, such as warfarin, soon after atrial fibrillation is diagnosed. That's true even for people at low risk of a stroke who wouldn't normally be given blood thinners.

"We found that people who are on warfarin -- the most common blood thinner used to prevent stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation -- experienced very low rates of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease," said lead researcher Dr. T. Jared Bunch. He's director of heart rhythm research at Intermountain Medical Center Heart Institute in Murray, Utah.

Atrial fibrillation is a common heart abnormality that affects nearly 3 million American adults. It causes the heart to beat abnormally or quiver. This causes blood to pool, and then it can clot.

Atrial fibrillation can cause dementia by damaging tiny blood vessels in the brain through repeated tiny clots or small bleeds that people aren't even aware of, Bunch explained.

While many patients are initially given aspirin, Bunch said aspirin's benefit in cutting the risk for dementia is limited, and patients should be started on warfarin or another blood thinner.

Although the study looked at patients taking warfarin (Coumadin), newer drugs -- including rivaroxaban (Xarelto) and apixaban (Eliquis) -- should reduce the risk of dementia even more, Bunch said.

In patients with atrial fibrillation, the risk of stroke is usually measured using the so-called CHADS score, the researchers said. This score assigns points for several risk factors, such as age, high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes and a previous stroke.

A score of zero to one usually means blood thinners aren't needed because the risk for stroke is low. For patients with scores above one, blood thinners are considered necessary, as these patients are judged to be at moderate to high risk, according to the researchers.

In this study, however, the investigators said they found that even a short delay in giving blood thinners to patients at low risk for stroke increases the risk for dementia.

In patients considered at low-risk for stroke, delaying blood-thinning treatment increased the risk for dementia 30 percent. In high-risk patients, a delay increased the risk 136 percent, the researchers reported.

The longer the delay in giving blood thinners, the more the risk for dementia, the researchers said.

For the study, Bunch and his colleagues looked at information from more than 76,000 atrial fibrillation patients who had no history of dementia. The average age of the study participants was 69, and 57 percent were male. The researchers looked at when treatment began: either within 30 days of atrial fibrillation diagnosis, which was considered immediate; or after a year, which was considered delayed.

"Once you are diagnosed with atrial fibrillation, starting stroke-prevention strategies immediately is essential. We shouldn't wait longer than a month to begin treatment," Bunch said. "The delay in treating can be devastating to patients when they start developing mental decline years later," he added.

The results of the study were scheduled for presentation Friday at the meeting of the Heart Rhythm Society in Chicago. Findings presented at meetings are generally viewed as preliminary until they've been published in a peer-reviewed journal.

According to Dr. Byron Lee of the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), "There is a growing body of literature supporting the connection between atrial fibrillation and dementia." Lee is a professor of medicine and director of the electrophysiology laboratories and clinics at UCSF.

"Therefore," he said, "we need to be extremely aggressive in treating atrial fibrillation patients with anticoagulants [blood thinners] when indicated. This study shows that treatment delays of even one month can greatly increase the incidence of cognitive [mental] decline," Lee said.

For more on atrial fibrillation, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions use of aspirin and notes that “aspirin’s benefit in cutting the risk of dementia is limited.”
However, aspirin is not really recommended as an alternative to blood thinners (guidelines don’t recommend this anymore, so we were surprised to see it mentioned). But beyond this, there aren’t any real alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is such a radical change in thought that it’s been hard for many people to get their heads around it,” said Dr. Monica Morrow, chief of the breast service at Sloan-Kettering and an author of the study, which is being published Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association. The paid for the study.

Doctors and patients alike find it easy to accept more cancer treatment on the basis of a study, Dr. Morrow said, but get scared when the data favor less treatment.

The new findings are part of a trend to move away from radical surgery for breast cancer. Rates of , removal of the whole breast, began declining in the 1980s after studies found that for many patients, survival rates after and radiation were just as good as those after mastectomy.

The trend reflects an evolving understanding of breast cancer. In decades past, there was a belief that surgery could “get it all” — eradicate the cancer before it could spread to organs and bones. But research has found that breast cancer can begin to spread early, even when are small, leaving microscopic traces of the disease after surgery.

The modern approach is to cut out obvious tumors — because lumps big enough to detect may be too dense for drugs and radiation to destroy — and to use radiation and chemotherapy to wipe out microscopic disease in other places.

But doctors have continued to think that even microscopic disease in the lymph nodes should be cut out to improve the odds of survival. And until recently, they counted cancerous lymph nodes to gauge the severity of the disease and choose chemotherapy. But now the number is not so often used to determine drug treatment, doctors say. What matters more is whether the disease has reached any nodes at all. If any are positive, the disease could become deadly. Chemotherapy is recommended, and the drugs are the same, no matter how many nodes are involved.

The new results do not apply to all patients, only to women whose disease and treatment meet the criteria in the study.

The tumors were early, at clinical stage T1 or T2, meaning less than two inches across. Biopsies of one or two armpit nodes had found cancer, but the nodes were not enlarged enough to be felt during an exam, and the cancer had not spread anywhere else. The women had lumpectomies, and most also had radiation to the entire breast, and chemotherapy or hormone-blocking drugs, or both.

The study, at 115 medical centers, included 891 patients. Their median age was in the mid-50s, and they were followed for a median of 6.3 years.

After the initial node , the women were assigned at random to have 10 or more additional nodes removed, or to leave the nodes alone. In 27 percent of the women who had additional nodes removed, those nodes were cancerous. But over time, the two groups had no difference in survival: more than 90 percent survived at least five years. Recurrence rates in the armpit were also similar, less than 1 percent. If breast cancer is going to recur under the arm, it tends to do so early, so the follow-up period was long enough, the researchers said.

One potential weakness in the study is that there was not complete follow-up information on 166 women, about equal numbers from each group. The researchers said that did not affect the results. A statistician who was not part of the study said the missing information should have been discussed further, but probably did not have an important impact.

It is not known whether the findings also apply to women who do not have radiation and chemotherapy, or to those who have only part of the breast irradiated. Nor is it known whether the findings could be applied to other types of cancer.

The results mean that women like those in the study will still have to have at least one removed, to look for cancer and decide whether they will need more treatment. But taking out just one or a few nodes should be enough.

Dr. Armando E. Giuliano, the lead author of the study and the chief of surgical oncology at the Cancer Institute at St. John’s Health Center in , Calif., said: “It shouldn’t come as a big surprise, but it will. It’s hard for us as surgeons and medical oncologists and radiation oncologists to accept that you don’t have to remove the nodes in the armpit.”

Dr. Grant W. Carlson, a professor of surgery at the Winship Cancer Institute at , and the author of an editorial accompanying the study, said that by routinely taking out many nodes, “I have a feeling we’ve been doing a lot of harm.”

Indeed, women in the study who had the nodes taken out were far more likely (70 percent versus 25 percent) to have complications like infections, abnormal sensations and fluid collecting in the armpit. They were also more likely to have lymphedema.

But Dr. Carlson said that some of his colleagues, even after hearing the new study results, still thought the nodes should be removed.

“The dogma is strong,” he said. “It’s a little frustrating.”

Eventually, he said, genetic testing of breast tumors might be enough to determine the need for treatment, and eliminate the need for many node biopsies.

Two other breast surgeons not involved with the study said they would take it seriously.

Dr. Elisa R. Port, the chief of breast surgery at in Manhattan, said: “It’s a big deal in the world of breast cancer. It’s definitely practice-changing.”

Dr. Alison Estabrook, the chief of the comprehensive breast center at St. Luke’s-Roosevelt hospital in New York said surgeons had long been awaiting the results.

“In the past, surgeons thought our role was to get out all the cancer,” Dr. Estabrook said. “Now he’s saying we don’t really have to do that.”

But both Dr. Estabrook and Dr. Port said they would still have to make judgment calls during surgery and remove lymph nodes that looked or felt suspicious.

The new research grew out of efforts in the 1990s to minimize lymph node surgery in the armpit, called axillary dissection. Surgeons developed a technique called sentinel node biopsy, in which they injected a dye into the breast and then removed just one or a few nodes that the dye reached first, on the theory that if the was spreading, cancer cells would show up in those nodes. If there was no cancer, no more nodes were taken. But if there were cancer cells, the surgeon would cut out more nodes.

Although the technique spared many women, many others with positive nodes still had extensive cutting in the armpit, and suffered from side effects.

“Women really dread the axillary dissection,” Dr. Giuliano said. “They fear lymphedema. There’s numbness, , and some have limitation of motion. There are a fair number of serious complications. Women know it.”

After armpit surgery, 20 percent to 30 percent of women develop lymphedema, Dr. Port said, and radiation may increase the rate to 40 percent to 50 percent. Physical therapy can help, but there is no cure.

The complications — and the fact that there was no proof that removing the nodes prolonged survival — inspired Dr. Giuliano to compare women with and without axillary dissection. Some doctors objected. They were so sure cancerous nodes had to come out that they said the study was unethical and would endanger women.

“Some prominent institutions wouldn’t even take part in it,” Dr. Giuliano said, though he declined to name them. “They’re very supportive now. We don’t want to hurt their feelings. They’ve seen the light.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does a great job explaining the history of this form of treatment and how it has evolved over time. “But doctors have continued to think that even microscopic disease in the lymph nodes should be cut out to improve the odds of survival. And until recently, they counted cancerous lymph nodes to gauge the severity of the disease and choose chemotherapy. But now the number is not so often used to determine drug treatment, doctors say. What matters more is whether the disease has reached any nodes at all. If any are positive, the disease could become deadly. Chemotherapy is recommended, and the drugs are the same, no matter how many nodes are involved.” The story goes on to do something that stories like this rarely do, it compares compares the harms from different forms of treatment, saying “After armpit surgery, 20 percent to 30 percent of women develop lymphedema, Dr. Port said, and radiation may increase the rate to 40 percent to 50 percent. Physical therapy can help, but there is no cure.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New research from the University of British Columbia and the University of Saskatchewan is adding new evidence in support of midwives as a safe option for prenatal care, especially for women who have low socioeconomic status.

The study, published today in the British Medical Journal Open, found that low-income pregnant women who receive care from a midwife compared to a physician are less likely to go into early labour, to have a baby with a low birth weight, or to have a small-for-gestational age birth, meaning a fetus or infant that is smaller or less developed than normal for the number of weeks in pregnancy.

Midwives, general practitioners (GPs) and obstetricians (OBs) are all qualified to provide safe prenatal care for women during their pregnancy, labour and birth, but each offer a different style of care that matches different women's preferences and needs. Midwives are experts in the care of women having healthy pregnancies, and tend to spend more time with their patients with a focus on the overall physical, emotional and psychological wellbeing of mothers and their newborns.

"Our findings show that women who are more vulnerable benefit from the care of a midwife, likely because they receive more time, counselling and education on how to care for themselves," said the study's lead author Daphne McRae, a post-doctoral research fellow at the UBC school of population and public health who conducted the study while she was a PhD student at the University of Saskatchewan.

For the study, the researchers followed 57,872 women in B.C. who carried a single baby, had low-to-moderate risk pregnancies, and received medical insurance premium assistance sometime between 2005 and 2012. They used maternity, medical billing and demographic data to investigate the odds of small-for-gestational age birth, pre-term birth and low birth weight for low-income women receiving care from a midwife, GP, or OB.

After controlling for differences such as age, previous pregnancies, where they lived and pre-existing medical conditions, the researchers found that low-income women who were receiving prenatal care from a midwife had 29 per cent lower odds of a small-for-gestational age birth compared to women who received care from a GP. Compared to those who received care from an OB, low-income women receiving midwifery care had a 41 per cent reduction in odds for small-for-gestational age birth, the researchers found.

McRae said the findings add new evidence in support of midwifery care, and support the development of policies to ensure midwives are available and accessible, especially for low-income women. Midwifery is not available in all parts of the country.

"Waitlists for midwives can be quite long, so women who are educated and health-conscious typically access midwives early on in their pregnancies," said McRae. "But more vulnerable women might not be as aware of the services available to them, so expanding midwifery to make it available for all women is important."

"Our research could help develop policies that make the service more accessible to low-income women," added senior author Nazeem Muhajarine, a professor in community health and epidemiology at the University of Saskatchewan and McRae's supervisor while she conducted the research.

The study was co-authored by Patricia Janssen, Saraswathi Vedam, Maureen Mayhew at the University of British Columbia, and Deborah Mpofu and Ulrich Teucher at the University of Saskatchewan.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release met our threshold here by saying midwives, general practitioners, and obstetricians “are all qualified to provide safe prenatal care for women during their pregnancy, labour and birth, but each offer a different style of care that matches different women’s preferences and needs.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
January 30, 2018 - For older women undergoing mastectomy for breast cancer, direct-to-implant (DTI) breast reconstruction provides good outcomes in a single-step procedure, while avoiding some of the inconvenience and risks of staged approaches to breast reconstruction, reports a study in the February issue of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery®, the official medical journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS).

"The DTI approach is a powerful tool for breast reconstruction in elderly patients," comments ASPS Member Surgeon Andrea Moreira, MD, of the Cleveland Clinic. The researchers believe the DTI technique may expand the options for older women, who are less likely to undergo breast reconstruction.

Good Results with DTI Breast Reconstruction in Women over 65

Direct-to-implant breast reconstruction has emerged as a single-stage approach to immediate breast reconstruction after mastectomy. So far, however, most studies of DTI have focused on younger women.

"Half of all breast cancers occur in women over 65, yet only four to 14 percent of these women undergo reconstruction," Dr. Moreira and coauthors write. Most studies of breast reconstruction in older women have focused on multiple-step techniques such as tissue expander implant (TEI) reconstruction.

The researchers identified women over age 65 who underwent DTI reconstruction at the Cleveland Clinic between 2012 and 2015. They identified a total of 24 breasts reconstructed by DTI in 19 patients, all with at least 30 days' follow-up and most with one year of follow-up

Patient characteristics and outcomes were compared to those of 109 breasts with TEI reconstruction in 98 patients. The women undergoing DTI reconstruction were older (73.5 versus 69.2 years) and had a higher body mass index, compared to the TEI group.

Both DTI and TEI were safe and effective options for breast reconstruction. Complication rates were similar between groups, including blood and fluid collections (hematoma and seroma), infection, unplanned surgery, and failed reconstruction.

However, DTI had some important advantages. Women in the DTI group were less likely to be readmitted to the hospital and spent fewer total days in the hospital. In the year after surgery was completed, women in the DTI group made an average of 6.5 office visits, compared to about 12 visits in the TEI group.

The DTI group also spent fewer days with a surgical drain in place: average about 13 days, compared to 23 days in the and had fewer total days in the hospital. That's an important consideration, as drains require antibiotic treatment to prevent infection, in addition to causing discomfort for the patient.

The authors note some important limitations of their study--particularly the fact that it was a review study of one hospital's experience with a relatively new procedure. Dr. Moreira and colleagues write, "These reported cases include our learning curve patients as we familiarized ourselves with appropriate patient selection and surgical technique."

The researchers emphasize that DTI isn't an option for every patient, depending on breast shape and other factors. Despite these limitations, their experience suggests that complications of the DTI approach in older women are similar to those of the more commonly used TEI technique. Dr. Moreira adds, "In appropriately selected cases, DTI reconstruction is a viable alternative to staged techniques requiring multiple surgeries."

Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® is published by Wolters Kluwer.

Click here to read "Direct-to-Implant Breast Reconstruction in Women Older than 65 Years: A Retrospective Analysis of Complication Rate and Overall Outcomes."

For more than 70 years, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® (http://www. ) has been the one consistently excellent reference for every specialist who uses plastic surgery techniques or works in conjunction with a plastic surgeon. The official journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® brings subscribers up-to-the-minute reports on the latest techniques and follow-up for all areas of plastic and reconstructive surgery, including breast reconstruction, experimental studies, maxillofacial reconstruction, hand and microsurgery, burn repair and cosmetic surgery, as well as news on medico-legal issues.

The American Society of Plastic Surgeons is the largest organization of board-certified plastic surgeons in the world. Representing more than 7,000 physician members, the society is recognized as a leading authority and information source on cosmetic and reconstructive plastic surgery. ASPS comprises more than 94 percent of all board-certified plastic surgeons in the United States. Founded in 1931, the society represents physicians certified by The American Board of Plastic Surgery or The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.

Wolters Kluwer N.V. (AEX: WKL) is a global leader in information services and solutions for professionals in the health, tax and accounting, risk and compliance, finance and legal sectors. We help our customers make critical decisions every day by providing expert solutions that combine deep domain knowledge with specialized technology and services.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2016 annual revenues of €4.3 billion. The company, headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands, serves customers in over 180 countries, maintains operations in over 40 countries and employs 19,000 people worldwide.

Wolters Kluwer Health is a leading global provider of information and point of care solutions for the healthcare industry. For more information about our products and the organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.

For more information about Wolters Kluwer's solutions and organization, visit http://www. , follow us on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The point of the study was comparing two options for breast reconstruction.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Orlando, Fla - Researchers at Orlando Health detected evidence of concussions in patients up to 7 days after their injury using a simple blood test, according to a new study published in JAMA Neurology. The discovery could greatly expand the window for diagnosing concussions, especially in patients who experience a delayed onset of symptoms.

"Symptoms of a concussion, or a mild to moderate traumatic brain injury, can be subtle and are often delayed, in many cases by several days," said Linda Papa, MD, MSC, an emergency medicine physician and NIH funded researcher at Orlando Health and lead author of the study. "This could provide doctors with an important tool for simply and accurately diagnosing those patients, particularly children, and making sure they are treated properly."

It's estimated nearly a quarter of a million children are treated in hospitals each year for concussions from playing sports, an average of nearly 700 a day. Almost all concussions in children are diagnosed only by symptoms, which are either observed, like vomiting or loss of balance, or symptoms reported by the child, like blurred vision or headaches. Neither scenario gives doctors and objective way to determine the severity of the injury.

"If patients are not diagnosed properly and treated appropriately, it could lead to long-term problems," said Papa. Untreated, or under-treated traumatic brain injuries like concussions, can lead to prolonged bouts with headaches, dizziness, memory loss and depression.

"This test could take the guesswork out of making a diagnosis by allowing doctors to simply look for a specific biomarker in the blood."

The biomarker Papa analyzed is known as a glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). These proteins are found in glial cells, which surround neurons in the brain, and when an injury occurs, the GFAP are released. What makes them unique is that they pass the blood-brain barrier and enter the bloodstream, making them easy to detect with this particular test.

"Not only were they present in the bloodstream, we were able to detect measurable levels of GFAP up to a week after the injury," said Papa.

Researchers analyzed nearly 600 patients for 3 years. When cross-checked with scans, the blood test was able to detect mild to moderate traumatic brain lesions with up to 97 percent accuracy in patients 18 years and older. The blood test also indicated which patients were in need of life-saving neurosurgery. This suggests that the blood test could be used by clinicians for up to a week after injury to detect brain injury. This is important because many patients with concussion may not seek medical attention for days after injury.

The blood test could also dramatically cut down on the need for computerized tomography (CT) scans. Currently, CT scans are the most precise way to diagnose brain lesions, but are expensive and are associated with radiation exposure. "Physicians really want to minimize the amount of CTs in patients, especially children, who are a lot more sensitive to radiation and the side effects that can come with it. Fortunately, this simple blood test appears to give us nearly the same information as a CT scan."

In fact, in a previous study published last fall, Papa and her team at Orlando Health tested both. They analyzed 152 children within 6 hours of sustaining a concussion, or mild to moderate traumatic brain injury. The results showed that the blood test was able to detect brain injuries with 94 percent accuracy, nearly as effective as state-of-the art CT scans.

"This could ultimately change the way we diagnose concussions, not only in children, but in anyone who sustains a head injury," said Papa. "We have so many diagnostic blood tests for different parts of the body, like the heart, liver and kidneys, but there's never been a reliable blood test to identify trauma in the brain. We think this test could change that," she said.

B-ROLL, SOUND BITES, WEB ELEMENTS & HI-RES STILL PHOTOS - Including HD video available for free/unrestricted use by the news media: http://bit.

For assistance in downloading, or if you have any questions, contact: drew@mediasourcetv.com or call: 614.932.9950

Orlando Health is a $2.1 billion not-for-profit health care organization and a community-based network of physician practices, hospitals, and outpatient care centers throughout Central Florida. The organization is home to the area's only Level One Trauma Centers for adults and pediatrics and is a statutory teaching hospital system that offers both specialty and community hospitals.

Nearly 3,000 physicians have privileges at Orlando Health, which is also one of the area's largest employers with more than 15,000 employees who serve nearly 2 million Central Florida residents and more than 4,500 international patients annually. Additionally, Orlando Health provides more than $270 million in support of community health needs. More information can be found at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release described how trauma patients would routinely be evaluated and possibly have a CT scan in order to diagnose without the use of blood markers. It would have been useful to include a mention of other research involving blood markers for concussion that have been undertaken.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Patients with depression often struggle through weeks or months of trial-and-error to find the right antidepressant. Now the burgeoning field of pharmacogenomics — how genes affect a person's response to drugs — is helping more patients avoid debilitating and all-too-common side effects of psychiatric medications.

Sarah Ellis will never forget her darkest days battling depression and the series of prescriptions the Sioux Falls, South Dakota mother of three endured.

“I tried every medicine," Ellis, 45, said. "I wondered if I would ever find something that works." One prescription gave her a rash for two years and the anti-anxiety medication, Clonazepam (Klonopin), affected her balance. She was also prescribed selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) — a class of drugs including Prozac which are used to treat anxiety and depression — but they "made me feel like I was losing my mind," Ellis told NBC News.

More than 1 in 20 American, ages 12 and older, are struggling with depression, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And many more are suffering from sometimes severe side effects, like weight gain, nausea, sleepiness and sexual problems. At least 135,587 adverse drug reactions linked to antidepressants were reported to the Food and Drug Administration's Adverse Event Reporting System between 2004 and 2012.

It's unclear how many patients have had to stop or chosen to stop treatment for depression due to side effects.

Related: 5 Things You Need To Know Before Taking an At-Home Genetic Test

Ellis tried 23 different combinations of depression medications. Finally, her psychiatrist, suspicious that her body might process medication differently than most, recommended a genetic test to see why Ellis wasn’t responding to the prescriptions.

“Once the genetic testing became available it provided Sarah with more than just physical relief," says Dr. Matthew B. Stanley of the Avera Medical Group in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. "It gave us an answer — that this was her physiology and her genetics and not something in her head.”

The Avera Institute for Human Genetics (AIHG) in Sioux Falls, South Dakota is among several institutions exploring the role of pharmacogenomics — the science of how our inheritance and genetic makeup influences the way we metabolize medications.

Related: Is Your Medication Helping or Hurting? DNA Tests May Be a Guide

'One piece of the puzzle'

AIHG’s pharmacogenomics research has led to the development of Genefolio, a genetic test that uses an individual’s unique DNA to predict how that individual will respond to medications. The test offered by Avera is $179 and is often covered by insurance.

Research pharmacist, Krista Bohlen, director of personalized pharmaceutical medicine at the Avera Institute for Human Genetics, believes that genetics play a large role in how different individuals react to certain medications, but cautions doctors and patients against relying solely on this method for answers.

According to a study conducted by the Mayo Clinic that looked at one genetic test similar to many used in hospitals — GeneSight Psychotropic — symptoms of depression were reduced by 70 percent compared to treatments prescribed without genetic testing.

While the results are striking, this technology is not a guarantee of complete resolution of depressive symptoms or medication side effects.

“Pharmacogenomics is one piece of the puzzle," Bohlen told NBC News. "We look at it as a tool to help the physician. They can couple their expert opinions with information from the patient, like their symptoms and family history, to look more closely at one class of drug over another."

The Genefolio test confirmed gene variants within Ellis’ DNA that made her more susceptible to certain side effects with newer classes of medications, so Stanley prescribed an older class of antidepressant and experimented with a lower dose.

"My energy's been really great," she says. "I feel like I can accomplish what I want to accomplish. This was definitely worth it.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions that other organizations are “exploring the role of pharmacogenomics,” and it mentions one other specific test, GeneSight Psychotropic, which it describes as “similar to many used in hospitals.” This is enough to merit a marginal Satisfactory score.
It does not say how similar the Genesight Psychotropic test is to the Genefolio test developed by the Avera Institute for Human Genetics, as we note above in the quantified benefits criterion. Thus, the article provides no data whatsoever about the clinical utility of Genefolio or of any other genetic tests other than GeneSight Psychotropic; instead, it focuses on the anecdotal story of how the Genefolio test helped a patient’s doctor decide to prescribe for her a lower dose of an older antidepressant and on the positive results that produced.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The new study only included national data through 2005, the most recent year they were available, but, said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate and colorectal cancers for the American Cancer Society, “there is no reason to believe it has changed significantly since 2005.” Doctors said there are several reasons screening seems to continue indefinitely as men age. They range from patient demands to malpractice fears to financial incentives and doctors’ own lack of understanding of the risks and benefits of screening.

“There are a lot of pressures,“ said Dr. Gerald L. Andriole, a urologic surgeon at Washington University. “It is not all pure data that is promoting aggressive screening.” Dr. Andriole is directing a National Cancer Institute study of 76,000 men that failed to find a screening benefit after 10 years. The men were aged 55 to 74 when the study began. P.S.A. screening is controversial at any age. Screening proponents say the cancer institute study was flawed and point to a European study of 162,000 men aged 55 to 69 that showed a 20 percent drop in the prostate cancer death rate with screening.

Screening critics say the European study was flawed and add that there is a logical reason it has been hard to show a screening benefit.

They note that prostate cancer is a common cancer, found in most men’s prostates on autopsy, although often the men had no idea they had it. The cancer can be lethal, but it usually grows so slowly that men die with it, not because of it.

For most men, screening only has harms because it leads to biopsies and treatments with unpleasant side effects. And, they say, it might not help cure many deadly prostate cancers because those cancers may have already spread outside the prostate, microscopically seeding other organs, long before a P.S.A. test indicates a possible problem.

A positive P.S.A. test usually leads to a biopsy and then, if cancer is found, to a decision about whether to treat it. Nearly all men opt for treatment, which includes surgery to remove the prostate or radiation to destroy the cancer. Side effects can include impotence and incontinence.

Even younger men should weigh the harms of screening, says Dr. Lisa Schwartz of Dartmouth Medical School. “You also have the potential to wreck their lives,” she said.

One reason treatment is the most common choice is that it is hard to know if a cancer is lethal. Pathologists can distinguish between cancers that look particularly aggressive and those that do not, but there is a real possibility that even if tissue obtained at a biopsy has only less aggressive tumor cells, more aggressive cells might still be lurking in the prostate.

But even with this uncertainty, prostate cancer specialists say, most men who are treated would not have died of prostate cancer, and that is especially true for elderly men, in particular those who are frail and have a limited life expectancy. Yet changing medical practice can be difficult.

“Anytime a practice becomes ingrained, it is difficult to eradicate,” says Dr. Brooks. “It is harder to get rid of an aberrant behavior than to adopt a new one.”

Dr. Andriole said the very concept of not screening is difficult.

“It is the hardest thing in the world not to look for a cancer and not to treat it,” he says. And doctors, he added, have many inducements to screen. They often are afraid they could be sued if they do not screen and a man is found to have a lethal cancer. And there are financial incentives.

“Urologists make money by finding ways to biopsy men and administer treatments,” Dr. Andriole said. Screening, he added, “is promoted by hospitals and industry.” And, he added, “many patients demand it.”

Dr. Brooks of the cancer society says he travels the country and talks to primary care doctors about screening, and has learned that many have misconceptions about the test’s benefits.

“They often don’t appreciate the downside of screening,” Dr. Brooks said, “and they don’t appreciate the delay in benefit.” In addition, Dr. Brooks said, primary care doctors often “overestimate the likelihood that early detection of prostate cancer will lead to survival benefits.”

Added to that, Dr. Brooks said, is the length of time it takes to discuss the pros and cons of screening with patients. Often it is easier to just order the test.

Dr. Bruce Roth, a professor of medicine at Washington University in St. Louis, said that ideally, a doctor should take a man’s overall health into account and not just go by age in ordering P.S.A. tests. But if a man has been screened year after year, it can be hard to suggest he stop because he may not live much longer.

Some men say the cautions just do not apply to them.

J. Allen Wheeler, who is 82 and lives in Portland, Ore., said he had his most recent P.S.A. test in January. His doctor orders it routinely, he says, adding, “In all honestly, it’s part of my physical.” His doctor “just does it — that’s the understanding between us.”

Mr. Wheeler, who says his health is “fairly good,” said he could not foresee a time when he would stop having the test. He would like to know if he has cancer, he says, although he may decide not to be treated.

A 75-year-old Connecticut man said he had the test because he was healthy and wanted to stay that way.

“I think I am going to live to be 100,” he said, asking that his name be withheld to protect his privacy. A recent P.S.A. test found a small cancer, and he does not want to take a chance that it will grow slowly and not cause him problems.

“I am thinking seriously of having the whole thing taken out,” he says. “Hasta la vista.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story presented information about the impact of being tested for prostate cancer using the PSA test versus not having the test.  It was especially clear about the idea that a life expectancy of 10 years as a man thinks about potential benefit.
But, again, the option of not being screened wasn’t reflected in the patients profiled in the piece.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An improved therapy to replace essential steroids in the body is a step closer thanks to new research.

The new treatment - expected to have fewer side effects than existing therapies - could help people with disorders of the adrenal gland whose bodies are unable to produce a class of steroids called corticosteroids.

Corticosteroids are involved in a wide range of physiological processes in the body, including regulating metabolism, blood pressure and helping the body to cope with physical stress.

The therapy could help people with conditions such as Addison's disease and congenital adrenal hyperplasia, who need steroid treatment to avoid the risk of potentially fatal illness during physical stress.

Treatment usually involves replacing one of the steroids they are unable to produce - called cortisol - with a medication. However, this approach also affects fat tissue and can lead to excessive weight gain, high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes.

Researchers at the University of Edinburgh's British Heart Foundation Centre for Cardiovascular Science studied another steroid called corticosterone, which is also naturally produced by the body. Until now, there has been little research into its activity.

In a mouse study, the team showed that the effects of corticosterone on fat cells were reduced compared with cortisol. They found the effects were reduced because fat cells have a pump that removes corticosterone - but not cortisol - from the fat cells.

The researchers tested the therapy in a small group of patients with Addison's disease. The team found that corticosterone was as effective as cortisol, but had reduced effects on fat cells compared with cortisol.

Professor Brian Walker, Head of the BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: "These findings suggest that corticosterone could provide a safer alternative to traditional cortisol replacement therapy for conditions such as Addison's disease and congenital adrenal hyperplasia."

The researchers say that, with further research, these findings may one-day lead to improved therapies for other conditions that respond to steroid treatment, including asthma and rheumatoid arthritis.

Dr Mark Nixon, of the BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science at the University of Edinburgh, said: "The discovery of this selective corticosterone pump in fat cells could lead to a completely new approach in our search for safer steroid medications."

The study, published in the journal Science Translational Medicine, was funded by Wellcome, the British Heart Foundation, the Medical Research Council and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The text offers an extended comparison of the side effects of the current use of cortisol and those of the possible new treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers from the University of Copenhagen and humanitarian organizations have conducted a large study in Burkina Faso in West Africa treating more than 1600 children with acute malnutrition. The study, published Monday 11 September in the open access medical journal PLOS Medicine, showed that corn-soy porridge should be replaced with a lipid-based nutrient supplement (LNS), a fortified peanut butter. The results of the study can be used directly both in the treatment and prevention of acute malnutrition.

Globally, more than 50 million children are affected by acute malnutrition. Those with the most severe acute malnutrition have more than ten times increased mortality, and those surviving may have impaired development, compared to children without malnutrition. But this can be prevented if children are treated early, while they only have moderate acute malnutrition.

Christian Fabiansen, MD PhD and a team from the Department of Nutrition, Sports and Exercise at the University of Copenhagen conducted the study in collaboration with a PhD-student from the Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé in rural Northern Burkina Faso, where there was a high prevalence of acute malnutrition. Dr Fabiansen previously worked in humanitarian medical projects with Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), who also sponsored this work. The research was conducted in a malnutrition project run by the medical humanitarian organisation The Alliance for International Medical Action (ALIMA) and its Burkinabe partners Keoogo and SOS Médecins.

During the trial, 1609 small children with moderate acute malnutrition were given either LNS or corn-soy porridge for 12 weeks. The study found that children who received LNS experienced greater weight gain, and the large majority of the weight gain was healthy lean tissue.

Dr Fabiansen , the main author of the paper appearing in PLOS Medicine today, underscores the importance of the findings:

"Previous studies of nutritional supplements have mainly looked at the effect on weight gain. It has been a concern that LNS, with its very high fat content, would result mainly in weight gain composed of fat. But by using a method based measurement of heavy water in the child's body we have found that LNS mainly increase lean mass, that is muscles and organs, which are important for immune function, survival and development."

Novel standard for research in malnutrition may save lives

Professor Henrik Friis, the senior author on the paper, points to the importance of the collaboration between university researchers and humanitarian organizations:

"It has been a new way to conduct research, that we tested the effect of nutritional supplements used mainly by aid agencies, employing very advanced research methods in remote rural areas where humanitarian organization are working, and not at the university hospitals. The collaboration between researchers and humanitarian organizations means these findings can have immediate practical impact on field practice."

The General Director of the Danish section of MSF Jesper H. Brix notes:

"Acute malnutrition is still a major global health problem. So, I hope we can use the results to provide the best possible treatment for more vulnerable children. If we can treat children with moderate acute malnutrition with the scientifically proven most effective food aid product, and thereby prevent severe acute malnutrition, then many lives can be saved"

Dr Susan Shepherd, a paediatrician who heads ALIMA's Operational and Clinical Research, says:

"ALIMA is very proud of its participation in this study. Vulnerable children, no matter where they live, deserve the best medical and nutritional treatments available. Studies like Treatfood generate the evidence we need to make the best decisions with our patients. ALIMA is committed to developing more research partnerships in its humanitarian projects, because this is how we will raise the quality of medical practice for all."

University of Copenhagen, Doctors Without Borders and ALIMA have collaborated on the project Treatfood, which aims to improve products for children with acute malnutrition. The study was primarily funded by Danida, MSF-Denmark and MSF-Norway, and USAID via the World Food Programme.

The main Treatfood results are presented in the paper: Effectiveness of food supplements in increasing fat-free tissue accretion in children with moderate acute malnutrition: A randomised 2 × 2 × 3 factorial trial in Burkina Faso, published in the open access medical journal PLOS Medicine. Earlier peer-reviewed articles from the study have appeared in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, BMC Nutrition, and Appetite.

Malnutrition in children can be chronic or acute. In acute malnutrition children are thin relative to their height, or wasted. Approximately 8% or 50 mio children globally are affected by acute malnutrition. Of these, 2/3 have moderate and 1/3 severe acute malnutrition. Acute malnutrition is more life-threatening than chronic. In chronic malnutrition the children are short relative to their age, or stunted. More than 30% of children in the world have chronic malnutrition.

Previous research has focused on treatment of severe acute malnutrition. WHO has called for research to identify the most optimal foods for treatment of children with moderate acute malnutrition.

Phd Christian Fabiansen 

Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen 

Telephone: +45 22440844 

Mail: chfa@nexs.ku.dk

Professor Henrik Friis 

Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen 

Telephone: +45 26253968 

Mail: hfr@nexs.ku.dk

Kristian Levring Madsen 

Communication Manager 

Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen 

Telephone: +45 4048 1684 

Mail: kma@nexs.ku.dk
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study is all about comparing widely used alternatives about which there have been long standing questions of relative benefit.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Britain’s 650,000 people with bipolar disorder should take lithium to help control their condition, despite its reputation for dulling the senses, a significant new study has found.

Researchers claim that although the drug does carry some health risks, its overall effectiveness, especially its ability to reduce self-harm and suicide, mean it should be much more widely used.

The findings are contained in the first study comparing the side-effects of the four main mood-stabilising drugs the NHS prescribes. They have prompted calls for a rethink about attitudes towards lithium, given that only an estimated 10% of those with bipolar disorder use it, mainly because patients fear it will cause loss of personality, weight gain and other problems.

The lead author behind the research told the Guardian that widespread “lithium stigma” among patients is leading to them receiving the wrong treatment and ending up admitted to hospital unnecessarily because their condition is not as well controlled as it could be.

“Lithium is a drug with a bad reputation. It is seen by patients, and some psychiatrists, as a dangerous drug. People rightly have suspicions about it. Patients say that the downsides include emotional numbing – feeling that you aren’t connected with your feelings – as well as tremors,” said Dr Joseph Hayes, a psychiatrist at University College London.

But lithium’s reputation is largely misplaced and based on the experiences of patients from the 1960s to the 1980s who were given too large a dose of the drug, he added. The new research, published in the medical journal PLOS Medicine, found that the side-effects of the mood-stabilising alternatives used by most patients are either the same as or worse than lithium, Hayes said.

The paper, co-written by Hayes and four colleagues from UCL and Oxford University, concluded that: “Lithium remains an important treatment for individuals with bipolar disorder.” It accepts that “there is clear evidence that its use is associated with a number of adverse events.”

However, it adds: “These risks need to be offset with the potentially superior effectiveness and anti-suicidal benefits of the drug compared to other treatment options.”

The researchers studied a nationally representative sample of 6,671 patients across the UK who were treated for bipolar disorder between 1995 and 2013. Of those, 2,148 had taken lithium, 1,670 had used valproate, 1,477 had been on olanzapine and 1,376 had taken quetiapine. They experienced side-effects including chronic kidney disease, thyroid disease, weight gain and high blood pressure.

The researchers’ analysis bore out one of the two main criticisms of lithium, but found the other to be baseless. They found that patients on lithium had a higher risk of suffering kidney function problems and developing hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism and also hypercalcemia. However, none of the drugs caused more severe kidney problems.

Meanwhile, lithium patients were less likely to put on weight than patients on the other drugs. While 15%-20% of those on the three other drugs were more likely to gain more than 15% of their body weight, just 10% of those on lithium put on the same amount of extra pounds. Those on olanzapine added the most weight and experienced high blood pressure as a result.

Separate research has shown that patients on the other three medications are 40% more likely to harm themselves than those on lithium. Bipolar disorder carries one of the highest rates of suicide of any mental illness, alongside schizophrenia and alcohol and drug addiction.

The very limited use of lithium is despite the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) advising in 2014 that it should be the standard treatment for bipolar disorder, which is also known as manic depression and is characterised by manic highs and bouts of depression. That superseded its previous view, outlined in 2006, that any of the four drugs were useful first lines of treatment for the condition, which affects about one in 100 people.

“Lithium stigma, which includes some people in the psychiatric community, leads to people using drugs that are less effective [than lithium]. To me as a doctor that’s a big worry because my main aim is to help people to be well and if you aren’t doing that with the best available evidence then you are failing patients,” said Hayes.

“I think that many patients are missing out quite commonly on the best available treatment. That means that people end up in hospital more often than they need to and end up achieving less in their lives than they could do if they were on lithium. The high suicide rate with bipolar disorder should encourage greater use of lithium. There should be more sensible use of it.”

Stephen Buckley, head of information at the charity Mind, said: “We welcome research which adds to our understanding of treatments and medications for people experiencing mental health problems, including bipolar disorder. But as with all areas of mental health there is still more research to be done.

“Different people will find that different treatments help with managing their mental health problems. This may be medication, talking therapies, or a mixture of both.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The research examined the side effect profiles of the most commonly used drugs to treat bipolar disorder, it also discusses “talk therapy” (but not until the end of the story).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Study: Honey better than drugs for kids' coughs For kids' coughs, silence is golden and sweet

Parents might consider giving their coughing child honey instead of medicine, according to a study released Monday.

Buckwheat honey — a dark variety sold in most grocery stores — relieved children's coughs and helped them sleep better than dextromethorphan, the drug in most over-the-counter cough suppressants, according to a report published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Honey also beat out no treatment at all.

"(Honey) is a cheap and effective treatment," said Dr. Ian Paul, lead investigator for the study. "Consider using this as a treatment before going to the pharmacy to pick up an over-the-counter cough and cold medicine."

Honey has long been used by some parents as an alternative treatment for cough, although it should not be given to children under 1 year old.

The study comes at a time when parents are on the lookout for new ways to give sick children relief. A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel recommended last month that children under the age of 6 not be given over-the-counter cough and cold medicines.

For the study, 105 children ages 2-18 with upper respiratory tract infections that kept them awake at night were given either a dose of buckwheat honey, honey-flavored cough syrup or no treatment half an hour before bedtime.

One dose measured one-half teaspoon for children aged 2-5, one teaspoon for children aged 6-11 and two teaspoons for children aged 12-18.

Parents of the 35 children who received honey, given either on its own or with a non-caffeinated drink, reported they coughed less and slept better than those who gave their children nothing. The group that used honey also reported more favorable results than those who used cough syrup, but since the study group was small, those differences weren't statistically significant.

One local pediatrician said she wouldn't discourage parents from trying honey with their children, but more studies are needed to draw solid conclusions.

"In older children, if it makes them comfortable and it helps them sleep at night, then there may be a potential benefit," said Dr. Sara Rizvi, assistant professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine who also works at a primary care clinic at Texas Children's Hospital. "I would be reluctant to routinely recommend to all parents that they give honey, because in some rare cases children can have reactions to honey."

Paul, a pediatrician who practices at Penn State Children's Hospital and teaches at the university's College of Medicine, said he began the study because he was frustrated no treatment had been proven beneficial to relieve the common children's cough. Several years ago, he led another study that showed over-the-counter cough medicine was no more effective than placebos.

Honey is not only cheap and readily available, it's also generally safer than cough medicine, which can have side effects or be administered in the wrong dose.

Honey should not, however, be given to children under the age of 1 because it sometimes contains a bacteria that causes botulism, a rare paralytic illness that can result in death. Unlike older children, infants can't fight the bacteria.

Paul's group tested buckwheat honey instead of the lighter, more popular varieties because it's known to have more antioxidant and antimicrobial effects, which have been shown in other studies to help wounds heal. Honey may suppress cough because its sweetness causes salivation that coats the throat, authors of the study suggested.

"It's kind of amazing that something so simple could be an answer," Paul said.

The study was paid for by the National Honey Board, an industry-funded agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Under the provisions of the grant, the group was not involved in the study or the published results, Paul said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions cough medicine as the alternative.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS, Aug. 22, 2018 -- Breastfeeding is not only good for babies, there is growing evidence it may also reduce the risk for stroke in post-menopausal women who reported breastfeeding at least one child, according to new research in Journal of the American Heart Association, the Open Access Journal of the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.

Stroke is the fourth leading cause of death among women aged 65 and older, and is the third leading cause of death among Hispanic and black women aged 65 and older, according to the study.

"Some studies have reported that breastfeeding may reduce the rates of breast cancer, ovarian cancer and risk of developing Type 2 diabetes in mothers. Recent findings point to the benefits of breastfeeding on heart disease and other specific cardiovascular risk factors," said Lisette T. Jacobson, Ph.D., M.P.A., M.A., lead author of the study and assistant professor in the department of preventive medicine and public health at the University of Kansas School of Medicine-Wichita.

This is among the first studies to examine breastfeeding and a possible relationship to stroke risk for mothers, as well as how such a relationship might vary by ethnicity.

Researchers analyzed data on 80,191 participants in the Women's Health Initiative observational study, a large ongoing national study that has tracked the medical events and health habits of postmenopausal women who were recruited between 1993 and 1998. All women in this analysis had delivered one or more children and 58 percent reported ever having breastfed. Among these women, 51 percent breastfed for one-six months, 22 percent for seven-12 months and 27 percent for 13 or more months. At the time of recruitment, the average age was 63.7 years and the follow-up period was 12.6 years.

After adjusting for non-modifiable stroke risk factors (such as age and family history), researchers found stroke risk among women who breastfed their babies was on average:
• 19 percent lower in women who had breastfed for up to six months. A longer reported length of breastfeeding was associated with a greater reduction in risk.

"If you are pregnant, please consider breastfeeding as part of your birthing plan and continue to breastfeed for at least six months to receive the optimal benefits for you and your infant," Jacobson said.

"Our study did not address whether racial/ethnic differences in breastfeeding contribute to disparities in stroke risk. Additional research should consider the degree to which breastfeeding might alter racial/ethnic differences in stroke risk," Jacobson said.

Because the study was observational, it couldn't establish a cause-and-effect relationship between breastfeeding and lower stroke risk, meaning that it is possible some other characteristic that distinguishes between women who breastfeed and those who don't is the factor changing the stroke risk. However, because the Women's Health Initiative is large, researchers were able to adjust for many characteristics, and the effects of breastfeeding remained strong, Jacobson said.

"Breastfeeding is only one of many factors that could potentially protect against stroke. Others include getting adequate exercise, choosing healthy foods, not smoking and seeking treatment if needed to keep your blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar in the normal range," Jacobson said.

The study was also limited by the relatively small number of strokes that occurred during the follow-up period (just 3.4 percent of the women experienced a stroke during the study period and 1.6 percent reported having had a stroke prior to the study) and by the Women's Health Initiative's exclusion of women who had already had severe strokes at the time of recruitment.

Currently, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the World Health Organization recommend exclusive breastfeeding for six months, with continuation of breast feeding for one year or longer. For babies health, the American Heart Association recommends breastfeeding for 12 months with transition to other additional sources of nutrients beginning at about four - six months of age to ensure sufficient micronutrients in the diet.

Frontiers: The Heartland Institute for Clinical and Translational Research and the Wichita Center for Graduate Medical Education-Kansas Bioscience Authority funded the study. The WHI was supported by the National Health, Lung, and Blood Institute.

Co-authors are Erinn M. Hade, Ph.D.; Tracie C. Collins, M.D., M.P.H., M.H.C.D.S.; Karen L. Margolis, M.D., M.P.H.; Molly E. Waring, Ph.D.; Linda V. Van Horn, Ph.D., R.D.; Brian Silver, M.D.; Maryam Sattari, M.D., M.S.; Chloe E. Bird, Ph.D.; Kim Kimminau, Ph.D.; Karen Wambach, Ph.D.; and Marcia L. Stefanick, Ph.D. Author disclosures are on the manuscript.
• Available multimedia including photos and an audio interview are on the right column of the release link - https:/
• Story on previous JAHA study (June 21, 2018): Breastfeeding may reduce a mother's heart attack and stroke risk
• For updates and new science from JAHA, follow @JAHA_AHA

Statements and conclusions of study authors published in American Heart Association scientific journals are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the association's policy or position. The Association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability. The Association receives funding primarily from individuals. Foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The Association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations and health insurance providers are available at https:/ .

The American Heart Association is devoted to saving people from heart disease and stroke - the two leading causes of death in the world. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat these diseases. The Dallas-based association is the nation's oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke. To learn more or to get involved, call 1-800-AHA-USA1, visit heart.org or call any of our offices around the country. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does a nice job here, stating: “Breastfeeding is only one of many factors that could potentially protect against stroke. Others include getting adequate exercise, choosing healthy foods, not smoking and seeking treatment if needed to keep your blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar in the normal range.”
Not all of the alternatives have been proven to protect against stroke but listing them is a worthwhile reminder that lifestyle changes might reduce their risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The use of proton radiotherapy to treat the most common malignant brain tumor in children is as effective as standard photon (x-ray) radiation therapy while causing fewer long-term side effects such as hearing loss and cognitive disorders, according to a study receiving online publication in Lancet Oncology. The paper from a team led by Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) investigators describes patient outcomes an average of seven years after proton therapy for medulloblastoma, a fast-growing tumor that develops in the cerebellum at the base of the brain.

"Proton radiotherapy is still not widely available in the U.S. or around the world, but it is increasingly recognized for its potential to reduce the side effects of treatment, particularly in the pediatric population," says Torunn Yock, MD, MCh, MGH Department of Radiation Oncology, lead and corresponding author of the report. "At experienced centers, proton therapy has a proven track record of treatment success and safety."

In contrast to photon radiotherapy, in which a dose of radiation is delivered all along the x-ray beam as it passes through a patient's body, in proton therapy the dose is precisely focused on the target area with little or no dose delivered to normal tissues in front of or behind the tumor. This feature has made proton therapy particularly attractive to treat tumors in or near the brain or eyes, areas where the protection of nearby healthy tissues is particularly critical.

While medulloblastoma can often be successfully treated with a combination of surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, because of its location within the brain, long-term side effects are common. These can include hearing loss, which can be particularly problematic in young children; problems with learning and memory, and neuroendocrine disorders caused by irradiation of the pituitary gland and hypothalamus. Also commonly seen are problems affecting the heart, lungs, thyroid, spine and reproductive organs, all of which tend to be more serious in children treated at younger ages.

While proton therapy may appear to be ideal for reducing these adverse effects, no previous study had prospectively examined the long-term results of children treated for medulloblastoma with proton therapy. To investigate their hypothesis that proton therapy would reduce the incidence and severity of side effects without loss of treatment effectiveness, the researchers enrolled children and adolescents ages 3 to 21 - with an average age of around 6 ½ - who received proton therapy for medulloblastoma at the MGH from 2003 to 2009. All had previous surgery to remove as much of the tumor as possible, and all received chemotherapy before, during or after proton therapy.

Study participants were tested for hearing, a variety of cognitive functions, levels of important hormones and height and weight at the outset of the study and at several follow-up visits for up to eight years. Of 59 patients who enrolled, 12 died from their tumor during the study period and one from a traumatic brain injury. Significant hearing loss was seen in 12 percent of patients three years after treatment and in 16 percent at five years, which compares with around 25 percent reported in studies using photon radiotherapy. The cognitive effects of proton therapy - primarily affecting verbal comprehension and processing speed - were also less serious than what has been reported with photon radiotherapy, and those effects were primarily seen in children who were under the age of 8 when treated.

The neuroendocrine effects of proton therapy - deficits in any hormone level were seen in 63 percent of participants seven years after treatment - were similar to what has been reported with photon therapy. However, no cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, seizure or secondary tumor effects - all of which have been reported in photon therapy studies - were seen in the current study's participants. Survival rates and the incidence and type of tumor recurrence all were similar to what has been reported for photon radiotherapy.

"Our results indicate that proton therapy maintains excellent cure rates in pediatric medulloblastoma while reducing long-term side effects, particularly in hearing and neurocognitive function, and eliminating cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal and reproductive effects," says Yock, who is an associate professor of Radiation Oncology at Harvard Medical School. "While we are currently investigating quality of life differences between proton and photon treatment, I truly believe that - particularly for the youngest children - the ability to offer them proton therapy can make a big difference in their lives."

Nancy J. Tarbell, MD, MGH Radiation Oncology, is senior author of the Lancet Oncology report. Additional co-authors are Elizabeth Weyman, Bree Eaton, MD, and Shannon M MacDonald, MD, MGH Radiation Oncology; Beow Yeap, ScD, MGH Department of Medicine; David Ebb, MD, Beverly Lavally, RN, and Mary Huang, MD, MGH Pediatric Oncology; Nicole Sherry, MD, MGH Pediatric Endocrinology; Robin Jones, MD, MGH Pediatric Neurology; Margaret Pulsifer, PhD, MGH Psychiatry; Annah Abrams, MD, MGH Child Psychiatary; and Karen Marcus, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital Radiation Oncology. The study was funded in part by National Cancer Institute grant P01 CA021239.

Massachusetts General Hospital, founded in 1811, is the original and largest teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. The MGH conducts the largest hospital-based research program in the United States, with an annual research budget of more than $800 million and major research centers in AIDS, cardiovascular research, cancer, computational and integrative biology, cutaneous biology, human genetics, medical imaging, neurodegenerative disorders, regenerative medicine, reproductive biology, systems biology, transplantation biology and photomedicine. In July 2015, MGH returned into the number one spot on the 2015-16 U.S. News & World Report list of "America's Best Hospitals."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does make multiple comparisons to studies of other therapies. We do not feel that this was framed properly in the release, but we address this in the quality of evidence section.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Sharon Belvin's nightmare with cancer began in 2004, when she was just 22.

Belvin was an avid runner but said she suddenly found she couldn't climb the stairs without "a lot of difficulty breathing."

Eventually, after months of fruitless treatments for lung ailments like bronchitis, she was diagnosed with melanoma — a very serious skin cancer. It had already spread to her lungs, and the prognosis was grim. She had about a 50-50 chance of surviving the next six months.

"Yeah, that was the turning point of life, right there," she says.

What Belvin didn't know at the time was that a revolutionary treatment for melanoma had begun testing in clinical trials. An immunologist named Jim Allison, now at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, had figured out that if the immune system was tweaked just right, it could do a better job of killing the cancer than the usual treatments. (Joe Palca worked for Allison early in both men's careers.)

Allison's treatment was still experimental, but if it worked, it had the potential to save Belvin's life.

"It's a new modality for treating cancer," Dr. Samuel Broder, a former director of the National Cancer Institute, says now of Allison's pioneering research. "It used to be there were three basic treatment options for cancer — surgery, radiation and chemotherapy — or some combination of those three. It's fair to say there's now a fourth option."

Allison's long search for this new kind of treatment — one that has since become a lifesaver for some cancer patients — began around a decade before Belvin got sick, when Allison was running a lab at the University of California, Berkeley.

At the time, he was what you could call a research scientist's research scientist. He was fascinated by certain powerful cells of the immune system — T cells. A subset of white blood cells, T cells travel around the body and can "protect us against just about anything," Allison says.

T cells do recognize cancer cells, but not in a way that can eliminate the disease. Allison had been studying T cells for years, and thought that by tinkering with one key molecule on the outside of these cells, he could enhance their response to cancer, enough to eradicate the illness.

He and one of his grad students ran an experiment to test the tweaked T cells on cancerous tumors in mice, and the initial results astounded them. The T cells seemed to be doing just what Allison had hoped they would do — shrink the tumors and kill the cancer.

Allison repeated the experiment with more mice over his winter break. After a few tense days, the tumors again disappeared.

"These mice were cured," Allison says.

"I've been doing this sort of stuff for years, and I'd never seen anything like that," Allison says. "And I thought, 'If we could do that in people, this is going to be amazing.' "

Allison tried to persuade drugmakers to create a human version of the treatment that had worked in mice. He thought they would jump at the chance to try a new approach.

But the biotech companies he met with didn't bite. In those days, most firms were focused on drugs that would target tumors directly, and Allison was asking them to try something very different.

"This was targeting the immune system, not the cancer," he says. "We weren't trying to kill the cancer cells. We were letting the T cells kill the cancer cells."

Thanks, but no thanks, the companies told him.

"I got very depressed," Allison says. He was sure this was the most important work of his career, but he had to get others on board.

Eventually, a scientist attending one of Allison's research talks was intrigued enough to contact a pal at the biotech firm Medarex. The company had recently developed technology that could make a human version of Allison's therapy, and was willing to give it a try.

It took a decade, but eventually Allison's big idea was ready for testing in people. A clinical trial to study the drug — now called ipilimumab, or Ippy for short — was set up at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.

Allison decided he wanted to be part of this next chapter in the testing of immunotherapy, so he packed up his California lab and moved it to Sloan Kettering.

As it happens, Belvin was also in New York — a patient of Dr. Jedd Wolchok at Sloan Kettering. By the fall of 2004, Belvin had run through all the treatment options available to her. Nothing had worked to control the melanoma; it continued to spread dangerously throughout her body.

Belvin remembers feeling sick and depressed, and says she wasn't even paying much attention when Wolchok walked into the exam room and suggested one last treatment.

"Sharon, we have an opportunity to participate in a clinical trial here. It's something you should consider," Wolchok told her.

Belvin says she signed up without hesitation. After just four injections of Ippy across three months, her cancer was nearly gone. And at Belvin's follow-up appointment a year later, Wolchok delivered news that was hard for her to take in: "Sharon, you no longer have cancer."

And in the next breath, Belvin recalls, "he goes, 'Oh, the guy who invented this is upstairs. Do you want to meet him?' "

"Yes, of course I want to meet him!" she told her doctor.

Wolchok called Allison, who was working nearby, and told him to drop everything and come to the clinic — a part of the hospital Allison had rarely seen. Though the research scientist couldn't imagine why Wolchok was in such a rush, he quickly figured it out as he opened the door and was greeted by Belvin with a huge hug.

Belvin says she tried not to tackle him. "It was hard to control myself," she says. "I owe this man my life."

Belvin was the first recipient of the immunotherapy that Allison had ever met. "It really meant a lot," he says. "It reminded me what it's all about at the end of the day."

That was in 2005; today, Sharon Belvin is still cancer-free.

Ippy is now sold under the brand name Yervoy by Bristol-Myers Squibb, which bought Medarex in 2009.

Meanwhile, Jim Allison has become a bit of a celebrity in the cancer research world. Among other honors, he was a 2015 recipient of the prestigious Lasker Award for his achievements in medical science.

He's become well-known among patients, too. Now and again, Allison fields calls from patients yearning to learn from the master himself what it will take to cure their disease.

Allison can't really answer them. Each case is different, and using a patient's own cells to destroy tumors won't work in every patient or in every type of cancer. Still, the approach offers promise to some people that other therapies can't, and has transformed the way doctors think about cancer treatment.

It might be too early to say we're going to cure cancer, Allison says, "but we're going to cure certain types of cancers. We've got a shot at it now."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story refers to other treatment options, including surgery, radiation and chemotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Novartis is considering trying so-called risk-sharing with some health plans, meaning it might charge more if the drug really does keep people out of the hospital and less if it doesn’t. But such talks, while encouraging, are still in the early stages, a Novartis spokesman said.

Timothy Anderson, pharmaceutical analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, said in a recent note that Entresto was “likely to become a mega-brand over time” but that the initial uptake was “likely to be on the slower side given the entrenched nature of off-patent ACE inhibitors.” He said it was highly unusual that there were no major competitors for Entresto on the way, giving it a “long runway.”

In a clinical trial with more than 8,400 participants, patients were randomly assigned to take either Entresto or enalapril, an ACE inhibitor. Patients in both groups of the study could also take other drugs, such as beta blockers, as their doctors saw fit.

After about 27 months, 21.8 percent of those taking Entresto had either died from cardiovascular causes or had been hospitalized for worsening heart failure, compared with 26.5 percent for those taking enalapril. That represented a relative risk reduction of 20 percent using a measure known as the hazard ratio.

Novartis said that about 2.2 million Americans would be eligible for the drug, which was approved for patients with so-called Class II to Class IV chronic heart failure with so-called reduced ejection fraction. Novartis is sponsoring another study to see if the drug is effective for those with preserved ejection fraction, which accounts for half of heart failure cases.

The F.D.A. said that the main side effects were low blood pressure, high blood potassium levels and kidney impairment. It said there were also cases of angioedema, an allergic reaction that usually results in swelling of the lips or face but can be life threatening if swelling interferes with breathing. Blacks and those with a previous history of the condition were at increased risk, it said.

Entresto is a combination of two drugs, one of which is valsartan, the active ingredient in the blockbuster drug that Novartis sells as Diovan but which now faces generic competition. The other ingredient, sacubitril, inhibits an enzyme known as neprilysin, a new mechanism of action for a heart failure drug.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does say that Entresto will be competing with generic versions of drugs called “angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or somewhat similar angiotensin II receptor blockers.” We’ll award a Satisfactory on that basis. The story could have added value by making it clear that these drugs — or Entresto — would be used as part of a suite of treatments for heart failure. For example, depending on the cause of low, or reduced, heart ejection fraction (meaning your heart is not pumping out blood efficiently), treatment options may include surgically implanting a defibrillator, changes in diet and physical activity, or the prescription of other drugs (including betablockers or inotropes).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Allos defends the price, saying it made a significant investment to develop the first approved drug for this type of cancer.

“It’s a very aggressive disease, and patients right now have no options,” said James V. Caruso, the chief commercial officer for Allos, a 17-year-old publicly traded company based in Westminster, Colo., that has no other drugs on the market.

Mr. Caruso also said the price of Folotyn was not out of line with that of other drugs for rare cancers. Patients, moreover, are likely to use the drug for only a couple of months because the tumor worsens so quickly, he said. So the total cost of using Folotyn will be less than for many other drugs with lower monthly prices.

“We believe we are fairly priced,” he added, “and we’re benchmarked” against other drugs. In a conference call with analysts last month, Mr. Caruso said Allos had “not had pushback of any type at this point” from insurers.

Some drugs for rare cancers are close to Foltyn’s price. Genzyme’s Clolar for pediatric leukemia costs about $34,000 a week, though the company says that only two weeks of treatment are typically needed. Genzyme’s drug Campath, for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, costs about $5,000 a week for several weeks.

GlaxoSmithKline is charging up to $98,000 for a six-month treatment course of Arzerra, a drug approved in late October for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, which strikes about 15,000 Americans a year. About $60,000 of the cost would be incurred in the first eight weeks, when the drug is given more frequently.

Gloucester Pharmaceuticals, which won approval in November for a drug to treat cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, another rare cancer, declined to discuss what it would charge when that treatment, called Istodax, goes on sale in January.

Despite such comparisons, Dr. Lee N. Newcomer, senior vice president for oncology at the big insurer UnitedHealthcare, called the price of Folotyn “unconscionable.” He said that Folotyn alone would cost as much as UnitedHealthcare now typically spends in total to treat a lymphoma patient from diagnosis until death. That median expenditure now, he said, is $87,000 for a little over a year of treatments.

But Dr. Newcomer said insurers would be obligated to pay for Folotyn because there were no alternatives.

Folotyn has not yet shown an effect on longevity. In the clinical trial that led to approval of the drug, 27 percent of the 109 patients experienced a reduction in tumor size. The reductions lasted a median of 9.4 months.

But considering all the patients in the trial, only 12 percent had a reduction in tumor size that lasted for more than 14 weeks. The trial did not compare Folotyn to another drug or a placebo.

“This drug is not a home run,” Dr. Brad S. Kahl, a lymphoma specialist at the University of Wisconsin, said during a meeting of an advisory committee to the F.D.A. on Sept. 2. “It’s not even a double. It’s a single.”

Saying that even a single was helpful, Dr. Kahl was part of a majority on the panel that recommended approval of the drug, 10 to 4.

But after recently learning what Allos planned to charge for Folotyn, Dr. Kahl said he was “disappointed” by the “excessive” price.

“It dampens my enthusiasm for using that drug,” he said. “It creates these huge ethical quandaries about trying a drug that has a modest benefit for the average patient at enormous expense.”

Folotyn is given by a rapid intravenous procedure once a week for six weeks out of every seven. Even to try the drug for the first seven-week cycle to see if it works would cost over $50,000. In the clinical trial, the median duration of use was 70 days, which would cost roughly $70,000 to $80,000. But some patients used the drug for many months.

In a note to clients in October, Joshua Schimmer, an analyst at Leerink Swann, estimated that a typical treatment would last 3.5 months and cost $126,000, or about $36,000 a month.

For investors, a high price is usually a good thing. Mr. Schimmer’s note was entitled “Folotyn Prices High, Reiterate Outperform.” He estimated annual sales of the drug in the United States reaching about $300 million by 2014.

Patient advocacy groups say that while they wish prices were lower, high prices might be needed to encourage companies to develop new drugs.

“It’s a two-edged sword that we have to live with and deal with,” said Louis J. DeGennaro, chief scientific officer of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, which has received donations from Allos and other companies. “A peripheral T-cell lymphoma patient,” he said, “at first blush will see this therapy as a very good thing.”

Allos, which is still unprofitable, has lost $350 million since its founding in 1992 and failed to win approval of a previous drug.

“Every dime that goes into the company supports Folotyn,” Mr. Caruso said.

At the time Folotyn was approved in September, stock in Allos briefly peaked above $8.50 but has slipped since then, closing up 16 cents at $6.62, or an increase of nearly 2.5 percent, on Friday.

After the approval, Allos raised $93 million in a secondary stock offering. In the prospectus for that offering, the company said that one of the risks for investors was “the relative price of Folotyn as compared to alternate treatment options.” It said there was a risk it might have to lower the price or offer discounts to successfully market Folotyn.

Like many other companies with high-priced drugs, Allos has established a program to help patients arrange insurance reimbursement. It says it will give the drug free to uninsured patients who cannot pay for it any other way.

And because a patient’s out-of-pocket co-payments alone — Medicare’s is 20 percent — could be thousands of dollars a month for Folotyn, Allos is financing a co-payment assistance program run by the National Organization for Rare Disorders, a patient advocacy group.

While this helps patients, it also helps the company sell more of its drug. If the 20 percent Medicare co-payment is made, then Medicare will pay the other 80 percent of the drug’s price — or about $24,000 a month.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly states that there are no alternatives to Folotyn for this particular indications, but compares the price of the drug to several other expensive cancer drugs. The story should have emphasized that Folotyn was studied in patients who have relapsed and a comparison with currently used regimens is not available.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Fasting diets have gained popularity in the past few years, but the scientific evidence proving that they keep us healthy while they help us lose weight is sparse. Now, researchers have shed light on what one type of time-restricted eating does to the body.

In a small, preliminary study, researchers put 23 obese volunteers on the 16:8 diet, a form of intermittent fasting. Followers of the popular regime eat during an eight-hour window, in this case between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. And for the 16 hours in between, they consume only calorie-free drinks, such as water.

For 12 weeks, the scientists measured various factors, including the participants' fat mass, blood pressure and cholesterol and glucose levels. The researchers compared the results to existing data from a separate weight loss trial carried out between 2011 and 2015.

Individuals who ate between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. consumed around 350 fewer calories, resulting in a loss of 3 percent body weight, and their blood pressure dropped by around 7mm Hg. However, their fat mass, insulin resistance and cholesterol levels were similar to the control group's.

Krista Varady, one of the study's authors and associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the University of Illinois at Chicago's School of Applied Health Sciences, said in a statement that the take-home message from the study is that cutting out certain foods or counting calories aren’t the only effective methods for losing weight.

The authors noted that the results mirror those from previous studies of other forms of intermittent fasting, including alternate day fasting, where an individual eats normally every other day.

"But one of the benefits of the 16:8 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain. We observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets,” said Varady.

Further research is now needed to uncover whether 16:8 works better than other fasting diets in terms of weight loss and health benefits.

The study's authors acknowledged that their preliminary data offers "promise for the use of time-restricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults, but longer-term, large-scale randomized controlled trials [are needed]."

Varady stressed that "when it comes to weight loss, people need to find what works for them, because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health."

Commenting broadly on fast-style diets, James Catterson of the Institute of Healthy Ageing at University College London, who was not involved in the study, previously told Newsweek the jury is still out on fasting diets.

He said that the data on the effects of fasting in animals are more convincing, probably because animals can be investigated in large sample sizes and in a highly controlled environment that is almost impossible to replicate in humans.

"There are also many studies that either report no overall effect or sometimes the opposite. And this is where it gets a bit murky, as it is very difficult to put proper controls in place when performing studies to do with nutrition," Catterson said.

He concluded, "So far, the consensus seems to be ‘let’s wait until more rigorous studies, with larger sample sizes that adjust for confounding lifestyle behaviors, have been performed before we conclude anything prematurely.'"
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions other diets such as alternate-day fasting.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When doctors who treat pregnant women recently met to debate the best time to induce labor, they came up with a surprising answer: 39 weeks — three weeks earlier than currently recommended.

Their organization, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), has not changed its guidelines on late-term pregnancies. The guidelines say that doctors may consider elective induction at 41 weeks and should proceed with it at 42 weeks. But the question has some doctors reconsidering their assumptions about induction and has sparked criticism by women who contend there is already too much interference with uncomplicated pregnancies.

The question was presented in May at the yearly ACOG meeting in Washington: “Why not induce everyone at 39 weeks?” Two doctors had been asked to debate: Errol Norwitz, chairman of obstetrics and gynecology at Tufts University School of Medicine, and Charles Lockwood, dean of the Morsani College of Medicine at the University of South Florida.

[Here’s what’s being done to lower the maternal death rate]

“My original assumption when asked to participate in this debate,” Lockwood said, “was that Dr. Norwitz would take the ‘pro’ side since he has written about the risk of stillbirth after 38 weeks, and I would take the ‘con’ side since older literature suggested that C-section rates would likely be higher in the elective induction of labor at 39 weeks.”

Norwitz was a vigorous proponent. “There is no benefit to the fetus waiting beyond 39 weeks in well-dated pregnancies,” he told the doctors. And as Lockwood reviewed research, he found that he was more and more in agreement with that point of view.

“But Errol and I decided we would not tell each other which side we were taking in order to conduct independent assessments of the literature and report on our conclusions,” Lockwood said. “Beyond adding an element of suspense, this strategy allowed us to come to unbiased conclusions.”

After Lockwood found that recent studies suggest that elective inductions at 39 weeks decrease Caesarean delivery rates and might reduce the rate of infant and maternal complications, what was supposed to be a debate proceeded as a discussion in support of induction.

Before either doctor spoke, the audience in a crowded ballroom was polled: 63 percent opposed having most women deliver at 39 weeks, 20 percent supported it and 17 percent were unsure.

Norwitz argued against simply letting nature take its course.

“Nature is a terrible obstetrician,” he said, referring to the “continuum” of pregnancy and birth: the large number of zygotes that never implant, the 75 percent lost before 20 weeks, and stillbirth.

And, he said, the risk of stillbirth and neurological injuries rises after 39 weeks. “Stillbirth is a hugely underappreciated problem,” he said. “There are anywhere between 25,000 to 30,000 stillbirths a year in the United States.”

Lockwood and Norwitz’s support for induction at 39 weeks not only surprised many of the doctors at the session, it also upset those who believe less intervention is the safest route for mother and baby.

Labor may be induced by breaking the amniotic sac or by using hormones called prostaglandins or medication such as oxytocin, which can set off contractions. Labor can begin immediately or take a day or two; if it becomes too lengthy, Caesareans are performed.

Cristen Pascucci, an advocate for giving women more control over childbirth decisions, thinks the doctors’ remarks suggest that all babies need to be “rescued by birth,” creating an anti-woman mentality. “It’s as if women and their babies are fundamentally in opposition to each other and the female body is dangerous by design,” said Pascucci, a vice president of the advocacy group Improving Birth.

Pascucci, who is based in Lexington, Ky., travels the country speaking and consultingon issues related to birth rights. She said the induction recommendation “reinforces a century-old, pre-feminist American obstetric view that birth is pathological and the doctor’s job is to extract the fetus from the incubator — like in the ’50s, when every baby was pulled out of its shackled, unconscious mother by episiotomy.”

Consumer groups such as hers, she said, have been calling on ACOG to evolve toward care that is more centered on women. “It’s disheartening to see how hard that’s going to be for some physicians to do.”

Lockwood and Norwitz are aware that there is strong opposition to induction at 39 weeks. “I think a lot of this gets very emotional,” Norwitz said.

Although both doctors support induction at 39 weeks for all healthy pregnancies, Lockwood said that obstetricians shouldn’t routinely adopt the practice just yet. As with any change in standard medical care, extensive research is needed before it can be safely and widely adopted. Even so, Norwitz thinks that “it’s a very healthy discussion to have.”

Due dates are calculated 40 weeks from the first day of a woman’s normal menstrual period and, according to ACOG, full term is defined as a pregnancy that lasts between 39 weeks and 40 weeks and six days.

As he prepared for the debate, Lockwood created a micro-simulation model to predict the outcome of various care decisions, and results suggested lower rates of stillbirth, Caesarean delivery and maternal and neonatal complications for elective induction at 39 weeks. That prompted him to take the debate stage as a proponent of early induction.

Still, he was surprised by an audience poll at the end of the discussion: 70 percent now supported the idea that women deliver at 39 weeks, 21 percent remained unsure and only 9 percent were against the idea.

[I didn’t understand the pressure to have a C-section until I was about to deliver]

Traditional medical thinking assumes that early induction could lead to higher infection rates and the need for a Caesarean. But Norwitz said the evidence doesn’t support that. Rather, he said, the latest literature suggests that the drugs available to soften the cervix in preparation for contractions help to decrease the Caesarean risk, adding a small caveat: For a small number of first-time mothers with “unfavorable, long and hard cervixes” — as opposed to cervixes that are soft and receptive to induction — the risk of Caesarean is increased.

Rebecca Dekker, who has a doctorate in nursing and founded the website Evidence Based Birth, which aims to make research on childbirth more accessible to families and professionals, watched a live stream of the session and described the presentations as misleading and the research as flawed. She called it “concerning and rash” for doctors at the meeting to make “broad conclusions” that “could potentially affect at least 3 million women a year in the United States alone.”

Norwitz said that the presentations were evidence-based. “This is my interpretation of the published literature,” he said. “This is not a personal opinion based on belief or ideology.”

Lockwood said he finds push-back inevitable and part of the broader scientific process.

Dekker said there were flaws in the research showing that women who received elective induction had lower rates of Caesarean delivery. For the women who waited for labor to start on its own, about half ended up being induced for medical complications. “They still analyzed the data as if the women had spontaneous labor, so it sways the results of the studies,” she said.

Dekker isn’t disputing that there are about 25,000 stillbirths per year or that this is a concern. However, she said a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report shows about half of stillbirths occur between 20 and 27 weeks of pregnancy, and the other half at later points.

“It’s obvious that a blanket policy of 39-week inductions would not affect all of the stillbirths that happen before 39 weeks,” Dekker said, adding that the CDC report concludes, “Despite intensive investigations, for a substantial number of fetal deaths a specific cause of death cannot be determined.”

And, Dekker said, the public has the misconception that inductions are simple, noninvasive procedures. Pitocin, the most commonly used drug for induction, is classified as a high-alert medication that can increase the risk of patient harm if an error occurs. The drug can cause contractions that are too frequent, increasing the risk of decreased blood flow and oxygen to the baby, she said. Also, the drug can cause the placenta to detach from the uterine wall too early, and it can cause the uterine wall to tear.

For Dekker, the major benefit of spontaneous labor is avoiding the risks of a medical induction.

There are clear philosophical differences. One early morning in his hospital’s labor and delivery unit, Norwitz said, he spoke with a midwife colleague who compared labor to walking through a forest. “We midwives stand behind the patient, and if she gets off the path, we coax her back onto it,” she told him. “Obstetricians are in front of her, hacking through the forest.”

Esther Hausman, a certified nurse midwife in Concord, Mass., argues for restraint. “Since we don’t know exactly what triggers labor, why mess with it?”

Hausman suggested learning from countries such as Denmark or Sweden, where midwifery is the first line of care and where fetal and maternal mortality rates are lower than in the United States. In a 2014 CDC report, the U.S. infant mortality rate (6.1 per 1,000 births) put it in 26th place among a selection of developed countries. Finland and Japan had the lowest rates (2.3 per 1,000 births.)

Dekker said that the ACOG debate should have instead compared the medical model of care to midwife-led care. Midwives are less likely than doctors to induce a woman electively, she said, and studies have found they intervene less than doctors and have more-satisfied patients.

Beverly Siegal, a retired obstetrician-gynecologist in Newton, Mass., attended the debate and was among those who changed their thinking on induction.

“What changed [my opinion] at the end of the presentation was the really convincing argument that there is nothing gained for the baby to stay in beyond 39 weeks,” Siegal said. “I would personally recommend that any woman with a favorable cervix at 39 weeks be encouraged to get induced.”

Of course, Lockwood said, women should be heard.

“Finally, needless to say, it is expectant mothers that should have the final say as to whether to let nature take its course or undertake this potentially salutary but clearly artificial intervention,” he said.

“But obviously our messages — how you talk — does make a difference,” Norwitz said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We will give the story a Satisfactory rating on this criterion because it clearly spells out that the subject is a debate between inducing labor 39 weeks into a normal pregnancy or waiting longer. However, the story mentions only one method of inducing labor.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alzheimer’s disease, the most common form of dementia, can be fully cured with an anti-inflammatory drug commonly used for period pain, a new research by the University of Manchester shows. Currently, no drug medications can successfully treat chronic neurodegenerative disease, but certain medicines can help alleviate symptoms or slow down the progression.

Researchers, who conducted the study on mice, found that mefenamic acid — a common Non-Steroidal Anti Inflammatory Drug (NSAID) used to relieve menstrual pain — can completely reverse memory loss and brain inflammation that are hallmark changes of Alzheimer’s, which currently affects over five million Americans.

For the study, researchers used 20 transgenic mice that develop symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease. The research was conducted when mice had developed memory problems. They were divided in groups of 10. First group was given mefenamic acid dose and the other group was given placebo for one month through a mini-pump implanted under the skin.

Researchers observed that memory loss was fully reversed to the levels seen in mice without Alzheimer’s.

“There is experimental evidence now to strongly suggest that inflammation in the brain makes Alzheimer’s disease worse. Our research shows for the first time that mefenamic acid, a simple [NSAID] can target an important inflammatory pathway called the NLRP3 inflammasome, which damages brain cells,” David Brough, lead author of the study said, in a statement.

Brough, however, cautioned that further research is required to identify its impact on humans and the long-term implications.

“However, much more work needs to be done until we can say with certainty that it will tackle the disease in humans as mouse models don't always faithfully replicate the human disease. Because this drug is already available and the toxicity and pharmacokinetics of the drug is known, the time for it to reach patients should, in theory, be shorter than if we were developing completely new drugs,” Brough said.

Researchers said that the lab results identify a class of existing drugs that are likely to treat Alzheimer’s by blocking a particular part of the immune response. But, they also warned that these “drugs are not without side effects and should not be taken for Alzheimer’s disease at this stage - studies in people are needed first.”

The research was published in the journal Nature Communications on Thursday.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions, near the top, “no drug medications can successfully treat chronic neurodegenerative disease, but certain medicines can help alleviate symptoms or slow down the progression.” This barest of nods toward alternatives earns it a just-passing Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An immunotherapy drug has been hailed as a potential 'game changer' after being found to greatly improve survival for patients with relapsed head and neck cancer - a disease which is notoriously difficult to treat.

Nivolumab became the first treatment to extend survival in a phase III clinical trial for patients with head and neck cancer in whom chemotherapy had failed - and it did so with fewer side-effects than existing therapeutic options.

More than double the number of patients taking nivolumab were alive after one year as those treated with chemotherapy, reported the major international trial, published today (Sunday) in the New England Journal of Medicine.

There are currently no other treatment options that improve the survival of patients with cisplatin-resistant relapsed or metastatic head and neck cancers. This group of patients are expected to live less than six months.

The trial was led in the UK by Professor Kevin Harrington of The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, and involved 20 research organisations from around the world. It was funded by Bristol Myers Squibb.

Of the 361 patients in the trial, 240 with relapsed or metastatic head and neck cancer were allocated to receive nivolumab and 121 to one of three different chemotherapies. UK patients received the chemotherapy drug docetaxel, which is the only treatment approved for advanced head and neck cancer by NICE.

After one year of the study, 36 per cent of patients treated with nivolumab were still alive compared with 17 per cent for the comparator arm.

Median survival for patients on nivolumab was 7.5 months, compared with 5.1 months for chemotherapy.

The survival benefit was more pronounced in patients whose tumours had tested positive for human papillomavirus (HPV). These patients survived an average of 9.1 months with nivolumab and 4.4 months with chemotherapy.

HPV-negative patients survived an average of 7.5 months with nivolumab and 5.8 with chemotherapy.

Importantly, fewer patients experienced serious side-effects from taking nivolumab than with conventional treatment - only 13 per cent compared with 35 per cent of patients who received chemotherapy.

Patients given chemotherapy reported feeling physically, socially and emotionally worse off, whereas those who were given nivolumab remained stable during the course of treatment.

Professor Harrington will be presenting some of the findings at the European Society for Medical Oncology 2016 Congress in Copenhagen, simultaneously with publication.

Nivolumab will still have to go through approval by the European Medicines Agency and NICE before it is available for head and neck cancer patients on the NHS.

UK trial lead Professor Kevin Harrington, Professor of Biological Cancer Therapies at The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and Consultant at The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, said:

"Nivolumab could be a real game-changer for patients with advanced head and neck cancer. This trial found that it can greatly extend life among a group of patients who have no existing treatment options, without worsening quality of life.

"Once it has relapsed or spread, head and neck cancer is extremely difficult to treat. So it's great news that these results indicate we now have a new treatment that can significantly extend life, and I'm keen to see it enter the clinic as soon as possible."

Professor Paul Workman, Chief Executive of The Institute of Cancer Research, London, said:

"Nivolumab is one of a new wave of immunotherapies that are beginning to have an impact across cancer treatment. This phase III clinical trial expands the repertoire of nivolumab even further, showing that it is the first treatment to have significant benefits in relapsed head and neck cancer.

"We hope regulators can work with the manufacturer to avoid delays in getting this drug to patients who have no effective treatment options left to them."

Some of the data was presented at 16:25 CEST today (Sunday) at the European Society for Medical Oncology 2016 Congress in Copenhagen.

For more information please contact Claire Hastings on 020 8722 5380 or claire.hastings@icr.ac.uk. For enquiries out of hours, please call 07595 963 613.

There were around 11,000 new cases of head and neck cancer and 3,300 deaths in the UK in 2012, 600,000 globally, and more than half relapse within 3-5 years.

The Institute of Cancer Research, London, is one of the world's most influential cancer research organisations.

Scientists and clinicians at The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) are working every day to make a real impact on cancer patients' lives. Through its unique partnership with The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and 'bench-to-bedside' approach, the ICR is able to create and deliver results in a way that other institutions cannot. Together the two organisations are rated in the top four centres for cancer research and treatment globally.

The ICR has an outstanding record of achievement dating back more than 100 years. It provided the first convincing evidence that DNA damage is the basic cause of cancer, laying the foundation for the now universally accepted idea that cancer is a genetic disease. Today it is a world leader at identifying cancer-related genes and discovering new targeted drugs for personalised cancer treatment.

A college of the University of London, the ICR is the UK's top-ranked academic institution for research quality, and provides postgraduate higher education of international distinction. It has charitable status and relies on support from partner organisations, charities and the general public.

The ICR's mission is to make the discoveries that defeat cancer. For more information visit http://www.

The Royal Marsden opened its doors in 1851 as the world's first hospital dedicated to cancer diagnosis, treatment, research and education. The Head and Neck Unit at The Royal Marsden is one of the largest of its kind in Europe.

Today, together with its academic partner, The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR), it is the largest and most comprehensive cancer centre in Europe treating over 50,000 NHS and private patients every year. It is a centre of excellence with an international reputation for groundbreaking research and pioneering the very latest in cancer treatments and technologies.

The Royal Marsden, with the ICR, is the only National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre for Cancer. First awarded the status in 2006, it was re-awarded in 2011. A total of £62 million is being provided over five years, to support pioneering research work, and is being shared out over eight different cancer themes.

The Royal Marsden also provides community services in the London boroughs of Sutton and Merton and in June 2010, along with the ICR, the Trust launched a new academic partnership with Mount Vernon Cancer Centre in Middlesex.

Since 2004, the hospital's charity, The Royal Marsden Cancer Charity, has helped raise over £100 million to build theatres, diagnostic centres, and drug development units.

Prince William became President of The Royal Marsden in 2007, following a long royal connection with the hospital.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study at issue was for patients who were seeing cancer progression despite the use of conventional chemotherapy treatments. In other words, as the release makes clear, the alternatives had been tried already.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cognitive behavioral therapy, which traditionally includes regular, and often weekly, visits to a clinician, is recommended by the American College of Physicians and other organizations for treatment of chronic insomnia.

For military personnel, internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy appears to be an effective alternative to meeting regularly with a therapist, although it is about half as effective as traditional methods, according to results of a study conducted by Daniel Taylor, University of North Texas professor of psychology and director of UNT's Sleep Health Research Laboratory.

Taylor received a $1.16 million grant from the U.S. Department of Defense for the study, which was affiliated with the STRONG STAR Consortium, a federally funded network of national experts seeking the best ways to treat behavioral health problems impacting post-9/11 service members and veterans. The study was published in SLEEP, the official journal of the Sleep Research Society.

Chronic insomnia is defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders as sleeping poorly at least three nights a week for a month or longer, despite adequate opportunity for a full night's sleep. It is "a significant problem in the military," said Taylor, who noted that military personnel often develop insomnia because of rapidly changing schedules and deployments that keep them constantly on alert.

Chronic insomnia is a strong risk factor for post-traumatic stress disorder, depression and substance abuse, absenteeism and occupational accidents, Taylor said. Treatment of insomnia may not only improve sleep in these soldiers, but also improve these other conditions, he said.

"About 10 percent of deployed military personnel take sleep medications, which are effective for short-term treatment of insomnia in civilian populations. For deployed military personnel, the side effects such as grogginess, slowed cognitive processing and slowed reaction time can be dangerous," Taylor said.

One hundred soldiers at Fort Hood who had chronic insomnia were recruited for Taylor's study. All completed one week of sleep monitoring by keeping sleep diaries and wearing activity monitors.

One third of the participants met with clinicians at Fort Hood for cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia once a week for six weeks, while another third received the therapy via the Internet once a week for six weeks. Both the in-person and Internet therapy had the exact same content, with the Internet lessons presented as audio recordings accompanied by visual graphics and animations. A third control group of participants was contacted by the researchers every other week during the six weeks, but did not receive cognitive behavioral therapy.

Taylor discovered that the study participants who received in-person cognitive behavioral treatment for their insomnia reported significantly greater improvements in sleep quality -- as determined by the sleep diaries and activity monitors -- than those who received the Internet therapy. Both groups had greater improvements in sleep quality than those who did not receive cognitive behavioral therapy.

He noted that that cognitive behavioral therapy is "a multifaceted intervention that can be difficult to administer without the benefit of a therapist." Additional training in the therapy for behavioral health providers in all branches of the military is needed, he said.

In a previous study of civilians with insomnia, Taylor and his research team discovered that cognitive behavioral therapy led to significant improvements in sleep efficiency, with the research subjects' use of sleep medication declining from 87.5 percent before therapy to 54 percent afterward, although the subjects weren't required to stop taking their medication.

Kristi Pruiksma, a STRONG STAR collaborating investigator and clinical psychologist, served as a clinician on Taylor's study. She said the benefits of the online therapy include easy access to the treatment and flexibility in times for completing the sessions, which "is really helpful for those juggling work and family demands."

"The online program can also be done from home rather than at a military behavioral health clinic, which some service members may avoid due to concerns about stigma," said Pruiksma, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (UT Health San Antonio).

"Successful treatment has a real impact on patients' daily lives. An important next step will be to figure out who is able to achieve good benefits from the online program and who is likely to need additional assistance from a therapist," she said.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release describes how two types of CBTi (online and in-person) compared. It mentions medications are used as a therapy for about 10 percent of the deployed military but that they can leave people groggy and with slow cognitive processing and reaction times — which are dangerous in conflict zones.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pediatricians Decide Boys Are Better Off Circumcised Than Not

The American Academy of Pediatrics on Monday announced its first major shift on circumcision in more than a decade, concluding that the health benefits of the procedure clearly outweigh any risks.

"There is clear evidence that supports the health benefits of circumcision," said Susan Blank, who led the 14-member task force that formulated the new policy being published in the journal Pediatrics.

The statement, and accompanying technical report, marks the first revision of the organization's position since 1999, when the academy backed away from circumcision. At that time, the group, which represents about 60,000 pediatricians nationwide, concluded that there was no clear evidence for or against circumcising newborns. The group affirmed that position in 2005.

Since then, the popularity of circumcision in the United States has declined. Only about 56 percent of newborn males are circumcised.

The academy's task force spent seven years combing through the latest research, analyzing more than a thousand studies. Their conclusion?

For starters, Blank says, circumcision helps baby boys pretty much immediately.

"The health benefits of male circumcision include a drop in the risk of urinary tract infection in the first year of life by up to 90 percent," she says.

But there's a much bigger reason to do it, Blank said. Circumcised males are far less likely to get infected with a long list of sexually transmitted diseases.

"It drops the risk of heterosexual HIV acquisition by about 60 percent. It drops the risk of human papillomavirus [HPV], herpes virus and other infectious genital ulcers," she says.

It also reduces the chances that men will spread HPV to their wives and girlfriends, protecting them from getting cervical cancer.

"We've reviewed the data and, you know, we have gone through them with a fine-tooth comb, and the data are pretty convincing," she says.

Critics, however, were not convinced. They liken the procedure to female genital mutilation.

"We have no right as parents or as physicians or adults to strap them down and chop off a normal part of their body. To do that is a human rights violation and an ethical travesty," says Georgeanne Chapin of the anti-circumcision group Intact America.

Chapin and other critics argue that the scientific evidence is questionable. For one thing, the studies about HIV have only been done in Africa, where AIDS is much more common among heterosexuals.

"They're cherry-picking their evidence," she says. "They act as though there's this huge body of literature. It's all the same couple of studies that have been regurgitated and reprogrammed. Over the past 150 years, all kinds of medical benefits have been proposed as resulting from cutting off the foreskin, and they have all been disproven."

Critics also question the safety of the procedure, saying too many boys are damaged for life by botched circumcisions.

But many experts say the academy is making the right call. They dismiss any comparison to female genital mutilation as grossly misleading and say male circumcision is about as safe as any procedure could be.

Some think the academy's position is long overdue, and that the group should have gone even further and more forcefully recommended circumcision.

"I think that all healthy newborn babies should be circumcised," says Edgar Schoen, a professor emeritus at the University of California, San Francisco. "I feel about newborn circumcision the way I do about immunization: It's a potent preventive health procedure that gives you a health advantage."

For its part, the pediatricians group hopes the new recommendations will encourage more parents to circumcise their sons — and more insurance plans to pay for it. As Shots reported last week, a lot of state Medicaid programs have stopped covering circumcision.

"Those families who choose circumcision should have access to circumcision. Cost should not be a barrier," Blank says.

The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been promising for years now to issue the government's first guidelines about circumcision. But the CDC keeps delaying it and still has not said when that will happen.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternative is no circumcision and was presented in the article.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Surgery For Sinus Misery: Better, But Still No Cure

Surgeon Ralph Metson stares at a big video screen that shows, with amazing clarity, the inside of Nancy Butler's nasal passages.

A weird glow lights up her nose and cheek from within. It comes from the fiber-optic tip of Metson's endoscope, which also holds a high-res camera lens.

On the monitor, you can see the miniature instruments he's using to cut away inflamed tissue and snip away pieces of eggshell-thin bone that block Butler's sinuses and give her nonstop headaches. To avoid poking through to the brain or into the orbit of an eye, there's a device around the patient's head with a guidance system that tells Metson, in three dimensions, exactly where his sharp instruments are on a CT scan of Butler's head.

After an hour or so of this delicate work, Metson has opened up the 72-year-old woman's sinuses so they can drain. "The next time she gets a cold," he says, "her membranes are not going to swell and block the sinuses the way they have in the past. They're going to stay open."

This is modern sinus surgery. It's a lot less brutal than the old days -- back in the early 1980s. Then, surgeons cut through the face and mouth, scraped out the sinuses and left patients bruised and scarred. Often they were no better off, sometimes worse.

Advances since then have persuaded more doctors to do sinus surgery. So a lot more people are getting it -- around 300,000 a year, making it one of the most common operations.

But how good is it, in terms of giving patients relief from the pain, breathing difficulty and fatigue of chronic sinusitis?

"Surgery is usually not curative," Metson says. "But probably in over 90 percent of the cases, it does significantly improve a patient's quality of life. He or she will still have infections after surgery. But hopefully they'll be less frequent, less severe and shorter in duration. A brief course of antibiotics will work better after surgery."

Judy Foreman, another of Metson's patients, offers an example of both how surgery can help -- and why patients' expectations shouldn't be too high.

Foreman had sinus surgery two years ago, when she was 64, after trying everything else. (See sidebar.) She rinsed out her sinuses faithfully with saltwater. She tried decongestants, antihistamines and steroid nasal sprays. Over and over, Metson prescribed antibiotics.

For about 80 percent of patients, these nonsurgical alternatives manage the problem adequately, Metson says. But Foreman was in the other 20 percent.

Foreman writes a health column for The Boston Globe and other newspapers, so she's an unusually well-informed patient. "I read an article about people feeling less tired all the time after having had surgery, and I thought, boy, I would really like that," she says.

When she asked Metson about surgery, he said most people with her degree of sinus problems would have had it long before.

"I thought, 'OK, so I'm just being scared,' " Foreman says. She didn't like to think of someone sticking sharp instruments up her nose and cutting away delicate tissue. But when she overcame her squeamishness and finally had the operation, she found it wasn't nearly as bad as she thought it would be.

"It's uncomfortable," she reports. "Afterwards you have these cotton wads up your nose and, of course, you can't breathe with all this stuff in your nose." But she didn't hurt very much. "I was so glad to get it over with that I would say the pain was not bad at all."

And the outcome? Now she has three or four sinus infections a year instead of five or more. They're not as bad as before. Still, she's disappointed.

"I'm not like a person without this problem," she says. "I get a cold and I freak out because I know it's going to be there for three weeks. Other people get it and they're done in five days."

Foreman wrote a column about her surgery. Two years later, she's still getting e-mail from people asking whether they should have it.

"I say, 'Go for it!' Because I think it's made enough of a difference that I'm glad I did it," Foreman says. She'd consider a second operation, but Metson says usually that's advised only for patients with nasal polyps that regrow -- not a problem she has.

Metson says most of his patients do better than Foreman. But surgery rarely cures them. That's because surgery doesn't touch the root cause of chronic sinusitis.

Surgeons can cut away bone and membranes that block sinuses. But they can't stop the inflammation some people are prone to, and that inflammation can cause new obstructions.

To tackle that problem, researchers have discovered five genes involved in that inflammatory process. Metson hopes drugs will be developed to regulate those genes.

"And if we can use those as novel targets for, let's say, nasal sprays or medications, we may be able to treat people like Judy without surgery," Metson says. "Or we'll do surgery and follow it up after surgery with these sprays."

That, he says, will be the next big advance in sinus treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story’s sidebar gives detailed descriptions of alternatives to surgery, including nasal irrigation and corticosteroid nasal sprays.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The effect was so marked that the trial was stopped early for ethical reasons, so that patients in the control group could be offered the new drug. Because of that, researchers do not yet know the median survival.

“You don’t need to wait for 50 percent of 675 patients to die to conclude that one drug is much better than the other,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas of the University of California, Los Angeles, who was an investigator in the trial and has been a consultant to the developer of the drug.

The other new drug, ipilimumab (pronounced ip-ee-LIM-yoo-mab), when combined with dacarbazine, extended median survival to 11.2 months compared with 9.1 months for those who received dacarbazine alone. After three years, 20.8 percent of those who got that new drug were alive, compared with 12.2 percent of those in the control group.

The results of both trials were published online by The New England Journal of Medicine in addition to being presented here.

To be sure, more than half of patients with metastatic melanoma would not be helped all that much by either drug. Experts say more needs to be done, especially since melanoma affects more young adults than many other types of cancer.

Even if the new drugs allow patients with metastatic melanoma to live two years, “Two years is nothing when you’re 30,” said Dr. Anna C. Pavlick, head of the melanoma program at New York University.

Still, doctors and patient groups welcomed the progress because until now treatment of melanoma that had spread beyond the skin to distant organs “was terrible even by routine cancer standards,” said Dr. Vernon K. Sondak, chairman of cutaneous oncology at the Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Fla.

Also, the number of melanoma cases has been rising, unlike for many other types of cancer. Doctors say that is because of unprotected sun exposure years ago, the proliferation of tanning salons and perhaps more attention to detecting the disease.

There were about 68,000 new cases of melanoma and about 8,700 deaths last year in the United States, up from 48,000 cases and 7,700 deaths in 2000, according to the American Cancer Society. Particularly fast increases have occurred among people older than 65 and among women 15 to 39 years old.

Vemurafenib is the latest so-called targeted therapy, which inhibits the effects of genetic mutations that spur tumor growth and spread. In particular, the drug counters the effect of a mutation in a gene called B-RAF that was discovered in 2002 to be common in melanomas. (The drug’s name comes from V600E mutation in RAF.)

The drug, which is taken orally twice a day, would be used only by the roughly half of melanoma patients whose tumors have this mutation. The drug significantly shrinks tumors in about half of these patients — or about a quarter of all melanoma patients.

It was developed by Roche and Plexxikon, a biotechnology company in Berkeley, Calif., that was recently acquired by Daiichi Sankyo of Japan. The drug is expected to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration within a few months.

Ipilimumab, the other new drug, releases a brake on the body’s immune system, allowing it to more effectively attack the tumor. Developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, it was approved in March and is sold under the name Yervoy.

A series of articles in The New York Times last year followed the development of vemurafenib, then known as PLX4032, and recounted how some patients close to death seemed to make miraculous recoveries.

The effect, however, typically lasts only about seven months before the cancer starts to grow again, though some patients benefit for more than two years.

S. Taylor Chance, a 67-year-old real estate agent in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., has been taking vemurafenib in a clinical trial since March 2010. “If it weren’t for the trial I wouldn’t be here,” she said.

It has not been all good. Ms. Chance said the drug caused such extreme pain at one point that “I called in the children and said, ‘I’m done, I can’t do this any more.’ ” But she had her dose reduced and took other medications for the pain.

In the trial, sponsored by Roche and led by Dr. Paul B. Chapman of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, 38 percent of participants had to stop taking the drug or lower the dose because of side effects, including rash and joint pain. Many patients get minor skin cancers that can be removed by dermatologists.

The trial of ipilimumab, paid for by Bristol-Myers, involved 502 patients with late-stage melanoma.

Last year at this conference, researchers presented results of a trial showing a survival advantage for patients who had undergone a previous treatment. The new trial of this drug, by contrast, involved patients who were getting treated for the first time.

While the extension of median survival of two months, from about 9 months to about 11 months, was less than some experts expected, researchers said the real benefit was that a small number of patients, perhaps 10 to 20 percent, could live a long time.

Because it unleashes the immune system, ipilimumab can have serious side effects. In the latest trial, a big one was liver damage.

A course of treatment of ipilimumab costs $120,000. The price of vemurafenib has not been announced, but is expected to be at least tens of thousands of dollars per year.

Doctors are eager to try the two drugs together. Roche and Bristol-Myers said Thursday that they would conduct such tests.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately explained the comparisons between both new drugs and the older dacarbazine chemo drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Consuming walnuts and select other whole foods as part of a healthy diet may be associated with a reduced risk of physical function impairments throughout the aging process in women

Folsom, Calif., (June 22, 2016) - A new study published in the Journal of Nutrition suggests that consuming 1-2 servings of walnuts per week (1/4 cup per serving) was associated with reduced risk of developing impairments in physical function, which helps enable older women to maintain independence throughout the aging process. (1)

This paper emphasized that overall diet quality, rather than individual foods, may have a greater impact on reducing risk of physical function impairments. Specifically, diet quality traits most associated with reduced rates of incident physical impairment were higher intake of fruits and vegetables; lower intake of sugar-sweetened beverages, trans fat, and sodium; and moderate alcohol intake. Among food components, the strongest relations were found for increased intakes of oranges, orange juice, apples, pears, romaine or leaf lettuce, and walnuts.

"There's a lot of research that looks at specific health conditions in aging, such as diabetes and heart disease, but less attention to research on quality of life and ability to maintain independence with aging," said Dr. Francine Grodstein, ScD, professor of medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School. "The simple message from this study is that eating an overall healthy diet, including certain foods, such as walnuts and other whole foods, may help women with the ability to do key everyday tasks as they age, like carrying groceries or dressing themselves."

The researchers looked at data from 54,762 women in the Nurses' Health Study, which tracked women for over 30 years. Between 1992 and 2008, the women were asked questions about their physical function, including their ability to perform basic activities of daily living. This new paper prospectively examined the association between the dietary habits of the participants and subsequent impairment in physical function. Diet was assessed using the Alternative Healthy Eating Index (AHEI-2010), a measure of diet quality that incorporates foods and nutrients predictive of chronic disease risk based on scientific evidence.

"These results add to the large body of evidence that outline the many benefits of a healthy diet for women. Additional research is needed to better understand how diet and lifestyle choices can help maintain our health and well-being as we age," said Dr. Grodstein.

There are numerous possible active properties in walnuts that may be contributing factors in providing health benefits. Walnuts are unique among nuts in that they are primarily composed of polyunsaturated fat (13 grams per ounce), which includes alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), the plant-based omega-3 fatty acid. They are the only nut to contain a significant amount of ALA with 2.5 grams per one ounce serving.

Some study limitations should be considered. The sample only included women, so these results may not be generalizable to men. Additionally, participants were not assigned to eat walnuts or other foods, and were just asked about their dietary choices. It is also possible that subjects may have misreported their dietary intake since this information was collected by questionnaires. In addition, because this is an observational study, residual confounding cannot be ruled out (i.e. that other lifestyle habits which are more common in adults who eat walnuts could contribute to the study findings); and, thus, the results should be interpreted with caution.

This research was supported in part by the California Walnut Commission (CWC). The CWC has supported health-related research on walnuts for more than 25 years. While the CWC does provide funds and/or walnuts for various projects, the actual studies are conducted independently by researchers who design the experiments, interpret the results and write the manuscripts.

The California Walnut Commission, established in 1987, is funded by mandatory assessments of the growers. The Commission is an agency of the State of California that works in concurrence with the Secretary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA). The CWC is mainly involved in health research and export market development activities. For more industry information, health research and recipe ideas, visit http://www. .

The California Walnut Commission (CWC) prohibits discrimination in all programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance programs. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact the CWC offices at (916) 922-5888. To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). CWC is an equal opportunity employer and provider.

The California Walnut Commission offices are located at 101 Parkshore Dr., Ste. #250, Folsom, CA 95630

1. Hagan KA, Chiuve SE, Stampfer MJ, Katz JN, Grodstein F. Greater Adherence to the Alternative Healthy Eating Index Is Associated with Lower Incidence of Physical Function Impairment in the Nurses' Health Study [published online ahead of print May 11, 2016]. J Nutr. doi: 10.3945/jn.115.227900
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that in addition to walnuts, the following dietary traits are associated with reduced rates of physical impairment: “higher intake of fruits and vegetables; lower intake of sugar-sweetened beverages, trans fat, and sodium; and moderate alcohol intake. Among food components, the strongest relations were found for increased intakes of oranges, orange juice, apples, pears, romaine or leaf lettuce, and walnuts.”
The news release states that walnuts are “unique among nuts in that they are primarily composed of polyunsaturated fat (13 grams per ounce), which includes alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), the plant-based omega-3 fatty acid. They are the only nut to contain a significant amount of ALA with 2.5 grams per one ounce serving.” It does not mention that there are other plant-based omega-3 sources such as flax seeds, chia seeds, soybeans, and leafy green vegetables.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, April 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A new oral medication for the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS) shows promise in slowing disease progression, limiting brain atrophy and reducing MS relapses, a recently completed two-year clinical trial demonstrates.

The findings concern the experimental drug laquinimod, and stem from work with over 1,100 MS patients at 139 medical facilities in 24 countries.

The study found that to date, the new drug appears to be both safe and well-tolerated. If the experimental medication is eventually approved for use, it would be only the second oral MS drug available to patients, alongside a number of long-standing injectable options.

"The injectables aren't going to go away," commented Dr. Scott S. Zamvil, a professor of neurology and faculty member in the program in immunology at the University of California, San Francisco. "We went 17 years with injectables before we got our first oral option, 'Gilenya', just last year. But there's a lot of excitement about this new option and these results, because even though the injectables are safe and effective in terms of convenience and patient compliance, oral drugs are much better than shots."

"And with the one oral option we have today, there has been a lot of concern over a possible risk for immune suppression and also an increased risk for cancer," added Zamvil, who was not a part of the current study team. "That does not seem to be the case with this new drug. So this appears to be a significant advance forward."

The current research was funded by Teva Pharmaceuticals, the maker of laquinimod.

The lead study author is Dr. Giancarlo Comi, director of the department of neurology and the Institute of Experimental Neurology at the Scientific Institute and University Vita-Salute San Raffaele in Milan, Italy. He is slated to present his team's findings this week in Honolulu at the American Academy of Neurology meeting.

In the two-year, double-blind Phase III trial, participants were randomly divided into two groups: those who were given a daily dose of laquinimod (0.6 milligrams) and those who were given a sugar-pill (placebo); neither the researchers nor the participants knew who received the medication or the placebo.

The annual rate of MS relapse was 23 percent lower in the laquinimod group compared with the placebo group.

In addition, disability progression was reduced by 36 percent and brain atrophy by 33 percent compared with those getting the sham treatment.

Adverse events, including serious events, were comparable to those in the placebo group, according to the researchers. The incidence of liver enzyme elevation was higher in patients treated with laquinimod, according to Comi, but he added that the elevations were temporary, reversible and did not lead to any signs of liver problems.

Laquinimod was not, however, tested against currently existing treatment alternatives, the authors stressed. The team added that the new medication appears to tackle MS by a different type of mechanism than other available options, and apparently works by curtailing the onset of permanent tissue damage while limiting acute inflammation.

"Each of the medications we have has a different mechanism of action," explained Dr. Gary Birnbaum, director of the MS Treatment and Research Center at the Minneapolis Clinic of Neurology. "And MS is probably not a single disease. So different medications may work better for some and not others, which is why this new drug could end up being an important addition to the armamentarium."

"However, we still need to have a head-to-head comparison with other drugs," cautioned Birnbaum, who was not part of the study team. "This is not that. And it's also important to note that this is not a cure. It achieved a reduction in the annualized relapse rate, and people on this medication did not have as many attacks per year as people on a placebo. But a 23 percent reduction is not a cure. This didn't stop MS."

"But, this is extremely hopeful research," he added. And if it is approved, it'll be a valuable adjunct to the array of treatment options now available."

Since the study is being presented at a medical meeting, it should be considered preliminary until the findings are published in a peer-reviewed journal.

For more on multiple sclerosis, visit the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story includes an unchallenged comment that “oral drugs are much better than shots,” without explaining why or what sort of evidence supports this claim. It redeems itself, though, by explaining that the inability to draw clear comparisons between the experimental drug and current alternatives is one of the study’s short points. “Laquinimod was not, however, tested against currently existing treatment alternatives, the authors stressed,” the story says. “The team added that the new medication appears to tackle MS by a different type of mechanism than other available options, and apparently works by curtailing the onset of permanent tissue damage while limiting acute inflammation. Then Dr. Gary Birnbaum, director of the MS Treatment and Research Center at the Minneapolis Clinic of Neurology, provides readers with a good summation of why this new drug, while not necessarily a silver bullet, could be clinically beneficial. “And MS is probably not a single disease,” Birnbaum says. “So different medications may work better for some and not others, which is why this new drug could end up being an important addition to the armamentarium.” He adds, though, “However, we still need to have a head-to-head comparison with other drugs.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This article is featured in Newsweek's Special Edition: Nature's Remedies—Heal Your Body.

One of the leading causes of disability in the United States isn’t physical—it’s mental. According to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America (ADAA), 15 million adults—approximately 6.7 percent of the population—suffer from major depressive disorder, which is most often treated through a combination of talk therapy and medication. Those who struggle with depression have imbalanced levels of serotonin, which maintains mood, and dopamine, which controls the pleasure and reward zones. The brain’s synapses control how much of these chemicals are released, and drugs like Zoloft effectively prevent the little serotonin being produced from reabsorbing back into the nerve cells from which they were released, resulting in a higher concentration of serotonin. Some pill-averse patients have longed for a natural cure for depression, while others complain that the drugs they’re on aren’t enough. Hope for both groups may have arrived through an unlikely source: magnets. Researchers discovered they can harness the power of magnetism to increase serotonin production and combat depression through a process called Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS).

“Each [symptom of depression] maps onto a given circuit of the brain,” neurologist Alvaro Pascual-Leone told NPR in April 2016 about treating patients using TMS. “The reason why that circuit of the brain is not functioning properly...has to do with a deficit of a certain chemical in the brain. But the point is that if we can identify the circuit that causes the symptoms, we can target that circuit and make it function better through brain stimulation. So, in a sense, [TMS is] not a treatment...for the ultimate cause of the disorder, but it’s an intervention that improves how the patient is able to function.”

TMS has a lot in common with a traditional MRI scan. In fact, the only clue TMS treatment contains magnets at all is that patients must remove any jewelry and stow their credit cards (to prevent demagnetization) before treatment. According to Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine’s description of the technique, a coil is fitted to the front of a patient’s head so the electromagnetic pulses can target the prefrontal cortex of the brain, which controls emotion. A physician then tests the machine to see how much power is needed to affect the patient’s reflexes. Once the patient’s thumb involuntarily twitches, the current is strong enough to affect the patient’s brain activity. At this point, specific symptoms can be targeted depending on the patient’s needs.

The biggest drawback to TMS, according to advocates, is the limitations on just who can undergo the treatment. Though it was approved by the FDA in 2008, its use is federally restricted with exemptions only for those with severe depression, autism or Parkinson’s. Even those who are approved to undergo the treatment face another barrier as TMS is not widely covered by health insurance. Its efficacy varies from patient to patient and, like most prescriptions for depression, TMS has its own set of side-effects. The most common, not surprisingly, are headaches. Although one-third of patients have reported experiencing painful scalp sensations and facial twitching, these tend to fade after several treatments.

Despite these setbacks, researchers are optimistic about TMS—and not just as a form of treatment for depression. Experiments treating Parkinson’s and autism, the other two conditions for which TMS is approved, have seen some success among neurologists. More studies will be needed to determine whether this method can be used as a widespread treatment for other brain-related disorders, but if today’s research is any indication, TMS could be a key to improving the lives of Americans suffering from a multitude of disorders.

This article was excerpted from Newsweek's Special Edition: Nature's Remedies—Heal Your Body. For more on the definitive guide to alternative methods of healing the mind, body and soul, pick up a copy today.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story briefly mentions other treatments, such as drugs and talk therapy.
It would have been a stronger effort if it had made an effort to compare success rates.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Playing football can improve bone development in adolescent boys, new research shows.

In a study comparing adolescent footballers to swimmers, cyclists and a control group of boys not involved in regular sport, scientists at the University of Exeter found football led to significantly better bones after one year of training.

Adolescence is the key period for bone development, and poor development at this stage is linked to reduced peak bone mass (the amount of bone mass at the end of the skeletal maturation, around age 30), increased fracture risk and osteoporosis later in life.

Though swimming and cycling have proven health benefits, the scientists said their study "raises a question" about whether they are good for bone development due to the non-weight bearing training - and they say young swimmers and cyclists could benefit from more weight-bearing exercise in training regimes.

"Our research shows that playing football can improve bone development in comparison to swimming and cycling," said first author Dimitris Vlachopoulos, of Sport and Health Sciences at the University of Exeter.

"Though we focussed on aspiring professionals who played as much as nine hours a week, playing football for three hours a week might be enough for a substantial effect.

"We already knew exercise was key for bone growth, but here we clarify what type of exercise.

"Although we didn't study other sports, it's reasonable to suppose that weight-bearing, high-impact, high-intensity exercise like tennis, badminton, basketball and handball will have similar effects to football."

The year-long study, of 116 boys aged 12-14, took a variety of measures including bone mineral content (BMC).

BMC measurements were taken at the lumbar spine (lower back) and femoral neck (upper leg) - both key sites for both fractures and osteoporosis.

The results showed footballers had higher BMC than swimmers and cyclists after one year of sport-specific training.

For example, footballers' BMC was 7% higher than that of cyclists at the lumbar spine, and 5% higher at the femoral neck.

The research was funded by the EU via a Marie-Sklodowska-Curie fellowship awarded to principal investigator Dr Luis Gracia-Marco, also of the University of Exeter.

Dr Gracia-Marco said: "The sports we studied are the three most popular in the UK, and it's important to know what effects they have in relation to bone health.

"Adolescence is the key time for bone growth. Once a person reaches puberty, the next five years are vitally important in this respect."

The athletes in the study were all playing high-level sport - the footballers in Exeter City FC's youth setup, and the swimmers and cyclists at leading clubs in the South West.

The boys in the control group, though generally active, were not involved in regular sport.

Despite the many health benefits of cycling and swimming, the study found little difference in bone development between cyclists, swimmers and the control group.

"This raises a question about whether swimming and cycling are good for bone development," Dr Gracia Marco said.

"We now need to consider how to counteract the lack of bone growth stimulus caused by cycling and swimming, possibly by encouraging swimmers and cyclists to add weight-bearing exercise in their training."

One innovative aspect of the study was the measurement of bone texture of the lumbar spine using trabecular bone score (TBS) - the first use of this technique in adolescent athletes.

The paper, entitled: "Longitudinal Adaptations of Bone Mass, Geometry and Metabolism in Adolescent Male Athletes. The PRO-BONE Study", is published in the Journal of Bone and Mineral Research.

The research is part of a larger University of Exeter study called PRO-BONE.

Note to editors: Being a UK university, when we say "football" we mean the game otherwise known as soccer.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study itself compared the bone growth benefits of playing soccer to those of participation in non-weight-bearing sports (cycling and swimming), providing one discussion of alternatives. In addition, the news release quotes the article’s lead author, Dr. Dimitrios Vlachopoulos, noting that other high-intensity weight-bearing sports such as tennis, basketball and badminton could have similar effects as playing soccer. This is particularly important given that the study findings actually showed no significant differences in bone growth between boys who played football competitively and boys who were active but not involved in any regular sports participation.
It would have been helpful if the release had mentioned some of the other comparative benefits/harms of soccer with swimming and cycling such as cardiovascular benefits, the overall fitness benefits, and the potentially better safety profiles of swimming and cycling versus soccer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Eric P. Winer, chief of women’s cancers at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, said that even women who completed their five years of tamoxifen months or years ago might consider starting on the drug again.

Tamoxifen blocks the effect of the hormone estrogen, which fuels tumor growth in estrogen receptor-positive cancers that account for about 65 percent of cases in premenopausal women. Some small studies in the 1990s suggested that there was no benefit to using tamoxifen longer than five years, so that has been the standard.

About 227,000 cases of breast cancer are diagnosed each year in the United States, and an estimated 30,000 of them are in premenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive cancer and prime candidates for tamoxifen. But postmenopausal women also take tamoxifen if they cannot tolerate the alternative drugs, known as aromatase inhibitors.

The new study, known as Atlas, included nearly 7,000 women with ER-positive disease who had completed five years of tamoxifen. They came from about three dozen countries. Half were chosen at random to take the drug another five years, while the others were told to stop.

In the group assigned to take tamoxifen for 10 years, 21.4 percent had a recurrence of breast cancer in the ensuing 10 years, meaning the period 5 to 14 years after their diagnoses. The recurrence rate for those who took only five years of tamoxifen was 25.1 percent.

About 12.2 percent of those in the 10-year treatment group died from breast cancer, compared with 15 percent for those in the control group.

There was virtually no difference in death and recurrence between the two groups during the five years of extra tamoxifen. The difference came in later years, suggesting that tamoxifen has a carry-over effect that lasts long after women stop taking it.

Whether these differences are big enough to cause women to take the drug for twice as long remains to be seen.

“The treatment effect is real, but it’s modest,” said Dr. Paul E. Goss, director of breast cancer research at the Massachusetts General Hospital.

Tamoxifen has side effects, including endometrial cancer, blood clots and hot flashes, which cause many women to stop taking the drug. In the Atlas trial, it appears that roughly 40 percent of the patients assigned to take tamoxifen for the additional five years stopped prematurely.

Some 3.1 percent of those taking the extra five years of tamoxifen got endometrial cancer versus 1.6 percent in the control group. However, only 0.6 percent of those in the longer treatment group died from endometrial cancer or pulmonary blood clots, compared with 0.4 percent in the control group.

“Over all, the benefits of extended tamoxifen seemed to outweigh the risks substantially,” Trevor J. Powles of the Cancer Center London, said in a commentary published by The Lancet.

Dr. Judy E. Garber, director of the Center for Cancer Genetics and Prevention at Dana-Farber, said many women have a love-hate relationship with hormone therapies.

“They don’t feel well on them, but it’s their safety net,” said Dr. Garber, who added that the news would be welcomed by many patients who would like to stay on the drug. “I have patients who agonize about this, people who are coming to the end of their tamoxifen.”

Emily Behrend, who is a few months from finishing her five years on tamoxifen, said she would definitely consider another five years. “If it can keep the cancer away, I’m all for it,” said Ms. Behrend, 39, a single mother in Tomball, Tex. She is taking the antidepressant Effexor to help control the night sweats and hot flashes caused by tamoxifen.

Cost is not considered a huge barrier to taking tamoxifen longer because the drug can be obtained for less than $200 a year.

The results, while answering one question, raise many new ones, including whether even more than 10 years of treatment would be better still.

Perhaps the most important question is what the results mean for postmenopausal women. Even many women who are premenopausal at the time of diagnosis will pass through menopause by the time they finish their first five years of tamoxifen, or will have been pushed into menopause by chemotherapy.

Postmenopausal patients tend to take aromatase inhibitors like anastrozole or letrozole, which are more effective than tamoxifen at preventing breast cancer recurrence, though they do not work for premenopausal women.

Mr. Peto said he thought the results of the Atlas study would “apply to endocrine therapy in general,” meaning that 10 years of an aromatase inhibitor would be better than five years. Other doctors were not so sure.

The Atlas study was paid for by various organizations including the United States Army, the British government and AstraZeneca, which makes the brand-name version of tamoxifen.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This comparison was brief but adequate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“We were hoping for a very different story,” said Dr. Gregory N. Connolly, director of Harvard’s Center for Global Tobacco Control and a co-author of the study. “I ran a treatment program for years, and we invested” millions in treatment services.

Doctors who treat smokers said that the study findings were not unexpected, given the haphazard way many smokers used the products. “Patient compliance is a very big issue,” said Dr. Richard Hurt, director of the Nicotine Dependence Center at the , who was not involved in the study.

Dr. Hurt said products like nicotine gum and patches “are absolutely essential, but we use them in combinations and doses that match treatment to what the individual patient needs,” unlike smokers who are self-treating.

The products have been controversial since at least 2002, when researchers at the , reported from a large survey that they appeared to offer no benefit. The study did not follow people over time. A government-appointed panel that included nicotine replacement as part of federal guidelines for treatment also came under fire, because panel members had gotten payments from the product manufacturers.

“Some studies have questioned these treatments, but the bulk of clinical trials have unequivocally endorsed them,” said Dr. Michael Fiore, director of the ’s Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention and the chairman of the panel that wrote the guidelines. Dr. Fiore, who has reported receiving payments from drug makers, said that “there are millions of smokers out there desperate to quit, and it would be a tragedy if they felt, because of one study, that this option is ineffective.”

In the new study, conducted in , the researchers followed a representative sample of 1,916 adults, including 787 people who said at the start of the study that they had recently quit smoking. They interviewed the participants three times, about once every two years during the 2000s, asking the smokers and quitters about their use of gum, patches and other such products, their periods of not and their relapses.

At each stage, about one-third of the people trying to quit had relapsed, the study found. The use of replacement products made no difference, whether they were taken for the recommended two-month period (they usually were not), or with the guidance of a cessation counselor.

One subgroup, heavy smokers (defined as those who had their first cigarette within a half-hour of waking up) who used replacement products without counseling, was twice as likely to relapse as heavy smokers who did not use them.

“Our study essentially shows that what happens in the real world is very different” from what happens in clinical trials, said Hillel R. Alpert of Harvard, a co-author with Dr. Connolly and Lois Biener of the , .

The researchers argue that while nicotine replacement appears to help people quit, it is not enough to prevent relapse in the longer run. Motivation matters a lot; so does a person’s social environment, the amount of support from friends and family, and the rules enforced at the workplace. Media campaigns, increased tobacco and tightening of smoking laws have all had an effect as well.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story lists a range of alternative factors for successful smoking cessation at the end of the piece: “Motivation matters a lot; so does a person’s social environment, the amount of support from friends and family, and the rules enforced at the workplace. Media campaigns, increased tobacco taxes and tightening of smoking laws have all had an effect as well.” This isn’t quite a comparison with nicotine products, but we give the story credit for covering some of this territory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Oakland, CA (April 22, 2015) - A fruit-based micronutrient and fiber-dense supplement bar (the "CHORI-bar") conceived by Drs. Bruce Ames and Mark K. Shigenaga at Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute (CHORI), was shown in clinical trials to improve metabolism in overweight/obese (OW/OB) otherwise healthy adults in ways that are consistent with reduced risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Consumption of the bar for two months also reduced chronic inflammation, and initiated a reduction in weight and waist circumference. Decreased inflammation and improved weight and weight distribution can lower the risk of many chronic diseases.

These effects occurred without requiring that participants make any change in their current diet or other lifestyle practices other than to eat two CHORI-bars each day for two months. The CHORI-bar is not just another nutrition bar. It is a serious intervention to improve health. Its composition is therefore complex, and required a number of years and a series of clinical trials to develop.

The publication describing this work appeared online today (April 22, 2015)1 at The FASEB Journal. The bar was developed over the past 10 years by a team of scientists led by Drs. Bruce N. Ames and Joyce C. McCann at CHORI (2,3), in collaboration with the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).

Most people do not eat an optimally nutritious diet - particularly the obese. This results in unhealthy metabolism, which not only diminishes vigor, but increases future risk of many diseases. While poor diets contain much that is not healthy (e.g., too much salt, sugar), they also are missing or deficient in a number of important components (e.g., vitamins/minerals, omega-3 fatty acids, fiber) necessary for healthy metabolism. The CHORI-bar is intended to fill these gaps with components present in the bar in normal dietary amounts.

Considerable evidence in the scientific literature, including Drs. Ames and McCann's work on vitamins and minerals, supports the idea that simply supplying missing or deficient dietary ingredients will improve metabolism (4-7). Development of the CHORI-bar has also been guided by Dr. Mark Shigenaga's insights into the importance of a healthy gut supported by optimal nutrition for disease prevention.

Because of the strong flavors associated with some vitamins and minerals, CHORI partnered with the United States Department of Agriculture to produce a tasty bar. Formulation development was guided by over 15 small clinical trials to ensure that beneficial properties of the bar were retained. Most early trials were two weeks in length and involved primarily lean individuals, most of whom benefited by increased HDL cholesterol. Results presented in this publication are compiled from 3 two-month clinical trials that also included a significant number of overweight/obese individuals. These trials were conducted over a 4-year period using very similar bar formulations. These trials employed a simple, economical design in which participants acted as their own controls (i.e., change in metabolic markers was measured before and after eating the bar).

Healthy metabolism is like a complex, smooth-running machine. Unhealthy metabolism is like an old machine with many rusted out joints. There is no magic bullet ingredient in nutrition - "oiling" one joint is not going to allow the rusted out machine to run. The CHORI-team thinks the broad scale improvements observed with the CHORI-bar may be the result of "oiling" multiple joints by the complex nutrient mixture. They are currently conducting experiments to better understand which ingredients in the bar are most important in the complex mixture for the observed effects.

The increasing prevalence of obesity is taking a huge toll on public health. Conventional approaches that encourage weight loss by improving dietary habits, reducing caloric intake and modifying activity can be successful, but prove difficult for many to initiate and sustain. The CHORI-bar is intended as a non-traditional means to positively impact the obesity epidemic by initiating a healthier metabolism without requiring sudden drastic behavioral changes. It may therefore assist in weight loss programs by beginning a process of favorable metabolic change. Improved metabolism resulting from eating the bar is also associated with a number of reports of feeling better (though this observation has not yet been formally tested), which the CHORI team predicts will help people transition to improved lifestyle habits.

The power of nutrient-rich, properly formulated food-based supplements, such as the CHORI-bar, to move dysregulated metabolism in a healthy direction may help reverse obesity-associated conditions, and thereby reduce the risk of future chronic diseases. The full potential of food-based supplements to do the work of some drugs without their negative side effects is just beginning to be seriously investigated.

UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland (formerly Children's Hospital & Research Center Oakland) is a premier, not-for-profit medical center for children in Northern California, and is the only hospital in the East Bay 100% devoted to pediatrics. UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland affiliated with UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital San Francisco on January 1, 2014. UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland is a national leader in many pediatric specialties including cardiology, hematology/oncology, neonatology, neurosurgery, orthopedics, pulmonology, and sports medicine. The hospital is one of only five ACS Pediatric Level I Trauma Centers in the state, and has one of largest pediatric intensive care units in Northern California. UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland has 190 licensed beds, over 500 physicians in 43 specialties, more than 2,600 employees, and a consolidated annual operating budget of more than $500 million. UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland is also a leading teaching hospital with an outstanding pediatric residency program and a number of unique pediatric subspecialty fellowship programs.

UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland's research arm, Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute (CHORI), is internationally known for its basic and clinical research. CHORI is at the forefront of translating research into interventions for treating and preventing human diseases. CHORI has 250 members of its investigative staff, a budget of about $50 million, and is ranked among the nation's top ten research centers for National Institutes of Health funding to children's hospitals. For more information, go to http://www. and http://www. .

1 McCann, J. C., Shigenaga, M. K., Mietus-Snyder, M. L., Lal, A., Suh, J. H., Krauss, R. M., Gildengorin, G. L., Goldrich, A. M., Block, D. S., Shenvi, S. V., McHugh, T. H., Olson, D. A., and Ames, B. N. (2015) A multi-component nutrient bar promotes weight loss and improves dyslipidemia and insulin resistance in the overweight/obese: Chronic inflammation blunts these improvements. The FASEB Journal, in press (March, 2015).

2Mietus-Snyder, M. L., Shigenaga, M. K., Suh, J. H., Shenvi, S. V., Lal, A., McHugh, T., Olson, D., Lilienstein, J., Krauss, R. M., Gildengoren, G., McCann, J. C., and Ames, B. N. (2012) A nutrient-dense, high-fiber, fruit-based supplement bar increases HDL cholesterol, particularly large HDL, lowers homocysteine, and raises glutathione in a 2-wk trial. FASEB J 26, 3515-3527.

4Ames, B. N. (2006) Low micronutrient intake may accelerate the degenerative diseases of aging through allocation of scarce micronutrients by triage. PNAS 103, 17589-17594.

5 Ames, B. N. (2010) Prevention of mutation, cancer, and other age-associated diseases by optimizing micronutrient intake. J Nucleic Acids pli:725071. doi:10.4061/2010/725071.

6 McCann, J. C., and Ames, B. N. (2009) Vitamin K, an example of triage theory: is micronutrient inadequacy linked to diseases of aging? Am J Clin Nutr 90, 889-907.

7 McCann, J. C., and Ames, B. N. (2011) Adaptive dysfunction of selenoproteins from the perspective of the triage theory: why modest selenium deficiency may increase risk of diseases of aging. FASEB J 25, 1793-1814.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes, “Conventional approaches that encourage weight loss by improving dietary habits, reducing caloric intake and modifying activity can be successful, but prove difficult for many to initiate and sustain.” We’ll call that sufficient for a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking extra vitamin D and calcium doesn’t seem to prevent bone-thinning in older men, according to Australian researchers.

However, exercise did boost bone mineral density, a proxy for bone strength, their report shows.

Despite the findings, people still need to get enough calcium and vitamin D to reduce the risk of osteoporosis, or bone thinning, said Dr. Mone Zaidi, an osteoporosis researcher at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, who was not involved in the study.

“It’s like the four legs of the stool: vitamin D and calcium, exercise, medications if a person is losing bone, and the fourth leg is telling people how to prevent fractures,” Zaidi said.

More than 40 million people in the US are affected by osteoporosis. It’s most common in older women, but about seven percent of white men and five percent of black men are affected, according to the American College of Physicians.

In the new study, published in the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, Robin M. Daly from the University of Melbourne, Australia and colleagues randomly assigned men aged 59 to 70 to an exercise program, drinking milk fortified with calcium and vitamin D, doing both, or doing nothing.

They measured the men’s bone density before and after the study, which took place over 18 months, but they didn’t look at fractures.

At the end of the study, men who exercised had higher bone density than those who had supplemented their diet with 1000 milligrams of calcium and 800 international units (IU) of vitamin D per day.

Adding the supplements to the exercise program provided no extra benefit, hinting that the men already had enough vitamin D and calcium in their diets to be able to boost their bone strength through exercise alone.

The recommended daily intake of vitamin D is 600 IU in adults up to age 70, and 800 IU for older people, according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH). A 6-month supply of vitamin D supplements can be bought for less than $10, and many multivitamins contain the recommended daily dose of vitamin D.

As for calcium, the NIH advises 1,000 mg per day for men ages19-70, and then 1,200 mg per day for men older than 70.

To build bone density, weight-bearing exercise is needed, such as running or weight-lifting, according to the NIH.

In animal studies, a lack of vitamin D has been linked to several diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and some types of cancer. However, there isn’t enough data to say if vitamin D can help treat or prevent these diseases, Zaidi said.

To reduce the risk of bone weakening, the NIH recommends not smoking, drinking less alcohol and exercising more.

Zaidi said that both vitamin D and calcium are extremely important for human health, so people should follow the previous vitamin D and calcium recommendations.

“You’ve got to have it to build a wall,” he said. “Adding more might not strengthen the wall, but you have to take enough to keep the wall strong. Otherwise it might fall apart.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/i4tDqs The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, online January 5, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: At least the story gave some broad contex about other approaches to prevent bone-thinning:
“To build bone density, weight-bearing exercise is needed, such as running or weight-lifting, according to the NIH.
To reduce the risk of bone weakening, the NIH recommends not smoking, drinking less alcohol and exercising more.
Zaidi said that both vitamin D and calcium are extremely important for human health, so people should follow the previous vitamin D and calcium recommendations.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A daily supplement of pharmaceutical grade chondroitin is as good as celecoxib (Celebrex) at relieving arthritic knee pain and doesn’t have dangerous side effects, researchers say.

Dr. Jean-Yves Reginster of Liege State University in Belgium and colleagues recruited 604 people over age 50 with knee osteoarthritis from five European countries and randomly assigned them to take 800 mg of the extra-pure chondroitin sulfate (Chondrosulf), 200 mg of celecoxib (Celebrex) or a placebo every day for six months.

Those who took chondroitin sulfate or celecoxib had similar levels of pain relief at the end of the study, and in both groups the improvement was greater than for those taking just a placebo, according to the report in Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases.

Reginster told Reuters Health the findings are in line with earlier studies showing pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate could significantly decrease the progression of knee osteoarthritis over a period of three years.

He stressed that pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin is not the same as over-the-counter supplements, which are made differently and can’t get into the joint in high enough concentrations to combat the causes of cartilage degradation and pain.

European regulatory bodies recommend pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate as well as pharmaceutical-grade glucosamine sulfate as first-line treatments for osteoarthritis, Reginster said by email, because of the side effects associated with celecoxib and other non-steroidal inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) including stomach ulcers, bleeding, liver and kidney problems.

Dr. Michael Shepard of Hoag Orthopedic Institute in Orange, California, noted that the study had a relatively low number of participants and that most U.S. studies of this type would run two years rather than six months.

In addition, U.S.-based studies of chondroitin have had mixed results, said Shepard, who wasn’t involved in the study. Some have found the supplements to be as effective as ibuprofen (also an NSAID), and some have found that chondroitin sulfate is no more effective than placebo, he told Reuters Health.

“I tell my patients, ‘buyer beware,’” Shepard said in an email. “I tell them about the mixed results of chondroitin in the literature. I tell them to try chondroitin for one month as a trial and if they like it and feel better with it, then keep taking it.”

If chondroitin doesn’t work for them, he suggests taking an NSAID “periodically,” and to be aware of the side effects.

“If you are going to stay on an NSAID for a prolonged period then you need regular follow up with your doctor,” Shepard cautioned.

Dr. Rachel Wolfe of Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, agreed that chondroitin is “reasonable to try” for some people, especially those with contraindications to NSAIDs.

“However, it should not replace other therapy such as quad strengthening exercises, and weight loss, which we know will provide benefit. It should be used in conjunction with these measures,” said Wolfe, who wasn’t involved in the study.

“Chondroitin is not a miracle pill, but if it allows people to feel less pain and be more active, thereby losing weight and strengthening muscles, then I think there may benefit,” Wolfe told Reuters Health by email. “Studies like this highlight that medicine is still an art - we do not have perfect answers, and we have to individualize for each patient.”

The study was sponsored by IBSA Institut Biochimique SA, a pharmaceutical company based in Lugano, Switzerland, that makes the chondroitin sulfate supplements used in the test.

SOURCE: bit.ly/2rcPLh0 Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, online May 22, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story reports on a study that compared favorably with chondroitin with Celebrex, a prescription NSAID drug. The quoted sources also mention over-the-counter NSAIDs such as ibuprofen, with warning about side effects of these drugs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Still, the findings could help smooth the way for regulatory approval, wider use of the drugs by doctors and possibly reimbursement by insurers.

The drugs, evolocumab from Amgen and alirocumab from Sanofi and Regeneron, inhibit a protein in the body called PCSK9 that helps regulate cholesterol. In the studies detailed on Sunday, both drugs reduced the bad cholesterol by about 60 percent, to about 50 milligrams per deciliter from about 120 at the start of the studies. In many cases such big reductions were achieved even though the patients were already taking statins.

Both drugs could win approval from the Food and Drug Administration by this summer. Analysts say the drugs will have billions of dollars in annual sales and will be taken by millions of people who cannot lower their cholesterol enough using statins alone or cannot tolerate statins. (However, the PCSK9 drugs are taken by injection every two weeks or four weeks, which could deter some users.)

Statins reduce cardiovascular risk and scientists believe it is because they decrease low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, the so-called bad cholesterol. But merely looking at cholesterol levels can be misleading. The drug niacin did not protect against heart attacks and strokes even though it raised so-called good cholesterol and modestly lowered bad cholesterol.

Insurers in particular might demand proof that the PCSK9 drugs stave off heart attacks, strokes, deaths from coronary disease and procedures to open arteries before agreeing to pay for them for many patients. Executives at CVS Health, a leading pharmacy benefits manager, recently said that PCSK9 inhibitors might cost $7,000 to $12,000 a year and would strain health care budgets because so many people might use them.

“Managed care pharmacy, indeed the health care system, has never seen a challenge like this to our resilience in absorbing costs,” they wrote in the Health Affairs blog.

Whether the results from these two small studies will be persuasive enough remains to be seen.

The study of Amgen’s evolocumab involved 4,465 patients with various degrees of risk, two-thirds of whom were randomly chosen to get the drug in addition to the medication they were already taking. After one year, 0.95 percent of those in the group that received the drug had suffered a heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular problem, compared with 2.18 percent in the group that did not take the drug. By a measure known as the hazard ratio, the risk of cardiovascular events was reduced by 53 percent.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article briefly compared PCSK9 inhibitors to statins, or other lipid-lowering drugs like Lipitor, stating that this new class of cholesterol drugs reduced bad cholesterol to lower levels than statins. It also mentioned the drug niacin, which did not protect against heart attacks and strokes, despite it raising good cholesterol levels and moderately lowering bad cholesterol.
However, a more thorough discussion on traditional treatments would have been welcome. For example, why are other lipid-lowering medications needed if there are already quite a few out on the market? The AP story addressed this question, explaining many people cannot tolerate statins or get enough help from them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ever since Alzheimer’s disease was described by a German doctor, Alois Alzheimer, in 1906, there was only one way to know for sure that a person had it. A pathologist, examining the brain after death, would see microscopic black freckles, plaque, sticking to brain slices like barnacles. Without plaque, a person with did not have the disease.

There is no treatment yet to stop or slow the progress of Alzheimer’s. But every major drug company has new experimental drugs it hopes will work, particularly if they are started early. The questions though, are who should be getting the drugs and who really has Alzheimer’s or is developing it?

Even at the best medical centers, doctors often are wrong. Twenty percent of people with — a and intellectual functions — who received a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s, did not have it. There was no plaque when their brains were biopsied. Half with milder memory loss, thought to be on their way to Alzheimer’s, do not get the disease. And with such a high rate of misdiagnosis, some who are mistakenly told that they have Alzheimer’s are not treated for conditions, like depression or low levels of thyroid hormone or drug side effects and interactions, that are causing their memory problems.

Brain scans that showed plaque could help with some fundamental questions — who has or is getting Alzheimer’s, whether the disease ever stops or slows down on its own and even whether plaque is the main culprit causing brain cell death.

Dr. Skovronsky thought he had a way to make scans work. He and his team had developed a dye that could get into the brain and stick to plaque. They labeled the dye with a commonly used radioactive tracer and used a PET scanner to directly see plaque in a living person’s brain. But the technology and the dye itself were so new they had to be rigorously tested.

And that is what brought Dr. Skovronsky, a thin and eager-looking 37-year-old, to his e-mail that recent day.

Five years ago, Dr. Skovronsky, who named his company Avid in part because that is what he is, had taken a big personal and professional gamble. He left academia and formed Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, based in , to develop his radioactive dye and designed a study with patients to prove it worked.

Hospice patients were going to die soon and so, he reasoned, why not ask them to have scans and then brain autopsies afterward to see if the scans showed just what a pathologist would see. Some patients would be demented, others not.

Some predicted his study would be impossible, if not unethical. But the F.D.A. said it wanted proof that the plaque on PET scans was the same as plaque in a brain autopsy.

The Avid study was designed to provide that proof. And the full results, contained in the e-mail message sent that day, May 14, were the moment of truth. When he saw them, Dr. Skovronsky said they were everything he had hoped for.

“This is about as good as it gets,” he said that day.

He went into a rotunda that serves as Avid’s lunchroom to tell the company’s 50 employees. “This is a big day for us,” he continued. “I thought about what I would say, but I have totally forgotten it.”

His employees applauded. Then they had champagne in blue plastic cups.

The type of scans used in this study, PET scans, are expensive and patients have to go to a scanning center, get injected with a radioactive dye, wait for the dye to reach their brain and then have a scan.

Other tests are being studied — ones that look for amyloid in cerebrospinal fluid that bathes the brain; scans that look for shrinkage of the brain in areas needed for memory and reasoning; PET scans that look for uptake of glucose, a cellular fuel, to show areas where the brain was active and where it was not. The tests, though, were not necessarily specific for Alzheimer’s and none had been studied to see if they accurately predicted plaque on autopsy.

Earlier this decade, two scientists at the developed an amyloid dye that while not practical for widespread use, stunned scientists by showing it seemed possible to see amyloid in a living brain.

The researchers, Chester Mathis and William Klunk, began their work two decades ago, persevering even though they had no research money. In the first 10 years, they tested more than 400 compounds. When they finally found one that seemed promising, they tested more than 300 variations.

“On and on it went,” Dr. Mathis said.

Finally, in late 2001, they began working with collaborators in to test their dye in humans.

On 2002, the Swedish researchers injected the first Alzheimer’s patient with the dye, known as Compound B, and scanned the patient’s brain.

It worked, the Swedish doctors told Dr. Mathis in an excited phone call.

A PET scan showed amyloid exactly where it would be expected. The Swedish doctors were convinced they were seeing actual plaque. They told Dr. Mathis it was time to celebrate.

But Dr. Mathis worried. What if the same pattern occurred in people without Alzheimer’s?

Two weeks later, he got another call from Sweden. His colleagues had scanned a person without Alzheimer’s. There was no sign of telltale plaques.

His sweet reward came in July 2002, when the scans were shown to an audience of 5,000 scientists at an international conference on Alzheimer’s.

“There was an audible gasp,” Dr. Mathis said. “The field was taken aback.”

Yet there was a problem. Pittsburgh Compound B used carbon 11 as its radioactive tracer. And its half-life is 20 minutes. Researchers have to make it in a cyclotron in the basement of a medical center, quickly attach it to the dye, dash over to a patient lying in a scanner, and inject it.

And a critical question remained: Was a PET scan with the Pittsburgh dye really equivalent to a brain autopsy?

Meanwhile, others, including Dr. Skovronsky, had another idea — use fluorine 18, with a half-life of about two hours. It could be made in the morning, and used that afternoon. And fluorine 18 is made routinely for two million PET scans each year.

Dr. Skovronsky, starting at the and then at Avid, worked with a University of Pennsylvania chemist, Hank Kung, for nine years to find and develop the radioactive dye. The university had the patent; Avid licensed it. Finally, on June 8, 2007, a patient at Johns Hopkins had a scan with their compound. Plaque lit up.

Most of the time, the scans were as expected — those with Alzheimer’s had lots of plaque, those with normal memories had little if any and those with mild memory impairment were in between.

But about 20 percent of people over 60 with normal memories had plaque.

“Then we looked more carefully,” Dr. Skovronsky said. “The 20 percent who had amyloid, though they were still statistically in the normal range, did worse on every memory test than the control group.”

What, Dr. Skovronsky asked, did that mean? Were they starting to develop Alzheimer’s? If so, could dementia be stalled if there were drugs to stop amyloid from accumulating?

The definition of Alzheimer’s is plaque plus memory loss and other symptoms of mental decline. But what is not known because no one could follow the development of plaque before a person died, was whether people with plaque and normal memories were developing Alzheimer’s.

“We’ve always assumed the pathology has been there, that the plaque has been there years before symptoms,” said Dr. Steven T. DeKosky, an Alzheimer’s researcher who is vice president and dean at the School of Medicine. “But we never had a way to detect plaque in living persons,” he said. And so plaque in the brains of people with normal memories has been a puzzle.

“Over the next couple of years, we will find out what it means.”

On Oct. 23, 2008, Avid and two other companies, and , that are developing fluorine 18-based dyes for amyloid scans, got a pointed question from an advisory committee to the F.D.A.: How do you know that what you are seeing on scans is the same as the amyloid you see on autopsy?

It seemed impossible to answer. If researchers wait for their subjects to die before comparing scans with autopsies they can be waiting a long time.

But Avid had a plan, and the committee agreed in principle that it would work. Hospice patients would be study subjects, some with dementia, some without. All would have memory tests and brain scans. After death, their brains would be autopsied. Avid suggested that after the first 35 died, there should be enough data to know if the scans gave a true picture of the pathology. Then the F.D.A. could decide if the results were convincing enough to approve the dye for marketing.

Some doctors had misgivings, wondering how they could ask people who were sick and dying to be scanned just to help Alzheimer’s research. But, they found, most patients and their families agreed and said they were grateful to have been asked.

That was evident on May 19, when Dr. Skovronsky gave a lunch for patients’ families in City, Ariz., to thank them for participating.

“It really touched my heart to be in this,” said Dorothy Wall, whose husband, Claude E. Wall, died of in Sun City on March 3.

“Something bad happens, and now something good happens.”

Late last year, Avid saw the initial results of its hospice study — data from the first six patients. Then, as more patients were studied, the data from them were held by a company that would analyze it. Avid did not see the results until the study was completed. But those first six were encouraging.

A man diagnosed with Alzheimer’s and cancer had a scan showing no plaque. His autopsy did not show it, either. The diagnosis was wrong. Another man with and dementia had been diagnosed as having dementia solely due to Parkinson’s. His scan showed amyloid. So did the autopsy. He had Alzheimer’s. A woman with mild memory loss had a scan showing no amyloid. Her autopsy also found none. Three others had clinical diagnoses of Alzheimer’s, confirmed by scans and autopsies.

Finally, on May 14, 35 patients had been scanned and autopsied. The Avid study was complete, and the full data will be presented at the meeting next month. Other companies, still doing their studies, did not yet have data to examine.

And Dr. Skovronsky got that e-mail message.

“This is going to have a big impact on Alzheimer’s disease, guys,” he told his staff that day.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: As mentioned above, there should have been some attempt here to explain why this scan would be better than a doctor talking with her patient. Nonetheless it does mention the existing diagnostic approaches along with the difficulties in making the diagnosis, so we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ViewRay, Inc. (Nasdaq: VRAY), maker of the world's first and only clinical MRI-guided radiation therapy system, announced today outcomes data presented during the recent 2017 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO). This data highlighted compelling early results using the company's MRIdian system for the treatment of inoperable, locally advanced pancreatic cancer.

Unlike any other system on the market today, MRIdian allows clinicians to see the tumor and nearby soft-tissue anatomy throughout radiation treatments using real-time diagnostic MR-visualization. As a result, MRIdian's on-table adaptive radiation therapy allows doctors to respond to subtle anatomical changes observed on a day-to-day basis and reshape the dose to better match the current contours of the tumor. By more accurately targeting the tumor, and reducing treatment radiation dose to surrounding organs such as the duodenum, small bowel, stomach and liver, a higher and potentially more effective radiation dose may be delivered without increasing the risks of side effects and complications for the patient.

As featured in the ASTRO Scientific Session poster titled "High Dose Adaptive MRI Guided Radiation Therapy Improves Overall Survival of Inoperable Pancreatic Cancer," key data points and findings from the presentation include the following:
• The study detailed a retrospective review of 42 locally-advanced pancreatic cancer patients treated with MRIdian at four institutions (University of California Los Angeles, University of Wisconsin, VU University Medical Center, Washington University).
• The authors examined survival and toxicity rates for two unique cohorts of patients. One sample received a higher biologically effective dose (maxBED10 >90), primarily enabled by MRIdian MR-guided on-table adaptive radiotherapy. The other sample received a lower, more conventional biologically effective dose (maxBED10 <90), using non-adaptive therapy.
• The cohort receiving a higher dose demonstrated a near doubling of median overall survival (Kaplan-Meier estimated median overall survival of 27.8 months compared to 14.8 months).
• Patients treated with higher radiation doses reported no grade 3 or higher toxicities (0 percent). In comparison, those patients receiving lower doses via non-adaptive treatments experienced 15.8 percent grade 3 or higher toxicities.

"High-definition MR now enables oncologists to detect the slightest anatomical changes that occur from one day to the next and in real-time while the patient is being treated. Coupled with new adaptive radiation therapy software tools, we create new customized plans in minutes, all while the patient is on the treatment table," said Percy Lee, M.D., senior author and Associate Professor and Vice Chair of Education for the Department of Radiation Oncology at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. "The data presented at the 2017 ASTRO Annual Meeting suggests that higher radiation doses with adaptive MR guided radiation therapy may improve survival in pancreatic cancer while maintaining a very favorable toxicity profile. These outcomes warrant further investigations."

The early results highlighted above, along with other data obtained using MRIdian will be tested in a multi-center, prospective, single-arm clinical trial for inoperable, locally advanced or borderline resectable pancreatic cancer. The trial will be conducted by ViewRay's Clinical Cooperative Think Tank (C2T2), a group of MRIdian medical institutions focused on evidence gathering to support MR-guided radiation therapy.

For more information regarding this clinical trial, please visit http://go. .

Presentations discussing the multi-institutional poster in ViewRay's ASTRO booth are available on the company's website at http://www. .

ViewRay®, Inc. (Nasdaq: VRAY), designs, manufactures and markets the MRIdian® radiation therapy system. MRIdian is built upon a proprietary high-definition MR imaging system designed from the ground up to address the unique challenges and clinical workflow for advanced radiation oncology. Unlike MR systems used in diagnostic radiology, MRIdian's high-definition MR was purposely built to deliver high-precision radiation without unnecessary beam distortion, and consequently, help to mitigate skin toxicity and other safety concerns that may otherwise arise when high magnetic fields interact with radiation beams. ViewRay and MRIdian are registered trademarks of ViewRay, Inc.

This press release contains forward-looking statements. Statements in this press release that are not purely historical are forward-looking statements. Such statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause future results to differ materially from those referenced. Forward looking statements with respect to predicted improved survival described in the poster presentation and video, are based on current expectations from the presented retroactive study and involve inherent risks and uncertainties about the potential health and medical benefits of MR-guided Radiation Therapy for the treatment of patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Further studies, including the planned prospective multi-institutional study referenced in this press release, as well as patient data covering longer periods of time post-treatment, could lead to different or contrary results from those expressed during ASTRO or in the poster presentation. Given these uncertainties, the reader is advised not to place any undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Additional risk factors include, among others, the ability to raise the additional funding needed to continue to pursue ViewRay's business and product development plans, the inherent uncertainties associated with developing new products or technologies, competition in the industry in which ViewRay operates and overall market conditions. These forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this press release, and ViewRay assumes no obligation to update the forward-looking statements, or to update the reasons why actual results could differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements, except as required by law. Investors should consult all of the information set forth herein and should also refer to the risk factor disclosure set forth in the reports and other documents ViewRay files with the SEC available at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This study was all about comparing alternatives, so it scores Satisfactory on that criterion. It would have helped readers if alternatives would have been described more in laymen’s terms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Sometimes, Ellis Glover would be forced to leave her friends and sit at a lunch table where no one was eating peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.

"I wanted to sit with my good, good friends, but I couldn't," the 10-year-old said. "If you're a kid and you have a food allergy, it's harder on you. You're missing out on a lot of stuff other children can have. I always want to try peanut stuff."

Mom Monica Glover said the family discovered Ellis' peanut allergy when she was about 3. The tipoff: a skin reaction around her mouth after she was given food with a small amount of peanuts in it. "We were lucky to have discovered it that way. That was a mild reaction," Glover said, and a doctor confirmed the allergy through tests.

The discovery was "distressing," Glover said. Accidental exposure to peanuts has happened, resulting in "severe stomach cramps and vomiting," she said. "Essentially, we have to live in fear all the time of Ellis being inadvertently exposed to peanuts and having a reaction that is potentially life-threatening."

Glover seized the opportunity to participate in a study on the safety and effectiveness of an experimental treatment that could give her daughter protection against accidental exposure to peanuts. Despite the risk, it was "a gift," she said, adding that her family hoped their efforts might help "lots of other children."

The risk paid off: Two-thirds of the kids in the study were able to eat the equivalent of two peanuts without any symptoms after following the months-long experimental treatment regimen, the researchers found.

Ellis is one of the majority of children for whom the treatment works. "It's been a huge success," her mother said.

"It does not make the allergy to go away," Vickery said. "The purpose is not to get them to be no longer peanut allergic and allow them to eat whatever they want."

"I'm telling patients when I see them that my hope is that patients will have access by late next summer, something like that," Vickery said. He added that although the study proved the treatment's effectiveness and safety only in children, adults would probably benefit in the same way.

To test the experimental therapy, 66 research centers in 10 countries recruited 551 participants who ranged in age from 4 to 55 and who all had a peanut allergy. Most -- 499 participants -- were between the ages of 4 and 17.

"We were extremely well-informed about the entire process," Glover said. "You start at a super low dose and work your way up. You take it at the hospital under observation. Then, you take it at home every day. "

Three-quarters of the study participants were given the treatment in increasing amounts every two weeks until reaching maintenance, when they received the equivalent of one peanut daily. The remainder of the participants were given a placebo. At the conclusion of the study after a year, all of the participants faced an "exit food challenge": They ate, under a doctor's supervision, the equivalent of two peanuts.

Two-thirds of the treatment participants were able to tolerate this exit dose without a severe reaction. Half tolerated even twice that amount: a four-peanut dose.

Overall, participants experienced fewer side effects during the study than the researchers had anticipated. "It's intuitive that that process would trigger some allergic symptoms in many patients," Vickery said. A third completed the study with no more than mild side effects, such as stomachache.

Ellis experienced stomach cramps and vomiting multiple times during the study, usually on days when her dose was increased to raise her tolerance. "Having stomach cramps did not feel very good," she said. Still, she usually vomited, and the cramps passed quickly.

Once, she felt her throat constrict, and "it was harder for me to breathe," she said. She'd gone into anaphylaxis, a severe allergic reaction. The hospital staff reacted immediately and gave her a shot of epinephrine. "I felt safe with all the doctors and nurses around me. They can help you get through it," she said.

A little more than 11% of the children dropped out of the study due to severe side effects. Among children receiving the treatment, 10% required rescue epinephrine during the exit challenge, compared with 53% in the placebo group.

"These treatments really have the potential to transform people's lives," Vickery said, "and I have seen it happen firsthand: the sense of relief [families] get when a child becomes desensitized."

Trying to be 'bite safe'

"It's what a lot of families call trying to be 'bite safe.' it's not that you're curing the allergy; it's not that you're going to be able to eat peanut butter sandwiches," said Sicherer, who was not involved in the study. "It's really just to have a better threshold so that if you accidentally ate something that had a little bit of peanut in it, maybe you wouldn't have a reaction or the reaction wouldn't be so bad."

Though the immunotherapy treatment is simply a matter of gradually increasing your tolerance to peanuts, you could have a severe reaction at home. "This is not something to try at home," Sicherer said.

Aimmune has made peanut into a "pharmaceutical-grade" product, he said. "Most people think of it as medicinalized food." Doctors and patients both know exactly how much you're getting, he said, "and that's important because if you're reactive to, say, a 50th of a peanut, you don't want to have a mistake where you're suddenly getting a 10th of peanut."

Assuming the treatment wins FDA approval, Sicherer said, the conversation between doctors and patients will be, "Is it better to just avoid the food and ask a lot of questions at restaurants and be real careful, or do something like this and still don't eat the food and ask the questions in the restaurant, but at least know you have a bit of a safety valve?"

There are more than a few caveats when it comes to the treatment regimen. For one, it's "a commitment," he said. You cannot take a dose before exercising, and you can't skip doses, or you might have a severe reaction when you pick it up again.

Glover noted, "It's somewhat disruptive. You have to do it every day. Generally, we would take it after dinner." After giving the medicine, she added, parents must carefully monitor their children, preventing them from becoming too active or too hot.

Sicherer said, "The family that does this really, really, really has to be a rule follower. It's not easy." It would still be worth it to many, he said.

If this ends up being the first approved treatment, if it is covered by insurance and if details of whom it works for best were all worked out and the risks and benefits were clear, "that would be so amazing, because we haven't really had anything like that before," he said.

"It's not everything we would hope for, but it's still fantastic to be able to raise someone's threshold from a teeny tiny amount of peanut to a couple of peanuts or more," said Sicherer, who believes that other allergy products will be developed in time: "I can tell my patients that this might be the right thing for them, but if not, we're looking at things that might be easier and better down the road."

Glover acknowledges that "it's not a perfect solution. I would say it's been some work to go through this study, just in terms of a time commitment." Still, if it had taken twice the amount of time, she would have done it: "It's peace of mind."

Even though she dislikes the medicine's taste, Ellis also believes it is worth it. "It's definitely better," she would say to another kid with peanut allergy: "You know you can be around your friends when they have peanut butter on them."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story makes clear that there is currently no approved treatment for peanut allergy.  
In addition, the profiled patient is described as having to eat her school lunch at a peanut-free table, showing reader the practice of avoiding exposure — currently the only way to manage a peanut allergy.  
However, the story doesn’t mention that AR101 is among at least four peanut immunotherapy products potentially entering the market.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A new blood test may be as accurate as a test requiring a painful spinal tap for differentiating Parkinson's disease from similar disorders, according to a study published Wednesday in Neurology, the medical journal of the American Academy of Neurology.

Parkinson's disease is a neurological disorder that can cause tremors, stiffness, slowness of movement, trouble balancing, problems walking and difficulty coordinating movement. Less obvious symptoms include depression, insomnia, anxiety, fatigue and constipation.

Neurological disorders that mimic the symptoms of Parkinson's disease are called atypical parkinsonism disorders.

Many doctors cannot tell whether a patient has Parkinson's disease or atypical parkinsonism.

"This can be very challenging, especially during the early stages of the diseases and if the responsible doctor is not a neurologist specialized in movement disorders," said Dr. Oskar Hansson, lead author of the new study, a neurologist and an associate professor at Lund University in Sweden.

Non-specialists "do not really know exactly what questions to ask the patient and the special signs to look for," Hansson wrote in an email. Yet patients with atypical disorders "usually have a much worse prognosis, with faster disease progression, (with) more disabling symptoms" than Parkinson's patients, so early identification is crucial.

The correct diagnosis is also key to treatment since "most patients with atypical parkinsonism disorders do not respond well to dopamine-targeting medications" that are usually prescribed for Parkinson's patients, Hansson said.

Hansson and his colleagues developed a blood test that is, essentially, a variation on an existing test capable of detecting neurofilament light chain protein in spinal fluid. This protein is a component of nerve cells, and when these cells die, it can be detected in both spinal fluid and blood.

Because spinal fluid is not easily obtained by a primary care doctor, this diagnostic test is not very useful, so Hansson developed a blood test and investigated its accuracy in the new study.

When validating a new biomarker for disease, "one should always analyze at least two different (groups of patients and controls) to make sure that the results are reproducible," said Hansson, who added that participants should also include both early- and late-stage patients established at different clinics.

All told, a total of 244 people with Parkinson's and 79 healthy volunteers serving as a comparison group participated in Hansson's study, along with 181 patients with atypical parkinsonism disorders.

Of these, 88 patients had multiple system atrophy, which impairs the body's involuntary functions such as heart rate, blood pressure and digestion.

Seventy patients had progressive supranuclear palsy, which affects movement, walking, balance, speech, swallowing, vision, mood and thinking.

And 23 patients had corticobasal degeneration, which causes decreased movement on one side of the body, muscle rigidity, tremor and a disconnection between thought and action.

Testing these participants, the researchers found that nerve protein levels ranged higher in people with atypical parkinsonism and lower in patients with Parkinson's disease as well as the healthy volunteers. However, the test cannot distinguish between the different atypical disorders, which doctors must rely on symptoms to diagnose.

Blood test accuracy is defined based on sensitivity, the percentage of positives that are correctly identified, and specificity, the percentage of negatives that are correctly identified. In Sweden, the blood test had a sensitivity of 82% and a specificity of 91%, while in the United Kingdom, sensitivity was 80% and specificity 90%. For early-stage study participants, generally, sensitivity was 70% and specificity was 80%.

Overall, the blood test showed equal accuracy as the spinal fluid test when diagnosing Parkinson's or an atypical parkinsonism disorder, in both early and later stages of disease.

Hansson imagines that blood-based tests will be used in the future "in the diagnostic work-up of patients with parkinsonism by most doctors who are not very specialized with these movement disorders." He also believes the test will be used by specialists for Parkinson's patients who "do not exhibit a very typical symptomatology" or do not respond as expected to treatment.

Though atypical parkinsonism conditions look very similar to Parkinson's at first, they "have a different underlying molecular cause," according to Bronstein, and so it is important to recognize them early in order to treat them properly. "Disease-specific therapies are now in trials, so accurate diagnosis is essential in determining if these new treatments work," he said.

According to Dr. Paul Wright, chairman of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, New York, and Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, New York, the importance of this study is that it brings to light that there are new biomarker tests that can delineate between these neurological diseases.

"A lot of time, people come in and say they or a family member has a tremor, and they believe it's Parkinson's disease," said Wright, who also was not involved in the study. This early assumption may impede diagnosis of a less recognized atypical parkinsonism condition.

Or a patient has "horrible blood pressure fluctuations," Wright said, and no obvious tremor or rigidity symptoms, so a doctor suspects a heart condition. Instead, the cause is multiple system atrophy, a neurodegenerative disease. Though other symptoms will show up eventually and help in diagnosing the patient, in the meantime, the patient will be receiving the wrong medicines.

An accurate blood test, then, would be good news in these situations.

"It's a lot more reassuring to a patient to say 'we're just going to take a blood test to check for a few things,' " Wright said. "It's much easier and less anxiety-provoking for patients than taking a spinal tap."

Up until now, many diseases have been diagnosed based on symptoms, with patients asking, "How do you know I have this?" Meanwhile, doctors are not always correct, Wright said. This is true even of Parkinson's, which is diagnosed based on symptoms, a patient's history, neurological exams, a patient's response to medicine and, in some cases, brain imaging tests.

Still, Wright is hopeful and believes a biomarker test for Parkinson's "will be down the line. ... In general, researchers are looking for biomarkers of disease."

Specialists and sub-specialists are available only in big cities, Wright said, and access to a simple blood test would enable a correct diagnosis in a primary care office.

"We always assume there's luxury," Wright said. "But that's not really what's real in most of the country."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses the alternative–a spinal tap test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Jeffrey Tice, an internist at the University of California, San Francisco, who wrote an editorial accompanying the study, said: "With hormones, we really were thinking we were preventing a lot of diseases and it was good for the long term. Maybe we were brainwashed by the industry paying people to tell us that in medical school."

Now, other drugs have come into use for hot flashes, but not much is known about their effectiveness or long-term safety. Until recently, there was little interest in studying them rigorously, because hormones worked so well for most women.

"There's a lot of hype around trying things that we haven't proven effective and, sadly, we haven't proven they're safe," said Dr. Heidi D. Nelson, the first author of the journal article and an internist and professor at the Oregon Health and Science University.

The report is based on a review of 43 studies of various nonhormonal drugs being used for hot flashes. Most were originally approved for other purposes. The drugs include the antidepressants Paxil (paroxetine), Effexor (venlafaxine), Prozac (fluoxetine) and Celexa (citalopram), the blood pressure drug Catapres (clonidine), and the seizure drug Neurontin (gabapentin). Some came into use for menopause because women taking them for other reasons told doctors the drugs seemed to diminish their hot flashes.

The researchers also examined studies of nonprescription extracts from soy and red clover, which contain plant estrogens called isoflavones and are marketed as a "natural" treatment for hot flashes.

None of the drugs or extracts are approved by the Food and Drug Administration to treat hot flashes — only hormones are approved for that purpose — but doctors are free to prescribe medicines for any use they see fit, and many recommend the drugs or plant products for hot flashes, based on study findings and their patients' experiences.

The researchers found that on average, antidepressants and Catapres each appeared to reduce hot flashes by about one per day, and Neurontin by about two per day. For women with a lot of hot flashes, that is not a very impressive performance, Dr. Nelson said, but she added that the drugs may also lessen their severity.

Estrogen, by comparison, gets rid of two to three flashes a day, and also makes them milder, Dr. Nelson said. Though hormones cause small increases in the risks for breast cancer and heart disease, a short course may still be the best choice for women with very severe symptoms, she said, though she added that women who have had breast cancer should definitely not take hormones.

All the nonhormonal drugs have side effects. The antidepressants can cause headache, nausea, dry mouth, dizziness and insomnia or sleepiness. Catapres can cause some of the same symptoms and also constipation. Neurontin causes sleepiness, and soy extracts can produce gastrointestinal troubles.

Among the antidepressants, Paxil seemed to have the strongest evidence of benefit. There were only two studies for Effexor, just one of which suggested it might help.

For the other antidepressants, Prozac and Celexa, and for the plant extracts, there was no statistically significant evidence that they worked for hot flashes.

"But I wouldn't want any drug company to get an edge," Dr. Nelson said. "It's just where we are today. It's not the end of the story."

She took a cautious view because she and her colleagues found that there was relatively little reliable data on using the drugs for hot flashes. Of 10 studies on antidepressants, for instance, the researchers judged only two of the studies to be good, and the rest fair or poor. The poor rating often meant a study, even though well conducted, was too small or too short to be conclusive.

"If there were only 20 women in the study, how do we say it's appropriate for all the women in the country?" Dr. Nelson said.

"Now we know what we need," she said. "More bigger studies on more things."

In the meantime, both Dr. Tice and Dr. Nelson said that for women who find their symptoms intolerable and want treatment, they would favor antidepressants over hormones. But Dr. Tice warned that the drugs should not be used long term.

"I wouldn't encourage the mindset of putting women on these drugs thinking they're going to be on them for life," he said, adding that patients should try the drugs for a few months and then try to stop.

"We hate to medicalize a natural process," Dr. Nelson said, but she added that severe symptoms should not be dismissed. "We want to take it seriously, but not everybody needs to be on prescription drugs for it."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Satisfactorily presents several non-hormonal options for treatment. However, lifestyle related non-hormonal treatment (e.g. cool, layered clothing, exercise, not smoking) is either not mentioned or presented as ineffective options for women with hot flashes. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Whether you call it water running, aqua jogging or hydrotherapy, you can’t beat a workout in water for an array of health benefits, many experts say. Everyone from pro athletes to stroke survivors are benefitting from aquatic exercise that combines walking or running against the natural resistance of the water to help build strength and endurance.

Running and walking in water is an excellent form of physical therapy for people rehabilitating from hip, knee and back injuries and surgeries. It’s also an easy-on-the joints form of exercise for seniors and others who suffer from arthritis, and a recent study shows it can speed recovery from stroke faster than using a traditional treadmill.

It’s just an all-around good aerobic conditioner for athletes, too, sports medicine expert Dr. Naresh Rao, told CBS News. Rao is the Olympic Team USA Water Polo Physician for the 2016 Summer Games.

“We’ve been using hydrotherapy to help decrease any sort of gravity that can affect joint function,” said Rao, who is also with the department of family medicine at Plainview Hospital in Plainview, New York. “I personally prescribe it for knee issues and low back issues.”

Hydrotherapy uses a water-friendly treadmill that can be placed in a pool. Another method involves a specially designed treadmill tank.

Matt Johnson, a physical therapist at St. Luke’s Hospital in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, told CBS News that the tank is basically a freestanding tub, about six feet long by three feet wide, with a motorized belt. The water height can be adjusted to the patient’s abilities. The buoyancy of the water helps someone who’s been injured to walk and run a little sooner than they’d be able to do on dry ground, he explained.

“In water, we can teach them sooner. They can really work on their gait, walk without pain, do exercises in water that you wouldn’t be able to do on land,” said Johnson.

He uses a HydroTrack Underwater Treadmill System – professional sports teams including the New York Yankees and the Miami Dolphins, have used it, too. The nice thing about it, said Johnson, is that people can step right into the tank at ground level and then the water fills up around them. It works like a lock on a canal, he said. So, even older patients with limited mobility and balance don’t have to negotiate getting down into a pool.

Johnson starts off recuperating athletes and patients in water somewhere between waist and chest height. The treadmill speed can be set anywhere from 0.3 to 7.1 miles per hour depending on how much resistance a person can handle.

“At waist height, it’s at about 50 percent of body weight. At chest height, it’s about 30 percent of body weight,” Johnson said, noting, for example, that a person with an injured knee who weighs 100 pounds who is running in waist-high water would only feel like 50 pounds on the bad knee.

“Taking some of that pressure off the knee helps them tolerate that knee injury longer,” said Johnson.

A recent study in the American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation showed that water workouts might benefit stroke survivors. Researchers asked 21 patients who’d had a stroke within the past two months to undergo two treadmill exercise tests – one submerged in water and one on a regular treadmill. They gradually increased walking speed and slope over time until the patients couldn’t go any further. Walking on the underwater treadmill produced better measures when it came to maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max), a reflection of heart and lung function during exercise, and metabolic equivalents, a measure of energy use.

“The study proposes a different, very innovative approach” to rehabilitation after stroke, said Dr. Gisele Wolf-Klein, director of geriatric education at Northwell Health in Great Neck, New York.

Wolfe-Klein told CBS News she has tried water workouts and said you don’t even feel like you break a sweat even if your heart rate is up. “It’s a very pleasant way of achieving exactly what you’re trying to do – allowing a cardio-respiratory response,” Wolfe-Klein told CBS News.

She noted that medicine’s veterinary counterparts have been using water therapy for years with injured racehorses.

Budd Coates, training director at Runner’s World magazine, said runners don’t just plunge into water​ therapy when they’re injured; it’s a great conditioning method for healthy athletes, too. Some recreational swimming pools and homeowners with backyard pools have manual treadmills that are water-safe and can be plunked right in the water.

An alternative to a water treadmill: Some pool companies will install a water flow system you can work out against.

“It creates a water force and helps keep you jogging in place,” said Coates.

For those without access to a water treadmill, you can purchase a foam vest specifically designed for water jogging or use foam barbells to help keep you afloat. Some pools may loan them out, too.

Or, Coates suggested, just try it freeform with waist- or chest-high water to start. If you have trouble getting in out of a recreational pool, look for one that has a slanting beach-style entry into the water, or one with a robotic chair lift. Ask a pool lifeguard or certified swim instructor to help you.

If running’s not your thing, but the water looks inviting, Coates said there are also spin bikes that can be used underwater.

Coates said the beauty of water running (or even walking) is that it’s great for any age and any level of ability, from elderly stroke survivors to Olympic athletes.

Galen Rupp, the 2016 Rio Olympics​ men’s marathon bronze medalist, relies on it as part of his training.

“He and some of the other guys on the Nike team, it’s well known they take advantage of the anti-gravity treadmill and the aqua track,” Coates said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternative to using a treadmill underwater would be to engage in cardiovascular exercise on dry land. The story addresses this, noting both the treadmill comparison study (mentioned above) and the fact that exercising in water reduces stress on joints. So, we’ll give it a Satisfactory rating.
However, the story intimates that exercising in a pool and exercising on an underwater treadmill are comparable. It’s not clear that this is the case, and the 2014 story from Runner’s World indicates that they are actually quite different. What’s more, there is no discussion of another form of aquatic exercise: swimming. Is swimming a viable option for cardiovascular recovery?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dry needling may be a viable treatment alternative to cortisone injection for patients with chronic, intermittent pain and tenderness on the outside of the hip, thus avoiding the potentially harmful effects of steroids

Dry needling may be a viable treatment alternative to cortisone injection for patients with chronic, intermittent pain and tenderness on the outside of the hip, thus avoiding the potentially harmful effects of steroids, according to a new study published in the April 2017 issue of the Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® (JOSPT®).

Researchers at Baylor Scott & White Health in Temple, Texas, found that dry needling, which uses filament needles to stimulate sensitive loci, or trigger points, in the muscles, is as effective as cortisone injection in reducing pain and improving movement problems caused by greater trochanteric pain syndrome (GPTS). GTPS is the current term for what used to be called greater trochanteric or subgluteal bursitis. This study is the first to directly compare these two treatments for the syndrome.

The medical community once thought that a swollen hip bursa--a fluid-filled sac that acts as a gliding surface to reduce friction between moving tissues in this joint--was the source of this hip pain. This conclusion led to the use of steroid injections to the bursa to help decrease swelling and pain. However, evidence now indicates that injuries to the muscles and tendons around the hip are the actual cause of this pain, and that inflammation is often not involved, calling injecting the bursa with a steroid into question.

GTPS is estimated to affect 10% to 25% of the general population. This kind of hip pain has been reported to be more common in women and in patients with coexisting low back pain, osteoarthritis, Iliotibial band tenderness, and obesity. The study demonstrates that patients with GTPS can get similar results from dry needling as from a steroid injection.

"Evidence for dry needling of the hip in lieu of steroid injection is in its infancy," acknowledges lead author Kindyle L. Brennan, PT, PhD, with Baylor Scott & White Health. However, "this study suggests dry needling as an effective alternative to cortisone injection."

Dr. Brennan adds that, "The potential detrimental side effects of steroid injection, particularly repeated injections, are of concern for patients and providers alike." As a result, "the identification of a comparable treatment alternative with minimal side effects, such as dry needling, offers valuable clinical advantages," she says.

Dr. Brennan and her fellow researchers treated 43 patients with GPTS and a total of 50 painful hips. The patients were randomly assigned to one of two groups: one group receiving cortisone injection and the other group, dry needling. Treatments were administered over six weeks, and clinical outcomes were collected at the start of the trial and at one, three, and six weeks. The researchers measured pain and function. They also collected information about medication intake for pain in the involved hip, as well as the sex, age, and body mass index of study participants.

The baseline characteristics were similar between the two groups. The results showed that cortisone injection did not provide better outcomes than dry needling for either pain or function in patients with GTPS. Both groups experienced a decrease in pain and an improved ability to move and complete daily activities.

Dr. Brennan cautions that while this study uses a larger sample than most, further studies are warranted. In particular, participants were only followed for six weeks; additional studies over longer time periods will be important.

The study is titled "Dry Needling Versus Cortisone Injection in the Treatment of Greater Trochanteric Pain Syndrome: A Noninferiority Randomized Clinical Trial." Co-authors on the paper are Bryce C. Allen, MD, and Yolanda Munoz Maldonado, PhD, also with Baylor Scott & White Health. The research report's full citation is: J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2017;47(4):232-239. Epub March 3, 2017. doi:10.2519/jospt.2017.6994

The study was approved through the Baylor Scott & White Health Institutional Review Board. Internal grant support was provided by Baylor Scott & White Health. The trial was registered at http://www. (NCT02639039).

For more information, please contact Dr. Brennan at Kindyle.Brennan@BSWHealth.org, or JOSPT Editor-in-Chief J. Haxby Abbott, DPT, PhD, FNZCP, at haxby.abbott@otago.ac.nz.

About the Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy

The Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy® (JOSPT®) publishes scientifically rigorous, clinically relevant content for physical therapists and others in the health care community to advance musculoskeletal and sports-related practice globally. JOSPT is an independent, non-profit journal, published by JOSPT, Inc. d/b/a Movement Science Media. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release adequately compares dry needling with steroid injections. Still, it could have mentioned other strategies for managing chronic hip pain such as physical therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, doctors in Cleveland will stimulate the brain of a person disabled by stroke to help them regain function and independence.

Someone has a stroke in the United States every 40 seconds, and it has become the leading cause of serious long-term disability among Americans. That’s why doctors at the Cleveland Clinic will test deep brain stimulation (DBS)—a procedure in which electrodes are implanted in the brain to provide small electric pulses as a way to help people recover control of their movements.

The hospital recently received the green light from federal authorities to start the first ever human trial of DBS for stroke, and plans to announce Tuesday that it will perform the procedure as soon as an initial patient is identified.

Close to 800,000 Americans have a stroke each year and estimates suggest about half of those people will be disabled from it. With physical therapy, many people regain some motor function, but the brain damage cannot be reversed and many still have profound movement problems.

“Despite advances in physical therapy and acute treatment of stroke there are still too many people who live with long term disabilities, and new technologies are needed,” said Dr. Andre Machado, the chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Neurological Institute who is leading the trial and will perform the procedures.

DBS has been used to treat tremors associated with Parkinson’s disease, but Machado said the new approach, if successful, will achieve something novel. “The big difference is that when we are treating the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, we’re trying to make the symptom, like a tremor, go away,” he said. “When we are treating stroke, we are really trying to make movement come back. There is something inherently different about that.”

And inherently harder. DBS has never been used on humans as a way to regain a function. And experts aren’t even entirely sure why it works for Parkinson’s in the first place. But for 10 years, Machado and his team have been studying the effects of DBS on rats. They found that rats with strokes who received DBS had more proteins in the brain that are associated with brain plasticity—and twice as many synapses or connections between nerve cells compared to rats with strokes who did not undergo DBS.

If all goes as planned, Machado will insert the electrodes in the brain of someone severely disabled by stroke who has exhausted all other options without improvement. The electrodes will be placed on parts of the brain that communicate with the damaged region and surrounding areas. The electrodes will be attached to a wire that connects them to a battery pack located under the skin in the chest—the pack looks similar to a pacemaker. The stimulation will hopefully jump-start the brain’s recovery process and help them gain more control while undergoing standard therapy.

The team will focus on people who suffer ischemic strokes, which is when blood flow to the brain is blocked. About 87% of all strokes are this type.

DBS is a type of brain surgery, and comes with risks like bleeding, infection and need for more surgeries. Since the procedure is experimental, there may be some unknown risks as well. Depending on how the first procedure goes, the hospital will enroll more people into its trial. If ultimately successful, DBS could become a treatment used in tandem with physical rehabilitation. “The goal of this therapy is not to replace physical training, but rather to boost the effects,” Machado said. “The proposition here is to make that recovery greater.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does point out that the standard treatment for stroke victims who suffer a disability is physical therapy. However, clot busting drugs and other early intervention methods are also being tried as means to improve stroke outcomes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Human papillomavirus-positive oropharynx cancers (cancers of the tonsils and back of the throat) are on rise. After radiation treatment, patients often experience severe, lifelong swallowing, eating, and nutritional issues. However, new clinical trial research shows reducing radiation for some patients with HPV-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas can maintain high cure rates while sparing some of these late toxicities.

“We found there are some patients have very high cure rates with reduced doses of radiation,” said Barbara Burtness, MD, Professor of Medicine (Medical Oncology), Yale Cancer Center, Disease Research Team Leader for the Head and Neck Cancers Program at Smilow Cancer Hospital, and the chair of the ECOG-ACRIN head and neck committee. “Radiation dose reduction resulted in significantly improved swallowing and nutritional status,” she said.

The study, published in the December 26 issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology, showed that patients treated with reduced radiation had less difficulty swallowing solids (40 percent versus 89 percent of patients treated with standard doses of radiation) or impaired nutrition (10 percent versus 44 percent of patients treated with regular doses of radiation).

“Today, many younger patients are presenting with HPV-associated squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx,” said Dr. Burtness. “And while traditional chemoradiation has demonstrated good tumor control and survival rates for patients, too often they encounter unpleasant outcomes that can include difficulty swallowing solid foods, impaired nutrition, aspiration and feeding tube dependence,” said Dr. Burtness. “Younger patients may have to deal with these side effects for decades after cancer treatment. We want to help improve our patients’ quality of life.”

The study included 80 patients from 16 ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group sites who had stage three or four HPV-positive squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx, and were candidates for surgery. Eligible patients received three courses of induction chemotherapy with the drugs cisplatin, paclitaxel, and cetuximab. Patients with good clinical response then received reduced radiation.

Study results also showed that patients who had a history of smoking less than 10 packs of cigarettes a year had a very high disease control compared with heavy smokers.

Other authors on the paper include: Shanthi Marur (Johns Hopkins Medicine) and Anthony Cmelak (Vanderbilt University).
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release summarizes a study that compares low dose and high dose radiation, and notes that chemotherapy was also part of the treatment regimen for the patients. It states that all of the patient volunteers were candidates for surgery, which is another alternative or adjunct therapy for these types of cancers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- Among women with dense breast tissue, for whom traditional mammograms are less effective at detecting cancer, who request additional screening after a negative mammogram, abbreviated breast MRI (AB-MR) may be a valuable cancer detection tool. In a study of 195 asymptomatic women with dense breast tissue who had a negative mammogram within the previous 11 months, AB-MR detected five additional cancers after a negative screening mammography, according to preliminary findings from a Penn Medicine team presented this week at the Radiological Society of North America meeting in Chicago.

To put this in perspective, the cancer detection rate of mammography is roughly 4 cancers in 1,000 women who have a mammogram. Digital tomosynthesis (DBT), or 3D mammography, does slightly better, detecting approximately 25 percent more cancers, or roughly 5 cancers in 1,000 women screened. Based on the preliminary results at Penn Medicine, the cancer detection rate of AB-MR screening is 25 cancers per 1,000 patients. One in eight women in the United States will develop breast cancer at some point during their life.

"Having dense breast tissue makes it more difficult to detect a cancer on a mammogram," said the study's lead author, Susan Weinstein, MD, an associate professor of Radiology and the director of breast MRI at Penn Medicine. "Based on the literature and our results, women with dense breast tissue who desire supplemental screening, these results suggest that AB-MR may be a better option than other supplemental screening tests such as whole breast ultrasound.

The most common exam offered for asymptomatic patients seeking supplemental screening is a whole breast screening ultrasound examination. However, screening ultrasound examinations have higher rates of false positives, meaning more cases of positive screenings where no cancer is present.

Based on the results from Penn's study, the AB-MR may be a better option. American Cancer Society guidelines currently recommend a full breast MRI, not an AB-MR, in women who, based on family history of breast or ovarian cancer and/or previous treatment for Hodgkin disease, have a 20 to 25 percent or greater lifetime risk of breast cancer.

In addition to Weinstein, additional authors include Mitchell D. Schnall, Elizabeth S. McDonald, Alice Chong, and Emily F. Conant.

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania (founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $6.7 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 20 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $392 million awarded in the 2016 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2016, Penn Medicine provided $393 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release compares the cancer detection rates of abbreviated breast MRI with mammography and digital tomosynthesis (DBT), or 3D mammography. However, it didn’t compare it with the most common screening alternative for these types of breasts — whole breast screening ultrasound — since as the release said, ultrasound carries “higher rates of false positives.”
As noted above, we wish the release would have noted the rate of false positives associated with abbreviated MRI screening.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The device, made of both synthetic and animal tissue, is driven by two miniature electric motors. Implanted in the patient’s chest after the diseased heart is removed, it uses information gleaned from sensors to mimic the activity of the natural organ. It is operated by a microcontroller and powered by electromagnetic induction through the skin or through a plug implanted behind the patient’s ear.

Carmat estimates its device will cost $176,000 to $226,000. When all expenses are considered, including hospital and surgical expenses, it says it will cost just over $315,000, about the same as a transplant.

The device was developed over 15 years by a team that included Alain F. Carpentier, the French surgeon-scientist who, along with Albert Starr, received the 2007 Albert Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research. The Lasker Foundation, which is based in New York, praised their work in the development of artificial heart valves, saying they had “prolonged and enhanced the lives of millions of people with heart disease.”

In the November 2009 bulletin of the Académie Nationale de Médecine, Dr. Carpentier wrote that, instead of picking up from older models of artificial hearts built on animal research, the developers of the new device had sought to use the tools of the digital revolution, namely computer-assisted design, hemodynamic modeling, regulation algorithms and simulations.

The French company is not the first to make total artificial hearts, which are meant to completely replace damaged and diseased organs.

SynCardia, based in Tucson, currently makes the only approved temporary artificial heart, having continued development of the groundbreaking Jarvik-7, which Dr. William C. DeVries implanted in a retired dentist named Barney B. Clark in 1982. Its device, powered by a small air compressor that can be carried in a backpack, has been implanted in more than 800 patients as a bridge before transplant.

Abiomed, a company based in Danvers, Mass., makes a self-contained total artificial heart, the electrical-powered AbioCor. The United States Food and Drug Administration has designated the AbioCor as a “humanitarian use device,” meaning its use is restricted to people who are ineligible for transplants and would otherwise be facing imminent death.

Others are in development. In the United States, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, a unit of the National Institutes of Health, is supporting efforts by two separate groups, one led by Dr. O. H. Frazier of the Texas Heart Institute in Houston, the other by Dr. Leonard A. R. Golding of the Cleveland Clinic.

Another device is being developed by scientists at the Helmholtz-Institute for Biomedical Engineering at the University of Aachen in Germany.

“There’s definitely a major need for a permanent, total artificial heart,” Laman A. Gray Jr., the University of Louisville professor of surgery who implanted the first AbioCor heart in 2001, said.

Citing World Health Organization data that shows heart disease is the world’s leading cause of death, Mr. Conviti, the Carmat chief executive, estimated the potential market at “a minimum” of 100,000 patients a year in the United States and Europe. However, he said cost constraints meant it was unlikely that more than one-tenth of those patients would actually receive an artificial heart.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Barely satisfactory.  No real comparison was made, but at least other devices that are approved or in development were noted. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ILC 2017: The study evaluated the use of a direct-acting antiviral treatment in children aged 6 to 11, for whom the standard of care has been pegylated interferon plus ribavirin

April 21, 2017, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: A study presented today that evaluated an investigational dosage of once-daily ledipasvir 45 mg/sofosbuvir 200 mg (LDV/SOF) in children aged six to 11 years infected with the Hepatitis C virus (HCV), found that 99% of children (n=89/90) had undetectable levels of HCV-RNA 12 weeks after treatment. The study, presented at The International Liver Congress™ 2017 in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, also showed that the fixed-dose combination of LDV/SOF was well-tolerated, and no patients experienced a serious adverse event considered related to the study drug.

Around 180 million people globally have chronic HCV infection,1 including approximately 15 million people in the EU.2 The prevalence of HCV infection in children varies from 0.05%-0.36% in the United States and Europe and up to 1.8%-5.8% in some developing countries.3 While direct-acting antivirals have been used to treat and cure adult patients with HCV,4-7 until now children have been mainly treated for 24 to 48 weeks with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin (RBV), an older treatment which causes severe side effects.8

"Direct-acting antivirals have transformed the treatment of adults with chronic HCV, however, studies of these new therapies in children are required," said Dr Karen Murray, University of Washington School of Medicine and Seattle Children's, Seattle, United States, and lead author of the study. "These data establish the use of the oral direct-acting antivirals as an important treatment option in HCV-infected children aged six to 11 years old."

This ongoing, open-label study enrolled 90 children aged between six and 11 years with chronic HCV, mostly genotype 1 (n=86). Children with HCV genotype 1 infection received 12 weeks of treatment (n=85) or 24 weeks of treatment if they had cirrhosis and failed prior treatment with pegylated interferon plus RBV (n=1); genotype 3 patients received LDV/SOF plus RBV for 24 weeks (n=2); genotype 4 patients received LDV/SOF for 12 weeks (n=2). Most children were male (59%), white (79%), treatment naïve (80%), and vertically infected (97%). Of the study population, 89/90 achieved a sustained virologic response 12 weeks after treatment (SVR12); one treatment-naïve genotype 1 patient with cirrhosis relapsed. No children discontinued the study due to side effects or had a severe or life-threatening adverse event related to the study drug. The most common side effects reported in 10% or more of patients were headache, fever, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting, cough, fatigue, sore throat and nausea.

"This study is a breakthrough for the management of children aged six to 11 years old with Hepatitis C, demonstrating that the new DAA regimen is highly efficacious and, more importantly, safe in this group of HCV-infected children", said Prof Frank Tacke, University Hospital Aachen, Germany, and EASL Governing Board Member.

This annual congress is the biggest event in the EASL calendar, attracting scientific and medical experts from around the world to learn about the latest in liver research. Attending specialists present, share, debate and conclude on the latest science and research in hepatology, working to enhance the treatment and management of liver disease in clinical practice. This year, the congress is expected to attract approximately 10,000 delegates from all corners of the globe. The International Liver Congress™ 2017 will take place from April 19 - 23, at the RAI Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

About The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL)

Since its foundation in 1966, this not-for-profit organisation has grown to over 4,000 members from all over the world, including many of the leading hepatologists in Europe and beyond. EASL is the leading liver association in Europe, having evolved into a major European Association with international influence, with an impressive track record in promoting research in liver disease, supporting wider education and promoting changes in European liver policy.

For more information, please contact the ILC Press Office at:

Session title: Parallel session: Advances in the treatment of HCV 

Time, date and location of session: 16:00 - 18:00, Friday 21 April, Hall 5 

Presenter: Karen Murray, United States of America 

Abstract: Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir ± ribavirin for 12 or 24 weeks is safe and effective in children 6-11 years old with chronic hepatitis C infection (PS101), 17:30 - 17:45

1 EASL Recommendation on Treatment of Hepatitis C 2016. Available from: http://www. . Last accessed: April 2017.

2 World Health Organization. Global Alert and Response - Hepatitis C. Available from: http://www. . Last accessed: April 2017.

3 Pawlowska M, Malgorzata et al. What's new in hepatitis C virus infections in children? WJG. 2015;21(38):10783-10789.

4 Afdhal N, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for untreated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 15;370(20):1889-98.

5 Afdhal N, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for previously treated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 17;370(16):1483-93.

6 Kowdley KV, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for 8 or 12 weeks for chronic HCV without cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 15;370(20):1879-88.

7 Sulkowski MS, et al. Daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir for previously treated or untreated chronic HCV infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 16;370(3):211-21.

8 Jara P, Hierro L. Treatment of Hepatitis C in children. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;4(1):51-61.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release offers a comparison with the current standard of care: “While direct-acting antivirals have been used to treat and cure adult patients with HCV,4-7 until now children have been mainly treated for 24 to 48 weeks with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin (RBV), an older treatment which causes severe side effects.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Propping open clogged arteries with a tiny wire-mesh tube called a stent is no better at reducing the risk of heart attack or death in patients with stable heart disease than treatment with medications, according to a large new study that challenges routine use of a procedure that rapidly became standard medical practice.

The study of more than 2,000 patients found that those who underwent the expensive procedure, known as angioplasty, in non-emergency situations were no less likely to suffer a heart attack or die than those who took only aspirin and other medicines to lower blood pressure and cholesterol and prevent clots, along with adopting lifestyle changes.

The study is the first large, well-designed comparison of angioplasty to non-surgical care for patients who are not having a heart attack or in imminent danger of having one. The procedure, often done to relieve chest pain and to reduce the risk of having or dying from a heart attack, has become one of the most common medical procedures in the United States.

"The data are compelling," said William E. Boden of the University of Buffalo School of Medicine, whose findings were published yesterday by the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with a presentation at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology in New Orleans. "We do too many of these procedures."

Several experts said they expect the findings will prompt a major shift in how doctors treat thousands of patients suffering from heart disease -- the nation's leading cause of death.

"These findings are pretty explosive," said Steven E. Nissen, president of the American College of Cardiology. "I think this is going to shake things up pretty significantly."

The findings underscore the danger of rushing to adopt a procedure before careful studies have been conducted to fully determine its benefits, Boden and others said.

"There was just this intuitive belief that it would be beneficial," Boden said. "But no one had ever done a proper randomized trial to see whether it actually improved outcomes. In the meantime, a whole industry has been created around this."

The researchers and others stressed that angioplasty clearly benefits patients who are in the throes of a heart attack or are at very high risk for one. But the findings indicate that for a patient whose condition is stable, medical therapy is just as effective at reducing the major risks. Such patients constitute at least one-third of those undergoing the 1.2 million angioplasties performed each year, and perhaps as much as 85 percent.

Some cardiologists who specialize in the procedures, however, argued that the study did not focus on the sickest patients who are most likely to benefit, and that the main purpose of angioplasty in many is to alleviate chest pain, not to prevent heart attacks.

"I don't think this is going to cause any huge paradigm shift," said Gregory J. Dehmer, president of the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. "This study was limited to a fairly select group of patients with very stable symptoms."

But Boden said that the study did include patients with moderate to severe heart disease and that many such patients undergo the procedure in the belief it will protect them against heart attacks.

In the procedure, doctors thread a tiny balloon into clogged arteries, inflate the balloon to clear the blockage, and insert a stent -- a tiny wire lattice strut that props the artery open. The procedure costs about $50,000 and is considered safe, though it does carry some risks.

The findings come on the heels of questions about the safety of new stents coated with drugs to keep arteries from reclosing. Those concerns had led doctors to curtail their use of the newer devices, and the new findings are expected to have a similar effect on angioplasty overall.

"There was an overexuberance," said William O'Neill, a prominent cardiologist at the University of Miami. "I think we're getting a midcourse correction."

The findings could also help fuel a resurgence of bypass surgery, which has become far less common with the rise of angioplasty.

"There was this sense that angioplasty would produce the same result as bypass surgery," Nissen said. "I think this will cause a tilt toward more patients with stable conditions choosing medical therapy and more people who have more severe disease getting bypass surgery, which both relieves symptoms and reduces the risk for heart attack and death."

The new study, which was funded mostly by the Department of Veterans Affairs, involved 2,287 patients at 50 centers in the United States and Canada who had chest pain or other symptoms because one or more major arteries supplying blood to the heart had clogged. Half the patients received standard medical treatment involving medication and lifestyle changes such as quitting smoking, eating better and exercising. The other half received the same treatment plus angioplasty.

After about five years, the number of patients who experienced a heart attack, were hospitalized or died because of their heart problems was virtually identical in the two groups, the researchers found.

"There was no significant difference," Boden said. "The data are clear."

Although about one-third of patients who initially got medical treatment later turned to angioplasty, the findings show how much medical treatment of heart disease has improved, Boden said.

"The paradigm for the last 20 years for patients like this been: 'Mr. Jones, you need a procedure.' End of discussion," Boden said. "I hope this will make people realize that patients have more options. They can safely choose to try medical therapy first."

Although study patients receiving angioplasty were somewhat more likely to be free of chest pain, known as angina, even that benefit was marginal, Boden said. After nearly five years, 74 percent of those patients were free of chest pain, compared with 72 percent of those who had medical treatment alone.

"One of the unexpected findings is that it's amazing how remarkably good medical therapy was for relieving angina," Boden said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses lifestyle changes and medication as alternate treatment options, and these alternate options were directly compared to angioplasty in the study.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 12, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- As a particularly nasty flu season rages across the United States, scientists have found a powerful new disinfectant that makes "light" work of the virus.

Researchers say a certain spectrum of ultraviolet light -- called far-UVC -- easily kills airborne flu viruses while posing no risk to people.

It could offer a new, inexpensive way to eliminate airborne flu viruses in indoor public spaces such as hospitals, doctors' offices, schools, airports and aircraft, said the team from Columbia University Medical Center in New York City.

The disinfecting success of initial experiments still need to be confirmed, said lead research David Brenner.

But he believes "the use of overhead, low-level far-UVC light in public locations would be a safe and efficient method for limiting the transmission and spread of airborne-mediated microbial diseases, such as influenza and tuberculosis."

As the researchers explained, broad-spectrum UVC light kills viruses and bacteria, and it is currently used to decontaminate surgical equipment. But this type of light can cause skin cancer and cataracts, so it's not used in public spaces.

However, Brenner and his colleagues wondered if a much narrower spectrum of ultraviolet light, far-UVC, might be a safer option.

In prior studies, they found that far-UVC light killed methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) bacteria -- a common and dangerous "superbug" -- without harming human or mouse skin.

In this new study, they found that far-UVC light also killed airborne H1N1 virus, a common strain of flu virus.

"Far-UVC light has a very limited range and cannot penetrate through the outer dead-cell layer of human skin or the tear layer in the eye, so it's not a human health hazard," said Brenner, who directs Columbia's Center for Radiological Research.

However, "because viruses and bacteria are much smaller than human cells, far-UVC light can reach their DNA and kill them," he said in a university news release.

Lamps with this type of UV light currently cost less than $1,000, Brenner said, but that price would likely fall if the lamps were mass-produced.

"And unlike flu vaccines, far-UVC is likely to be effective against all airborne microbes, even newly emerging strains," he said.

Two flu experts were encouraged by the findings.

"The prospect of reducing the transmission of influenza and other respiratory viruses using far-UV radiation is very exciting," said Dr. Michael Grosso, chief medical officer at Huntington Hospital in Huntington, N.Y.

"Though hand-washing remains critically important, it does not prevent every instance of transmission," Grosso said. "Immunization and antiviral medications are also important, but again, have limitations. It appears that low-dose far-UV light is safe and effective, and has the advantage of inactivating a wide range of disease-causing viruses."

Dr. Len Horovitz, a pulmonary specialist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, agreed.

He noted that the technology's cost "is not prohibitive, and it is safe. This use can sterilize the air in a public space, reducing the spread of respiratory droplets containing flu viruses and other bacteria and viruses."

The findings were published online Feb. 9 in the journal Scientific Reports.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on flu.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does well to quote one independent source who reminds readers that hand-washing, immunization, and antiviral medications remain important in protecting against the flu.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Research published today in Scientific Reports shows that light from RayVio's 293nm ultraviolet (UV) LED is more efficient than sunlight at producing vitamin D3 in skin samples. Tyler Kalajian and his research team, led by Dr. Michael F. Holick, Ph.D., M.D., and supported by Boston University School of Medicine and a Boston University Ignition Award, found that skin samples exposed to RayVio's UV LED for just 0.52 minutes produced more than twice as much vitamin D3 as samples exposed to 32.5 minutes of sunlight.

"We tested ultraviolet LEDs from different sources and at different wavelengths. RayVio's 293nm LED showed the most significant potential for vitamin D3 production in the shortest amount of time," said Dr. Holick, a Professor of Medicine, Physiology and Biophysics at Boston University School of Medicine, and endocrinologist at Boston Medical Center. "This study will lead to a new generation of technology that can be labeled as photopharmacology in which the use of LEDs with targeted wavelengths can cause specific biologic effects in human skin to help treat and prevent chronic illnesses."

Vitamin D deficiency is associated with osteoporosis, rickets and other metabolic bone diseases and is more prevalent in northern and southern latitudes where sunlight is limited for a significant part of the year. This device for making vitamin D is ideally suited for patients with fat malabsorption syndromes including inflammatory bowel disease and gastric bypass surgery.

The research shows that RayVio's UV LEDs could be used for treating patients that are vitamin D deficient. A vitamin D3 producing UV LED device could be used on skin areas that experience less exposure to sunlight such as upper legs and arms and abdomen and back thus minimizing risk for developing non-melanoma skin cancer. The UV LED device also emits a much narrower band of UVB light and thereby decreasing likelihood of skin damage that can occur when the skin is exposed to higher wavelengths of UV radiation.

"The potential of digital UV technology for phototherapy is enormous," said Dr. Robert C. Walker, RayVio's CEO. "Dr. Holick's research with our UVB LEDs demonstrates the potential for new applications that can potentially improve and save hundreds of thousands of lives.

About Vitamin D3 Two forms of vitamin D are important to humans: vitamin D2 produced by plants, yeast and mushrooms, and vitamin D3 produced by skin when exposed to sunlight or the appropriate wavelength of ultraviolet light.

U.S. alone, seventy-five percent of teens and adults are vitamin D deficient. Thanks to the work of the research team and the pioneering work of the Boston University Photonics Center on UV LEDs, we may soon see innovative treatment options like simple integration with a wearable device could aid millions of people."

Co-authors on the paper, all from Boston University, are T.A. Kalajian, A. Aldoukhi, A.J. Veronikis, K. Persons, and M.F. Holick.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Natural sunlight is the main alternative discussed in the news release, since skin samples exposed to sunlight needed much more time to produce comparable levels of vitamin D3 than those exposed to RayVio’s UV LED. The news release also mentions diet, pointing out that vitamin D is also found in plants, yeast and mushrooms. Other foods containing vitamin D include oily fish — like salmon, mackerel, and blue fish — as well as fortified milk and other dairy products.
Another alternative to treat vitamin D deficiency is oral supplementation.
We feel the news release’s comparison to natural sunlight is enough for a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Of course, Hologic has done some selling of its own. The firm, which markets itself as “The Women’s Health Company,” makes other products, including a 2-D digital mammography machine, a test that assesses risk of preterm labor, gynecological products, including Adiana (a permanent contraception technique), and widely used equipment that measures bone density. But 3-D mammography could become its flagship, because for the moment it owns the entire market – although other companies, including powerhouse GE, are developing their own 3-D machines, Hologic is the only one with FDA approval thus far. Of course, given the sluggish economy and the continuing state of uncertainty around American health care, persuading hospitals to upgrade may be challenging. So perhaps it’s not surprising that the company’s PowerPoint presentation to the FDA included the unsubtle phrase “huge breakthrough,” or that the first American patient to undergo 3-D mammography – Laura Lang, a polished 55-year-old Boston marketing executive and breast cancer survivor – did so in front of a CBS camera crew last February.

Indeed they do. They’re catching on like – well, it’s not a slow burn. The device earned Food and Drug Administration approval on February 11, and for a short time it was available only at MGH. Now it is available in at least nine states, three of which have multiple sites, and most of the several dozen hospitals around the United States that assisted with clinical trials are planning to buy systems, too. The images aren’t the only selling point. The early data are compelling as well. In studies presented to the FDA, radiologists reported a 7 percent improvement in their ability to distinguish cancerous from noncancerous cases when they used the new system. If that sounds unimpressive, consider that 39 million women are screened each year; any significant reduction in callbacks for additional testing would mean hundreds of thousands of women would be spared painful, and expensive, follow-up.

Dr. Elizabeth Rafferty is trying not to lapse into rhapsodic cliches. “I don’t want to call it a magic bullet, because that would oversell,” she says. “It’s not a panacea.” Then, five minutes later: “I don’t want to say it’s catching on like wildfire.” After a few minutes more, though, Rafferty can’t help herself. She lets her enthusiasm loose. “People have been waiting for it for a long time,” she says. “It’s a step, but it’s a step by a person who has a stride of 7 feet.” “It” is a 3-D mammography machine, the Selenia Dimensions system, one of which sits in the breast imaging clinic at Massachusetts General Hospital that Rafferty, a radiologist, runs. The machine, which is made by the Bedford company Hologic and developed partly at MGH under Rafferty’s supervision, produces images that are so vivid and clear they seem to speak out loud: “Hey, right here! This is a tumor!” If you look at enough of them, you may become convinced that you don’t need medical training to spot a case of breast cancer or distinguish a false positive on a mammogram from a true one. The distinction seems that clear. “If you can tell the difference as a non-radiologist, imagine how a radiologist feels,” says Rafferty. “The images sort of sell themselves.”

Much of the criticism focused on the data the task force had used to make its decision, which consisted largely of the results from prospective, randomized clinical trials conducted in the United States. Trials like this are the gold standard of medical evidence. They are also expensive and time-consuming, and thus hard to come by. The most recent such trial looking at mammography and mortality in the United States was published in the 1980s. “A lot of the people on the task force are my friends, and I have tremendous respect for them, but this was a big point where we differed,” says Brawley. “The standard type of mammography that’s used all over the country today may very well be better than what was used in that trial. So the outcomes may be better, too.” The studies the task force had chosen to examine showed that screening beginning at age 40 had little impact on mortality while at the same time generating a significant number of false positives. Those data were complete and comprehensive. But, says Brawley, they were outdated.

The task force wasn’t expecting a firestorm. That, however, was what it got. Breast cancer advocacy groups mutinied, saying the guidelines would cause significant numbers of women to go undiagnosed for years, some of them fatally. Politicians started giving scary speeches about rationing health care. Many radiologists – including the MGH department as a whole – rejected the new guidelines. Daniel Kopans, a world leader in breast imaging (he wrote the textbook of that name) and a radiologist at MGH, now says that the panel didn’t “understand mammography screening.” Furthermore, he adds, the new guidelines had “no biological or scientific reason” behind them.

The last time someone tried to improve the way American women are screened for breast cancer, it turned into a national debacle. In November 2009, the US Preventive Services Task Force, a government-backed group of doctors charged with making recommendations that often influence what insurers will pay for, updated its guidelines for mammography. Previously, it had advised women to begin annual or biannual screening at 40. The new guidelines pushed that age to 50, emphasizing that starting earlier should be an individual choice.

Debates about mammography are often so emotionally charged that this type of nuance goes missing. “I think some of our rhetoric – medicine’s in general, and also that of advocates?– has made people think that every metastatic breast cancer is a failure of the woman to get a mammogram or of a doctor to read a mammogram correctly,” says Otis Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society and a professor at Emory University’s School of Medicine in Atlanta. “In reality, yes, mammography does save lives – but it is far from perfect. It’s not as good as many people think it is.” So if the new 3-D mammography isn’t perfect, just how good is it?

But the company, and the rest of us, should be careful not to overhype 3-D mammography. As Rafferty says, it’s not a panacea. The technology does come with costs, financial and medical. A fully equipped 3-D machine runs on average $474,541, not including the annual service fee Hologic charges for maintenance, and even hospitals that already own an upgradeable 2-D system made by Hologic have to pay about $125,000 to get it adapted for 3-D use. There are also costs in the sense of risks: Women who get a combo 2-D and 3-D mammogram, the protocol that confers the most dramatic jump in benefits, are exposed to twice as much X-ray radiation as the norm (albeit still an amount that’s under the FDA’s permitted limit). And no one yet knows if the new technique will actually save lives.

Is Hologic's 3-D mammography machine likely to fare better? There are reasons to think it will. Unlike MRI, which requires an injection with contrast dye and an hour in the imaging machine, it isn’t an ordeal – or at least it’s no worse than a conventional mammogram. (Yes, you still have to endure the dreaded clamp.) And it seems to be more effective than its most similar precursor, the 2-D digital technique. Early data from Rafferty’s trial showed that the same group of women who did benefit from 2-D digital benefited even more dramatically from 3-D. (It’s worth noting that this is not a small group of people. Fifty percent of women are in what the American Cancer Society considers the “intermediate zone” of risk, which overlaps considerably with the group that saw some benefit in DMIST.) Perhaps more important, even the women who didn’t see any improvement in accuracy with 2-D get a small boost with 3-D over film. And 3-D seems to be both more sensitive and more specific – improvement in one area doesn’t have to come at the cost of the other.

But when the definitive trial of 2-D digital techniques, called DMIST, was published in 2005, tracking nearly 50,000 patients, it didn’t provide the answers that advocates had been expecting. Digital mammography did seem to perform more accurately than film in women who were younger than 50, women who were pre- or perimenopausal, and women with dense breast tissue. But when all women were considered as a group, that benefit disappeared. On the whole, it turned out, digital just didn’t live up to the way it had been sold.

When 2-D digital mammography was introduced in 2000, doctors hoped it would vault over those problems. (Well, most of them. The cost concern was still present: Digital mammography machines were five times as expensive as film ones.) The marketing materials suggested it already had. An ad for GE’s 2-D digital system that ran during the Summer Olympics called it a “major new breakthrough in the fight against breast cancer.” Digital technology, the thinking went, would show nuances that film never could, because it could render, literally, many more shades of gray.

The problem, however, was that each time they introduced a new imaging tool for breast cancer, they found that they could not advance on one front without taking a step backward on the other. “First there was ultrasound,” says Rafferty. “We did find more cancers, but we also found so many false positives that it was untenable.” Then there was MRI, which had the same problem – and it was 10 times more expensive than mammography.

Rafferty had already been running trials of 3-D mammography for two years when the task force’s guidelines came out. She understood its concern about false positives – she was trying to address it, herself, albeit in a very different way. In fact, technology developers had been trying in various ways for years to increase mammography’s sensitivity (its ability to flag possible cases of cancer) while also increasing its specificity (its ability to filter out the false positives).

There’s an intuitive argument for why 3-D mammography might be more accurate. The technique works a little like a CT scan does; it takes 15 pictures of the breast at slightly different angles, then fuses them into a single synthesized image. If breast cancers were spherical in shape, they’d look basically the same in all 15 images, or, for that matter, on a conventional 2-D picture. But they’re very rarely shaped that way in reality. “In the breast, in particular, cancer cells tend to creep out single-file along the architecture of the body,” says Rafferty. “And that makes some of them especially hard to see on a [2-D] mammogram. They look like distortions, not blobs.” There’s another thing about cancer that is much clearer on a 3-D mammogram: spicules, or thin, spidery tentacles emerging from the center of a tumor. 2-D images, when taken from the wrong angle, are often too fuzzy to show them. In 3-D, however, the spicules are visible in high resolution – and seeing them is critical, since they are a hallmark of malignancy.

To Rafferty, the existing data are persuasive enough. “I own no stock in Hologic. I have no financial ties to them. And I was skeptical of this idea at first. You think to yourself, it is that simple? That elegant?” she says. “But this really does address the fundamental flaw of mammography. I want every woman to have access to this technology. I got my sisters down here when it was approved. I was like, ‘You’re all going to get this!’ Because in my heart I know it’s better.”

Andy Smith, Hologic’s vice president of imaging science, is similarly hopeful. “It’s expected to improve the cancer detection rate. It is going to reduce the recall rate,” he says, referring to suspicious findings that require women to return for follow-up tests, some of which turn out to be false alarms. “And we will have more numbers on that within one to two years.” This last part, at least, is very likely true. Mammography is heavily regulated, and clinics are required to send their recall statistics – the number of women they call back for second looks – to the federal government. The data on whether 3-D will save more lives than 2-D may not be known immediately. But they will exist.

However, the most meaningful data – the numbers that would show whether 3-D mammography saves women’s lives – won’t be available for decades. Only a prospective, randomized trial with mortality as its “endpoint” can say for sure, and that’s how long it takes to conduct one. Smith knows that that’s the reality. “We are expecting a reduction in morbidity and mortality, but we won’t know that for a long time,” he says. “You know, this technology has only been approved for two months.”

By the time such data do come out, mammography will surely have changed again. There are already efforts to augment it with contrast dyes, to develop a complementary tool called a “gamma camera,” and to augment imperfect human judgment by refining computer programs that can spot tumors as well as a radiologist might.

What this means is that the next time the US Preventive Services Task Force or anyone else wants to take a hard look at mammography, the data it has will once again be outdated. It’s inevitable. Three-D mammography may very well be more accurate than 2-D. It may see more cancers and fewer impostors. But whether it’s truly a “huge breakthrough” by the metric that matters most is a question that can’t currently be answered – and that may be irrelevant by the time it can be. Rafferty may know “in her heart” that 3-D is better. But right now, at least, that’s the only way she truly can.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This article compares existing 2-D mammorgraphy imaging with the new 3-D imaging throughout the piece.  While it does present 3-D imaging as superior because of its ostensibly improved sensitivity and specificity, the article provides no scientific evidence to support that view.
For patients the information that matters most is which imaging mode improves survival.  Both the article and Hologic’s Andy Smith note that a study of whether 3-D imaging improves patient survival versus 2-D imaging will take a long time and “won’t be available for decades.”  Because of that fact, the story had an even greater obligation to provide readers with balanced information about this latest imaging technique and to include any available evidence supporting the superiority of 3-D imaging that this article suggests.
Nonethless, since some attempt at comparison was made, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, July 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Men may one day have a birth-control option other than the condom or vasectomy -- if early research on a new contraceptive gel pans out.

Preliminary findings suggest that when applied to the skin, the gel dramatically lowers sperm counts, thus also lowering -- though not eliminating -- the risk for pregnancy.

This is the first time that a combination of testosterone and a synthetic progestin called Nestorone has been tested as a gel that could be applied topically. Previous research involved administering the combination by injection or via a patch, said study senior author Dr. Christina Wang, a professor of medicine at Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute.

The combination contraceptive needs to undergo further testing before it is commercially available.

Although men have sometimes received a bad rap for not being willing to assume responsibility for birth control, Dr. Joseph Alukal, an assistant professor of urology at NYU Langone Medical Center, in New York City, thinks this reputation may be somewhat undeserved.

"I think [men] would use it more than is realized," said Alukal, who was not involved in the new research. "Plenty of guys are concerned about unwanted pregnancy, almost as much as women."

Unfortunately, condoms and vasectomy have remained the only commercially available contraception options for men.

The results of the study, funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development, were presented at the recent Endocrine Society annual meeting, held in Houston.

According to Wang, the gel was applied in two spots -- the testosterone component on the arm and the progestin component on the abdomen. The gels were applied every day for six months.

The study, conducted in conjunction with the University of Washington, involved 56 men who were assigned to receive one of three types of gels: one gel containing both testosterone plus a gel containing one of two doses of the synthetic progestin; or a gel containing testosterone on its own plus a "placebo" gel with no progestin.

Up to 89 percent of the men who received the combination formulas saw their sperm concentrations plunge to less than 1 million sperm per milliliter, versus just 23 percent of those receiving only testosterone.

Normal sperm concentration is more than 15 million sperm per milliliter, according to the Mayo Clinic's website.

Up to 78 percent of men receiving the drug combination in the study saw their concentrations drop to no sperm at all, versus only 23 percent of men taking testosterone alone.

The testosterone/progestin combination works by shutting off the hormones that control production of sperm in the testes, Wang explained.

One important and unanswered question is what the long-term side effects of this regimen might be.

The answer, said Wang, is "We just don't know."

That's apart from mild-to-moderate acne or an increase in acne, which was seen in about 21 percent of participants.

A new formulation currently being developed that contains half the amount of testosterone might decrease or eliminate that problem, Wang speculated.

Another question is how reversible this would be in terms of restoring sperm counts, Alukal said.

In addition to planning more studies on this combination protocol, Wang is also in early phases of testing the male hormone dimethandrolone, which is more potent than testosterone.

Because the new study was presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

There's more on contraception at the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions condoms and vasectomy as the other contraception options for men. It would have been nice to see some data on how effective these are at preventing unwanted pregnancy and a comparison with the gel tested here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ANN ARBOR, Michigan -- Even as treatment options for laryngeal cancer seemed to improve, survival rates did not. For the most advanced patients, 50 percent survival was the norm, whether patients had surgery to totally remove the voice box or alternative treatment with chemotherapy and radiation to try to avoid surgery.

But the head and neck oncology team at the University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center came up with a different approach: Give patients a single dose of chemotherapy and see who responds to it. The responders can continue with combination chemotherapy and radiation. The non-responders can be referred immediately for surgery.

After a decade of using this approach, researchers are reporting "exceptional" survival rates nearing 80 percent, even for the most advanced patients. The team published their outcomes in JAMA Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery.

"In trying to match the biology of the tumor to the treatment, all of the patients get better outcomes," says study author Gregory T. Wolf, M.D., professor and chair emeritus of otolaryngology - head and neck surgery at Michigan Medicine.

"This approach allows us to enhance quality of life for all of our patients. Many patients can spare their voice box by having chemotherapy and radiation. But that's only good if the treatment works. For patients who must go on to receive surgery, by selecting them up front, we can spare them the complications that may occur when the voice box is removed following multiple cycles of chemotherapy with radiation," adds study author Francis Worden, M.D., professor of hematology/oncology.

The Michigan Medicine team first tested the idea in 1995. They found that patients whose tumor shrunk by more than half after one round of chemotherapy were more likely to do well with chemotherapy and radiation and have an excellent chance of saving their voice box. If the tumor did not respond after that first dose, patients would likely fail on the chemotherapy and would do better going straight to surgery.

In a clinical trial, they saw disease-specific survival rates of 80 percent in patients with advanced disease. This was unheard of. And it wasn't just those who responded to the chemotherapy. The non-responders who were immediately referred for surgery had better outcomes too.

"We adopted the treatment approach and started offering it to all our laryngeal cancer patients," Wolf says. As part of a Specialized Program of Research Excellence, or SPORE, grant, the team was already maintaining long-term follow-up data on patients. Wolf suggested they look back and see if they were still maintaining such strong outcomes with this approach. The results surprised even him.

Over 10 years, 153 stage 3 and 4 laryngeal cancer patients were treated at Michigan Medicine, with about half receiving the induction chemotherapy. The remainder elected to proceed straight to surgery or chemo-radiation without the induction dose.

Average disease specific survival at five years for the induction chemotherapy patients was 79 percent - equivalent to the results in patients with early stage disease, and significantly better than the 66 percent survival for patients who had chemo-radiation without the induction strategy.

"This adds ammunition to the idea that we need to pick individual therapies more carefully. Both chemo-radiation and surgery are difficult treatments with their share of challenging long-term effects. But if we tailor treatments to the individual biology of the tumor and characteristics of the patient, we'll get the best results," Wolf says.

The study did find lower functional preservation of the larynx in the induction chemotherapy group compared to those who elected chemoradiation. Two-thirds of the induction group achieved organ preservation, while more than three-quarters of the chemo-radiation patients did.

Wolf notes, however, that chemoradiation often severely damages the larynx, which may cause problems with eating or swallowing years later.

The induction approach can be done anywhere, but requires intense collaboration among surgeons, medical oncologists and radiation oncologists. All three must be involved to assess the patient and refer to the appropriate therapy.

Even that single dose of chemotherapy can be debilitating and toxic for some patients. Wolf hopes future research will reveal a way to tailor treatment without the need for the induction chemotherapy.

Funding: National Cancer Institute grants P50 CA097248 and P30 CA046592, and the Sinabaldo and Diane Tozzi Research Fund
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Our main take-away from the release is that there are many treatment alternatives and room for patient and physician joint decision-making. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study from Karolinska Institutet in Sweden shows that short-course preoperative radiotherapy combined with delayed surgery reduces the adverse side-effects of rectal cancer surgery without compromising its efficacy. The results are presented in the journal The Lancet Oncology.

Rectal cancer affects some 2,000 men and women in Sweden every year. Preoperative radiotherapy was gradually introduced in the early 1990s, with a consequent improvement in prognosis for people with rectal cancer and reduction in the risk of local recurrence.

"Back then we showed that preoperative radiotherapy reduces the risk of local recurrence by over 50 per cent for patients with rectal cancer," says principal investigator Anna Martling, senior consultant surgeon and professor at Karolinska Institutet's Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery. "Thanks to our results, radiotherapy is recommended to many rectal cancer patients."

However, radiotherapy can cause adverse reactions and the optimal radiotherapeutic method and the interval between it and the ensuing surgery have been mooted. The study now presented in The Lancet Oncology is based on the claim that the adverse effects of rectal cancer treatment can be reduced by administering more but lower doses of radiation for a longer time, or by increasing the interval between radiotherapy and surgery. These hypotheses have now been tested in a study in which rectal cancer patients were randomly assigned to three different treatment arms:
• Delayed surgery with short-course (5x5 Gy) radiotherapy followed by surgery after 4-8 weeks.
• Delayed surgery with long-course (25x2 Gy) radiotherapy followed by surgery after 4-8 weeks.

The results of the study show that patients with delayed surgery develop fewer complications with equally good oncological outcomes. It also showed that there is no difference between long-course and short-course radiotherapy other than that the former considerably lengthens the time for treatment.

"The results of the study will give rise to improved therapeutic strategies, fewer complications with a sustained low incidence of local recurrence, and better survival rates for rectal cancer patients," says Professor Martling. "The results can now be immediately put to clinical use to the considerable benefit of the patients."

Eighteen Swedish hospitals took part in the study, which was financed by the Swedish Research Council and the Cancer Society in Stockholm, and through the regional ALF agreement between Stockholm County Council and Karolinska Institutet. Researchers from the universities in Lund, Uppsala and Linköping also contributed to findings.

Publication: 'The Stockholm III Trial on optimal fractionation of preoperative radiotherapy and timing to surgery for rectal cancer - a randomised controlled trial' Johan Erlandsson, Torbjörn Holm, David Pettersson, Åke Berglund, Björn Cedermark, Calin Radu, Hemming Johansson, Mikael Machado, Fredrik Hjern, Olof Hallböök, Ingvar Syk, Bengt Glimelius, Anna Martling
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The purpose of this study was to compare the timing of existing standard treatment modalities. Complementary and alternative treatments are beyond the scope of the news release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The 161 subjects involved in the study consumed at least three portions of chicken and eggs per week, that were naturally enriched with omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (PUFA), the same nutrients found in oily fish.

The results from the clinical study saw an increase in omega-3-PUFA levels in blood and a positive shift in what is described as the 'omega-3 Index'-a test that measures the amount of the omega-3 fatty acids, Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) and Eicosapentaenoic Acid (EPA) in red blood cell membranes, which reflects the levels in your heart and other tissues.

A low omega-3 Index (<4%) indicates a heightened risk of heart and brain disease. The study showed that consuming omega-3 enriched chicken and eggs resulted in a halving of the number of subjects with such a high-risk omega-3 Index.

The chicken meat and eggs used in the study came from birds offered OmegaPro, a sustainable and algae-based source of omega-3 PUFA, developed by Devenish.

The findings were presented by Professor Alice Stanton of The Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland:

"Greater consumption of oily fish has long been linked to a reduced incidence of heart attack, stroke, diabetes and cancer and improved brain health, vision, muscle and joint health," said Professor Alice Stanton.

"International guidelines recommend eating oily fish at least once per week, however, many people do not eat fish at all and less than 20% of the world's population have optimal omega-3 PUFA levels.

"Therefore, in this project we studied the recently developed alternatives to oily fish or supplementation, namely chicken meat and eggs, naturally enriched with sustainable algae-based omega-3 PUFA.

"Omega-3 enriched chicken and eggs offer consumers an attractive alternative to eating oily fish or to the lifelong taking of supplements, with the potential for substantial health benefits," Professor Stanton said.

Dr. Heather Hayes, Director of Food Innovation with Devenish, said:

"Offering birds a natural and sustainable source of omega-3 PUFA is good for the bird and good for the consumer. Taste panel studies have shown that the omega-3 enriched chicken meat tastes as good, if not better than conventional chicken.

"This science has demonstrated the importance of food nutrients to promote good health and prevent ill health. We are also focusing our research efforts on producing sustainable and nutrient rich pork, beef and milk, with scientifically proven health claims. Omega-3 is just one nutrient that we are interested in-we are working on others too."

"We worked closely with Moy Park, Waitrose and the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, to deliver an innovative, nutrient-rich food, that increases omega-3 levels in consumers, naturally. The science shows the importance of food nutrients to promote good health in consumers and the innovation starts on the farm.

"The farmer has a key role to play in delivering sustainable and nutritious food with a health claim. Devenish is working hard to increase the opportunity for consumers to benefit from this nutrient-rich food, as less than 20% of the world's population is eating enough Omega-3."

Dr. Patrick Wall, Professor of Public Health at University College Dublin, said:

"By enriching the birds' diet, the meat and eggs become naturally enriched with omega-3 PUFA and the associated nutritional benefits are then passed on to consumers.

"Morbidity is unevenly distributed in society and poorer people experience poorer health. By including the omega-3 in chicken and eggs, both very affordable sources of quality protein, all segments of the population can benefit from this approach to using innovative animal nutrition to benefit human health."

Professor Chris Elliott, Founder of the Institute for Global Food Security & Pro Vice Chancellor, Faculty of Medicine, Health & Life Sciences, Queens University Belfast said:

"The cost to the health service of treating cardiovascular related illness in the UK is £10billion/year. Having access to sustainably produced nutrient-rich food, with a scientifically proven health claim, offers huge potential to turn this around globally."

INTERVIEW FOOTAGE WITH PROFESSOR ALICE STANTON, The Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland CAN BE DOWNLOADED VIA: https://vimeo.com/241661898

NOTES TO EDITOR:

DEVENISH

Devenish delivers sustainable and innovative nutritional products and solutions for the feed industry, the food industry and for human health.

Devenish has ten manufacturing sites across Ireland, the UK (Northern Ireland and England), USA (Iowa, Georgia and Minnesota), Turkey and Uganda, as well as offices in UAE, Uganda, Mexico, Philippines, Dominican Republic and India and it exports to over 35 countries worldwide.

Devenish manufactures pre-mix and special feed for pigs, poultry, cattle, sheep, equine, game, companion animals and aquaculture. They also deliver tailored nutritional products and solutions for their customers' specific requirements.

The Devenish strategy, 'One Health, From Soil to Society, focuses on the importance of optimising nutrient utilisation in soil, plant, animal, environmental and human health, as key and interlinked components of the value chain.

THE AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION

The American Heart Association's Scientific Sessions is a global exchange for cardiovascular scientists and clinicians, exploring the future of cardiovascular science and medicine. It is attended by 18,000 delegates from over 100 countries.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give this category a Satisfactory since the alternative to this new, supposedly enhanced feed is regular chicken feed now on the market.  The story also mentions that the primary source of omega-3 fatty acids is oily fish and/or dietary supplements.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Feb. 1, 2010 -- Twelve weeks of fish oil pills made teens at high risk of psychosis much less likely to become psychotic for at least one year.

The finding comes from a placebo-controlled clinical trial that enrolled 81 young people -- average age 16 -- teetering on the brink of psychosis.

A year after entering the study, 11 of the 40 teens treated only with placebo pills developed a psychotic disorder. This happened to only two of 41 teens who began the year with 12 weeks of fish oil capsules rich in omega-3 fatty acids.

No other intervention, including psychiatric drugs, has achieved as much for so long after treatment stopped. Moreover, antipsychotic drugs tend to have serious side effects, including weight gain and sexual dysfunction. Fish oil pills have no serious side effects.

The study suggests that to prevent one case of psychosis, four high-risk young people must be treated. That's the same level of efficacy seen with antipsychotic medications, note study researcher G. Paul Amminger, MD, of the University of Vienna, Austria, and colleagues.

"The finding that treatment with a natural substance may prevent or at least delay the onset of psychotic disorder gives hope that there may be alternatives to antipsychotics for the prodromal phase [symptoms leading up to psychosis onset]," Amminger and colleagues suggest.

Earlier studies have suggested that omega-3 fatty acids can alleviate clinical depression and other psychiatric disorders, although there have been mixed results.

It's not clear whether the fish oil pills help people with established psychosis. Despite having worrisome symptoms, none of the teens in the Amminger study had ever had a full-blown psychosis.

It's also not clear how fish oil might prevent psychiatric disorders.

Amminger and colleagues note that people with schizophrenia tend to have low levels of omega-3 fatty acids, suggesting that the mental illness could be linked to a defect in the ability to process fatty acids. There's also evidence that fatty acids interact with chemical signaling in the brain.

Particularly relevant to the Amminger findings is the suggestion that omega-3 fatty acids protect brain cells from oxidative stress.

Amminger and colleagues warn against over-interpretation of their findings. It may be that fish oil works better in young people with pre-psychotic conditions than in older people with more established psychiatric disorders. They do, however, strongly urge further research.

The study appears in the February issue of Archives of General Psychiatry.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story briefly compares the efficacy of fish oil supplements to antipsychotic medications and “other interventions.” However, more specific information on this would have been useful.  Additionally, it would have been helpful to know that participants in both groups received psychosocial and psychological interventions. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 4, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Among men under 65 with early stage prostate cancer, those who have the prostate gland removed are less likely to die than those who adopt a "watchful waiting" approach, according to a new long-term study out of Europe.

But the findings are not likely to be practice-changing, said Dr. Richard E. Greenberg, chief of urologic oncology at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, who was not involved with the study.

"This is relatively early stage disease, and it shows what we would expect it to show: that those who have more years [to live] have better survival if treated aggressively," he said.

Men with prostate cancer face a confusing maze of options today, including not only surgery but hormone therapy, different kinds of radiation therapy and even simply foregoing medical treatment while monitoring the cancer closely ("watchful waiting," also known as "active surveillance").

"Watchful waiting" is often recommended when a man is not expected to die of the cancer and would like to avoid the risk of the debilitating side effects associated with prostate cancer treatment. These may include: incontinence and erectile dysfunction (surgery); erectile dysfunction and secondary cancers (radiation therapy); nausea, breast growth, liver problems (hormonal therapy); and weakness, hair loss, fluid retention (chemotherapy).

The data presented in the May 5 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine is a 15-year follow-up of a study for which three-years of follow-up had previously been reported.

The earlier study also found that undergoing a radical prostatectomy lowered the risk of the cancer spreading, as well as the death rate from prostate cancer or any other cause.

The researchers, Drs. Anna Bill-Axelson and Lars Holmberg of University Hospital, Uppsala, and colleagues, enrolled nearly 700 men with early prostate cancer under the age of 75 who were randomly selected either to undergo a radical prostatectomy or to stay in "watchful waiting" mode.

After an average follow-up of about 13 years, 14.6 percent of the men who had undergone surgery had died, versus 20.7 percent in the watchful waiting group, a 38 percent reduced risk.

The benefit was primarily seen among men younger than 65 and the authors estimated that seven men under the age of 65 and 8 over the age of 65 would need to be treated to save one life.

There was also a benefit in men whose tumors had low-risk characteristics.

Men whose cancer had moved outside of the prostate gland and who underwent removal of the prostate had a seven times higher risk of dying than men whose tumors hadn't spread.

Radical prostatectomy can come with a price -- including erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence and even bowel incontinence -- although these effects are not as common as techniques improve. A nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy, for example, may be able to prevent erectile dysfunction.

Also, the men in this study were diagnosed only after they had symptoms, unlike the majority of men in the United States, Greenberg said.

"The advantage of screening is that men are more likely to be cured of cancer but they also have a greater chance of not succumbing to the consequences of the surgical complications, whether [those] be erectile dysfunction or urinary incontinence," Greenberg said.

Also, he said, erectile dysfunction can also be a factor of aging and can be treated in most cases.

But much remains to be known about how best to treat different types of prostate cancer.

"The management of early stage prostate cancer continues to require further randomized controlled studies, which are underway, to determine the true benefit of treatment versus expectant management," said Dr. Marc Danziger, an attending urologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, who was not involved with the study.

"Currently, the potential benefit and side effects of treatment needs to be addressed on an individual basis in relation to the risk stratification of disease, patient desires, health status and risk tolerance," Danziger added.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer treatments.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story included a list of the commonly available treatment options for early stage prostate cancer.
But we must give an unsatisfactory score because the story included a factually incorrect statement indicating that watchful waiting is synonymous with active surveillance.  It is not.   The story went on to misinform readers by indicating “watchful waiting is often recommended when a man is not expected to die of the cancer” by failing to complete the thought by explaining that the reason they are not expected to die of the cancer is because their advanced age makes it unlikely that the cancer will have sufficient time to progress to lethality OR because they have other diseases from which they are likely to succumb before there is time for the prostate cancer to be deadly.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using a high sensitivity blood test [1], researchers have identified the optimal level of a protein called troponin that could rule out a diagnosis of heart attack for two-thirds of people attending the emergency department, according to new research published in The Lancet. Using this threshold in routine practice could potentially double the number of patients suitable for immediate discharge directly from the emergency department, say the authors.

"Until now there were no quick ways to rule out a heart attack within the emergency department," explains lead author Dr Anoop Shah from the University of Edinburgh in the UK. "We have identified a cardiac troponin concentration (less than 5 nanograms per deciliter; <5 ng/L) below which patients are at very low risk of heart attack either during the admission or in the ensuing 30 days. These patients are therefore potentially suitable for immediate and safe discharge from the emergency department. These findings could dramatically reduce unnecessary hospital admissions and provide substantial cost savings for healthcare providers."[2]

One of the most common causes of hospitalisation worldwide is acute chest pain. In the UK alone, chest pain is responsible for around 1 million visits to the emergency department every year. International guidelines recommend that individuals presenting with chest pain are admitted to hospital for testing for very high levels of troponin (above the 99th percentile)--a sign that a heart attack has occurred. Current approaches for assessing patients with suspected heart attacks either require admission into hospital or lengthy stays in the emergency department for repeat testing. Until now, whether new high-sensitivity cardiac troponin tests could identify very low-risk patients who may be suitable for immediate and safe discharge from the emergency department was unknown.

The test used in this study is more sensitive than the standard version and can detect far lower levels of troponin in the blood. Using this test, troponin levels were measured in over 6000 patients with chest pain admitted to four hospitals in Scotland and the USA. Dr Shah and colleagues prospectively evaluated the negative predictive value (the probability that patients were not at risk) of heart attack or subsequent death from a heart condition after 30 days for a range of troponin concentrations.

The researchers found that a troponin threshold of <5 ng/L at presentation identified around two-thirds (61%) of patients at very low risk of heart attack and may have been eligible for early, safe discharge--with a high negative predictive value of 99.6%. This high negative predictive value persisted irrespective of age, sex, cardiovascular risk factors, or prior cardiovascular disease. At one year, these patients had a three times lower risk of heart attack and cardiac death than those who had troponin levels 5 ng/L or higher.

According to Dr Shah, "Over the last two decades the number of hospital admissions due to chest pain has tripled. The overwhelming majority of these patients do not have a heart attack. This study shows that low plasma cardiac troponin concentrations at presentation identify up to two-thirds of patients who are at very low risk of heart attack and could be safely discharged from the Emergency Department. Use of this approach is likely to have major benefits for both patients and healthcare providers."[2]

Writing in a linked Comment, Louise Cullen and William Parsonage from the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Queensland, Australia, and Martin Than from Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand, say, "The ultimate validation for the safety and efficacy of discharging patients with cardiac troponin concentrations less than 5 ng/L will be the report of clinical outcomes after this threshold is implemented in routine clinical practice...Finally, what further assessment, if any, is needed for those patients identified as low risk and suitable for early discharge? Trials are needed to assess the safety and effectiveness of clinical pathways that involve no further testing for such patients."

This study was funded by the British Heart Foundation and Chief Scientists Office (Scotland).

[1] A troponin test measures the level of troponin proteins in the blood. These proteins are released when the heart muscle has been damaged, like during a heart attack. The more damage there is to the heart, the greater the amount of troponin there will be in the blood. Even a slight increase in the troponin level will often mean there has been some damage to the heart. Very high levels of troponin are a sign that a heart attack has occurred.

[2] Quotes direct from author and cannot be found in text of Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does a pretty good job of comparing current troponin tests with more sensitive one used for the current study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At issue are controversial spiral CT scans, where a rotating scanner views the lungs at various angles to spot growths when they are about half the size that a standard chest X-ray can detect. Some previous studies have suggested that the earlier detection helps, while other research concluded it may do more harm than good by spotting too many benign growths.

The massive National Lung Screening Trial enrolled 53,000 current or former smokers to try to settle the debate. It found 20 percent fewer deaths from lung cancer among those screened with spiral CTs than among those given chest X-rays, the NCI said Thursday, a difference significant enough that it ended the study early.

The actual number of deaths averted was fairly modest - 354 died in the spiral CT group over the eight-year study period compared with 442 deaths among those who got chest X-rays.

The NCI said it is not clear that all smokers should get the scans, which are not risk-free.

The best advice for avoiding lung cancer remains to quit smoking, said NCI Director Dr. Harold Varmus.

Still, "a validated approach that can reduce lung cancer mortality by even 20 percent has the potential to spare very significant numbers of people from the ravages of this disease," he said.

About 200,000 new lung cancers are diagnosed in the U.S. each year, and the disease kills about 159,000 people annually. It is most often diagnosed at advanced stages, and the average five-year survival rate is just 15 percent.

Many smokers already had sought out spiral CTs, even though the American Cancer Society hasn't recommended the test - citing a lack of clear evidence that they work - and most insurance doesn't cover the $300 to $400 cost.

The scans aren't risk-free: They frequently mistake scar tissue from an old infection or some other benign lump for cancer, leading to unnecessary biopsies or surgery that in turn can cause a collapsed lung, infection or other problems.

The NCI still is compiling rates of false alarms and other risks from the study.

Nor is it clear if the study results are applicable to all smokers. The trial enrolled people ages 55 to 74 who were or had been very heavy smokers and gave them one scan a year for three years.

While the spiral CTs emit less radiation than standard CT scans used to diagnose disease, researchers also will analyze whether the radiation exposures from three scans changes a smoker's lifetime risk of other radiation-related cancers. Letters being mailed to study participants advise them to discuss with their doctors whether they should have additional scans or not.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 


This story highlights advice that quitting is the best way for smokers to avoid lung cancer.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The cancer drug that former president Jimmy Carter says made his melanoma seemingly disappear has helped about 40 percent of similar patients survive for as long as three years, oncologists said Wednesday.

The drug, called Keytruda, takes a new approach to treating cancer by stopping tumor cells from cloaking themselves against the normal, healthy immune system response.

New data about to be released to a meeting of cancer specialists shows that 40 percent of the patients who have been taking the drug are still alive three years later. That compares to about 5 percent of patients given the standard therapy, interleukin, the American Society for Clinical Oncology (ASCO) says.

That means 60 percent of patients are not living that long — but it’s still far more than the usual 11-month survival with advanced melanoma.

“It is definitely a huge benefit over what we have seen in the past,” said ASCO president Dr. Julie Vose, a specialist in blood cancers at the University of Nebraska Medical Center.

Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer. It will be diagnosed in more than 76,000 Americans this year, according to the American Cancer Society, and it will kill 10,000.

Rates are rising, in part because tanning became fashionable. Melanoma is easy to cure when caught early, but it is often hard to tell if a mole or freckle has turned cancerous. Carter, for example, was only diagnosed once the tumors had spread to his brain, last fall.

That’s Stage IV cancer and it’s almost always deadly at that stage. But Carter has remained well enough to continue teaching his weekly Sunday school classes and said this past Sunday he’d just traveled to London.

He says there’s no trace of his cancer now.

“In the past, patients with this type of melanoma — he has metastases to the brain — you don’t even see responses to therapy,” Vose told NBC News. “This is something really different than what we have seen in the past.”

Other people are having similar experiences.

For the trial, Caroline Robert of Gustave Roussy and Paris-Sud University in France and colleagues treated 655 patients with advanced melanoma.

"These are patients whose disease cannot be surgically removed, cannot be cured by surgery and usually the majority of these patients have disease that involved vital organs," said Dr. Stephen Hodi, a melanoma specialist at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute who worked on the study.

Seventy-five percent of them had already been given other cancer treatments, including Yervoy, known generically as ipilimumab.

On average, the patients lived two years and 40 percent of them are still alive three years later. About 15 percent of these patients have what’s called a complete remission, meaning there is no trace of their tumors. That doesn’t mean a cure — it’s too soon to say that — but it does mean months or years of cancer-free life that they otherwise could not have hoped for.

And 61 of the patients, or 9 percent, have stopped taking the drug after their tumors went away. Virtually all of them are still in remission.

“This is huge in the melanoma community,” said Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation.

“It's difficult to know at what point you call it a cure. For the patient, though, it means they are cancer-free and for some of those patients, it is likely that their cancer never will come back,” Turnham told NBC News.

“When this study was started the average life expectancy of someone with advanced melanoma was 11 months and now we're seeing that a large percentage of people are living at least three years.”

Keytruda — known generically as pembrolizumab — targets the activity of genes called PD-1 (anti-programmed-death-receptor-1) and PD-L1. The interaction between the two genes lets some tumors escape detection and destruction by immune system cells.

PD-1 stops immune cells from attacking normal healthy cells by mistake. Tumor cells make PD-L1 turn on PD-1 when immune cells approach. Keytruda, an engineered immune protein called a monoclonal antibody, disrupts this signal and lets the immune cells attack the tumor cell.

The drug works far better in patients whose tumors express more PD-1, meaning they have a lot of PD-1 activity, so the drug will optimally be used jointly with a test for PD-1. There are side-effects, including fatigue, itchiness and rash. It was bad enough for 8 percent of patients that they stopped taking it.

The Food and Drug Administration gave Keytruda accelerated approval for melanoma in 2014. It's got breakthrough therapy designation for Hodgkin's lymphoma and colon cancer and got accelerated approval for lung cancer.

“In a matter of a few years, these therapies have truly transformed the outlook for patients with melanoma and many other hard-to-treat cancers,” said Dr. Don Dizon, an oncologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and a spokesman for ASCO.

Keytruda's being tested in other cancer types now.

Earlier Wednesday, the FDA gave accelerated approval to a drug that works in a similar way.

It approved Tecentriq, known generically as atezolizumab, for use in patients with advanced bladder cancer.

Like Keytruda, Tecentriq is a monoclonal antibody. It goes straight to PD-L1, so its target is slightly different.

FDA’s approval was made on the basis of a trial that showed 12 percent of patients with advanced bladder cancer who had high levels of PD-L1 activity saw their tumors disappear, compared to 5.5 percent of patients on other treatments. Another 14 percent had a partial response, meaning their tumors shrank a little, compared to 9.4 percent on standard treatment.

The drugs must be infused and they are pricey. Keytruda costs about $12,500 a month, or $150,000 a year.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says the majority of participants in the study had Stage IV disease and had limited treatment options. It also briefly discusses the other alternative treatment, i.e. ipilimumab.
While this is Satisfactory for this criterion, we would have liked to see more general information about how melanoma is treated, including surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many more people facing surgery for knee problems would be better off with a partial rather than total knee replacement, which should allow them to recover faster, say experts.



Partial replacements are also cheaper, say researchers from Oxford University. The NHS, however, needs to get the support of surgeons, many of whom rarely carry out the less invasive procedure.

Partial replacements, also known as unicompartmental replacements, are suitable for people who have arthritis in just one side of the knee, usually the inner. They can be carried out with a smaller incision using minimally invasive surgery, but they are only suitable for people whose ligaments inside the knee are strong.



Researchers from the Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences (NDORMS) publishing in the BMJ Open journal found that the less invasive procedure was being used less than it could be.

The main reason for the surgery is osteoarthritis. About half of all patients should be suitable for a partial replacement, but an analysis of data routinely collected by the National Joint Registry showed that of 98,147 knee replacements undertaken in 2016, only 9% were partial.

“The main strength of this study is that we were able to use real data, from very large numbers of people, about their actual operations, their GP visit, and their own reported quality of life outcomes in a way that is not always possible,” said Dr Rafael Pinedo-Villanueva, the co-lead researcher and NDORMS senior health economist, who is funded by the National Institute of Health Research Oxford Biomedical Research Centre and the Medical Research Council.

“This has allowed us to provide strong proof that partial knee replacements are both better for patients and cheaper for the NHS.”

Whether people had a partial or total replacement varied by surgeon, as did the success of the operation, the researchers discovered. Those surgeons who carried out more partial replacements had better outcomes from them than surgeons who did fewer.

“This is an important finding,” said co-lead researcher Prof David Murray. “If surgeons aim to use partial knees in a quarter or more of their knee replacements this will substantially improve the results of knee replacement and will save money. In addition, more partial knee replacements will be done and more patients will benefit from this procedure.”

Ed Burn, first author of the paper, said they needed to get surgeons on board. “For patients and the NHS to see the benefits of partial replacements, we need the buy-in of surgeons, who would need to feel comfortable performing a greater proportion of their knee replacements as partials,” he said.

“If we see surgeons carrying out this procedure more often, the proportion of knee replacements that are partials would increase from the current figure of 9% and we would see an increase in future economic and population health gains.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: If, as we noted under “Disease Mongering,” the story is focused only on patients that require either partial or total knee replacement, then the only alternatives are, well, partial or total knee replacement. And the story refers explicitly to both.
But there are nuances missing. The partial procedure is thought to be a simpler one. As such, it may lead patients to undergo surgery at an earlier stage than they may otherwise have if they had the full replacement. As such, an alternative of waiting would be reasonable. This really is the challenge. There are few things between conservative measures and surgery for patients with knee arthritis.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Women undergo more cesarean sections each year in the United States than any other major surgery, with the procedure carrying a significant rate of infection at the incision site.

A new study from Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis offers strong guidance on the best way to reduce the infection risk. Rather than prepping patients with iodine-alcohol — a common antiseptic combination in C-sections — the research indicates that chlorhexidine-alcohol is significantly more effective. The researchers argue that the evidence is strong enough to change standard skin-prep practices for C-sections.

The study appears online Feb. 4 in The New England Journal of Medicine and coincides with a presentation at the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine’s Annual Meeting in Atlanta.

“One of the biggest complications of surgery, and of C-sections in particular, is infection,” said first author Methodius G. Tuuli, MD, assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology. “For a new mother who needs to care for her baby — which is stressful even when all things are equal — having an infection can really impair her ability to do that. We are very interested in clarifying the best ways to prevent these infections, reducing the burden on the patients, on their infants and on the health-care system as a whole.”

An estimated 1.3 million women in the U.S. delivered their babies by C-section in 2013, with surgical-site infections complicating 5 to 12 percent of those deliveries. The average cost of treating those cesarean-related infections in the hospital is $3,500 and may be much higher for severe infections.

The research shows that patients in the chlorhexidine-alcohol group developed significantly fewer infections than patients in the iodine-alcohol group. Those who received the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination had a 4 percent infection rate, which is nearly half that of the patients who received the iodine-alcohol combination — 7.3 percent.

The clinical trial included 1,147 patients who underwent cesarean sections at Barnes-Jewish Hospital from 2011 to 2015. Of 572 patients randomly assigned to receive the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination, 23 developed an infection at the site of the surgery within 30 days of the procedure. Of 575 patients who randomly received the iodine-alcohol combination, 42 developed a surgical-site infection.

The investigators pointed out that all other standard procedures for reducing the risk of infection after surgery, including giving preventive antibiotics beforehand, were the same in both groups.

Studies of other types of surgeries also have suggested the superiority of chlorhexidine over iodine in preventing infection. But according to Tuuli, the unique circumstances of a C-section — that bacteria come from both skin and vagina and that a woman’s immune system is altered during pregnancy — mean the results of these studies may not apply.

In addition, past trials comparing antiseptics before surgery included relatively few participants and often compared a chlorhexidine-alcohol combination with iodine alone. These studies could not determine whether the worse performance of iodine alone was due to the chlorhexidine, the alcohol or the combination.

Although the new study was conducted at only one hospital, the researchers said the patient population was racially diverse and that more than 60 percent received public insurance. Tuuli and his colleagues also pointed out that the superiority of the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination was consistent whether the C-section was scheduled or unscheduled, whether or not the patient was obese, whether staples or sutures were used to close the wound and whether the patient had chronic medical conditions, including diabetes.

Highlighting the significance of the findings, the study’s senior author, George A. Macones, MD, the Mitchell and Elaine Yanow Professor and head of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, said, “This study is a tremendous addition to the literature on preventing surgical-site infections after cesarean. There are few circumstances when a single study should change our practice. But based on the biological plausibility and the striking reduction in surgical-site infections with chlorhexidine, this is one of those circumstances.”

This work was supported by a Women’s Reproductive Health Research Career Development grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant number 1K12HD063086-01; and by the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.

Tuuli MG, Liu J, Stout MJ, Martin S, Cahill AG, Odibo AO, Colditz GA, Macones GA. A randomized trial comparing skin antiseptic agents at cesarean delivery. New England Journal of Medicine. Feb. 4, 2016.

Washington University School of Medicine’s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study compares an alternative method of skin preparation to the current standard and also mentions antibiotics. Soap and water could be another alternative, as could foregoing an elective C-section, but it’s probably too big a digression to mention these when reporting on a head-to-head study on antiseptics.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - There may be a seed of truth amidst the many health claims for pomegranate juice, researchers from Israel said Thursday, at least for kidney patients on dialysis.

They found that such patients who gulped a few cups of the tart liquid every week lowered their chances of infections, the second-leading killer of the more than 350,000 Americans on dialysis.

The findings were presented at the American Society of Nephrology’s meeting in Denver — aka Renal Week — and have not yet been vetted by independent experts.

“It’s a very intriguing study,” said Dr. Frank Brosius, who heads the nephrology division at the University of Michigan Health System and was not involved in the research.

“I certainly don’t know of anything else that would have such a profound effect,” he told Reuters Health, cautioning at the same time that the study needed to be replicated by other centers.

The results come in the wake of a U.S. crackdown on allegedly false advertising by POM Wonderful, which claims its pomegranate products can help everything from heart disease to prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction.

The Israeli researchers, led by Dr. Batya Kristal of Western Galilee Hospital in Nahariya, did not use POM juice, but a brand sold by Naturafood.

In lab tests, Kristal told Reuters Health, that brand ranked highest in polyphenol antioxidants, which can reduce cell damage caused by so-called free radicals.

Antioxidants are found in different levels in fruits and vegetables, such as blueberries or broccoli.

“Pomegranate juice was shown in the last three years to contain the highest levels of polyphenols among a variety of products,” Kristal said. “Much higher than red wine, for instance.”

The researchers figured an antioxidant-rich diet might help patients with kidney failure, because the level of free radicals in their blood increases as the blood circulates through the dialysis device. That, in turn, may rev up inflammation in their tissues.

In the study, funded by the Israeli Ministry of Health, 101 patients were randomly assigned to either a concoction without pomegranate juice, or the real thing.

After downing about half a cup three times a week over a year, those who drank the real thing had a reduction of inflammatory molecules in their blood.

They also made fewer trips to the hospital.

“We found significant reductions in hospitalization due to infections, with more than 40 percent reduction in the first hospitalization and 80 percent in the second,” said Kristal.

However, the researchers were only able to rule out chance as the cause of the reduction in the second visit to the hospital.

According to the findings, among 50 patients drinking pomegranate juice for a year, about two would have to go to the hospital at least twice. By comparison, that number would be nearly 11 in patients not drinking the juice.

The researchers say they don’t know if their results extend to other brands as well, and suggest squeezing your own juice. A 16-oz bottle of POM Wonderful sells for about $4.

She said her team had found no side effects, but added that kidney patients should be aware of the high potassium content in the juice, given the delicate balance of nutrients in their blood, and talk to their doctor if they consider drinking it.

Brosius was skeptical of the benefits, although he said the juice was unlikely to cause harm.

“I would prefer to see this validated at other centers before we come out and say this is the thing to do,” he said. Even if the findings hold up, he said, it is still unclear what accounts for them. “Who the heck knows what the active ingredients are?”

Marion Nestle, a nutrition expert at New York University, said the effects might not be unique to pomegranate juice.

“This study does not demonstrate anything special about pomegranate juice,” she told Reuters Health in an e-mail. “The effects of juice were compared to a placebo, not to any other kind of juice that might have exactly the same effect.”

“The pomegranate people are spending millions to prove what I could have told them in the first place,” she added. “Pomegranate juices — like most if not all fruit and vegetable juices — have antioxidant activity. Does this make pomegranates better than any other fruit? Investigators have yet to show this.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Again, the Marion Nestle concluding quote was key:  “Pomegranate juices — like most if not all fruit and vegetable juices — have antioxidant activity. Does this make pomegranates better than any other fruit? Investigators have yet to show this.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, March 29, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- If you're looking to lose those extra pounds, you should probably add reducing stress and getting the right amount of sleep to the list, say researchers from Kaiser Permanente's Center for Health Research in Portland.

In fact, although diet and exercise are the usual prescription for dropping pounds, high stress and too little sleep (or too much of it) can hinder weight loss even when people are on a diet, the researchers report.

"We found that people who got more than six but less than eight hours of sleep, and who reported the lowest levels of stress, had the most success in a weight-loss program," said study author Dr. Charles Elder.

Elder speculates if you are sleeping less or more than recommended and if your stress levels are high, you will not be able to focus on making behavioral changes.

These factors may also have a biological impact, he added.

"If you want to lose weight, things that will help you include reducing stress and getting the right amount of sleep," Elder said.

The report, funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health, is published in the March 29 online edition of the International Journal of Obesity.

In this two-step trial, 472 obese adults were first counseled about lifestyle changes over a 26-week period. Recommendations included cutting 500 calories a day, eating a diet rich in fruits, vegetables and whole grains by following the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet approach, and exercising at least three hours a week.

In addition, the researchers asked the participants questions about sleep time, depression, insomnia, screen time and stress.

During this part of the trial, the participants lost an average of almost 14 pounds. The 60 percent of the participants who lost at least 10 pounds went on to take part in the next phase of the trial. Those in the second phase of the trial continued their diet and exercise program.

Elder's team found the right amount of sleep and stress reduction at the start of the trial predicted successful weight loss. Lower stress by itself predicted more weight loss during the first phase of the trial, they added.

Declines in stress and depression were also important in continuing to lose weight during both phases of the trial, as were exercise minutes and keeping food diaries, Elder's group found.

Dr. David L. Katz, director of the Prevention Research Center at Yale University School of Medicine, said that "while we often tend to look at health one condition at a time, the reality is that health is best viewed holistically."

"People who are healthy and vital tend to be healthy and vital not because of any one factor, but because of many. And the factors that promote health -- eating well, being active, not smoking, sleeping enough, controlling stress, to name a few --promote all aspects of health," he added.

This study shows that people are more likely to lose weight when not impeded by sleep deprivation, stress or depression, he said.

"Anyone who has ever tried to lose weight probably could have said much the same from personal experience. Similarly, weight loss reduced stress and depression. This, too, is suggested by sense and common experience, as it is affirmed by the science reported here," Katz said.

The important message is that weight loss should not be looked at with tunnel vision, Katz said.

"Improving sleep may be as important to lasting weight control efforts as modifying diet or exercise. Managing stress is about physical health, as well as mental health. This study encourages weight loss in a more holistic context," he said.

Another study presented earlier this month at the American Heart Association scientific sessions held in Atlanta found that people of normal weight eat more when they sleep less.

Columbia University researchers discovered that sleep-deprived adults ate almost 300 calories more a day on average than those who got enough sleep. And the extra calories mostly came from saturated fat, which can spell trouble for waistlines.

The researchers came to their conclusions -- which should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal -- after following 13 men and 13 women of normal weight. They monitored the eating habits of the participants as they spent six days sleeping four hours a night and then six days sleeping nine hours a night (or the reverse).

"If sustained, the dietary choices made by people undergoing short sleep could predispose them to obesity and increased risk of cardiovascular disease," the researchers wrote in an American Heart Association news release.

For more information on obesity, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: One of the strengths of this story in comparison with its shorter LA Times competition is the context it provided, much of it from an independent expert who said:
“People who are healthy and vital tend to be healthy and vital not because of any one factor, but because of many. And the factors that promote health — eating well, being active, not smoking, sleeping enough, controlling stress, to name a few –promote all aspects of health. …The important message is that weight loss should not be looked at with tunnel vision. … This study encourages weight loss in a more holistic context.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Jan. 1, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Three-quarters of patients undergoing surgery for stubborn sinusitis saw significant improvements in their quality of life, new research shows.

Most of the remaining 25 percent also saw some improvement, just not as dramatic, said Dr. Timothy Smith, lead author of a study appearing in the January issue of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery.

"Certainly this reinforces our belief that sinus surgery increases the quality of life of patients, and I see that clinically as well as scientifically," added Dr. Jordan S. Josephson, a sinus and allergy specialist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Previous studies have been single-center studies, and this is a bigger study using multiple centers and using a fairly large population, so it further says sinus surgery is a really good thing to do if you need it."

Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) affects a sizable minority -- 14 percent to 16 percent -- of U.S. residents. The condition, marked by symptoms such as sinus pain and pressure, headache, stuffy nose and sneezing, can compromise quality of life more than even congestive heart failure, back pain or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the study authors said.

Endoscopic sinus surgery has been performed in the United States since the mid-1980s, said Smith, who is director of the Oregon Sinus Center at Oregon Health & Science University in Portland.

"It's a minimally invasive type of surgery performed with a telescope that goes into the nostril," then basically snips away abnormal and interfering tissue while leaving normal tissue behind, Smith explained.

Smith and his co-authors studied 302 patients with CRS from three academic medical centers, following them for an average of a year and a half after their surgery.

"These were patients who have chronic sinusitis so, by definition, they have at least three months of symptoms and they have evidence of an ongoing inflammation or infection of their nose and sinuses on either a CT scan or an examination of the nose and sinuses," Smith said.

Following the surgery, about 76 percent of patients had "clinically significant" improvement in quality of life, as measured by various validated scales.

Patients with worse disease at the outset seemed to fare the best after the procedure, as did those undergoing surgery for the first time. This second finding is probably explained by the fact that people going for second or further surgeries were probably sicker to begin with, Josephson said.

None of which is to say that patients shouldn't try medical therapies first, he added.

"I don't think it means everyone with CRS should consider surgery. They should try medical therapy, and if medical therapy fails and the surgeon feels that part of the problem is anatomic, then surgery would be a good tool for them to use," Josephson said. "Some people with stage 1 and 2 diseases may even get cured. This is a wonderful renewed hope of feeling better."

The U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases has more on sinusitis.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Although the story mentions that medical therapy can be an effective alternative to surgery, more information on the specific medications, including nasal steroids, oral decongestants and antihistamines, would have helped readers. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — June 15, 2016/Novato and Los Angeles, CA Results from quantitative MRI and neuropsychological testing show unprecedented improvements in ten patients with early Alzheimer’s disease (AD) or its precursors following treatment with a programmatic and personalized therapy. Results from an approach dubbed metabolic enhancement for neurodegeneration are now available online in the journal Aging.

The study, which comes jointly from the Buck Institute for Research on Aging and the UCLA Easton Laboratories for Neurodegenerative Disease Research is the first to objectively show that memory loss in patients can be reversed, and improvement sustained, using a complex, 36-point therapeutic personalized program that involves comprehensive changes in diet, brain stimulation, exercise, optimization of sleep, specific pharmaceuticals and vitamins, and multiple additional steps that affect brain chemistry.

“All of these patients had either well-defined mild cognitive impairment (MCI), subjective cognitive impairment (SCI) or had been diagnosed with AD before beginning the program,” said author Dale Bredesen, MD, a professor at the Buck Institute and professor at the Easton Laboratories for Neurodegenerative Disease Research at UCLA, who noted that patients who had had to discontinue work were able to return to work and those struggling at their jobs were able to improve their performance. “Follow up testing showed some of the patients going from abnormal to normal.”

One of the more striking cases involved a 66-year old professional man whose neuropsychological testing was compatible with a diagnoses of MCI and whose PET scan showed reduced glucose utilization indicative of AD. An MRI showed hippocampal volume at only the 17th percentile for his age. After 10 months on the protocol a follow-up MRI showed a dramatic increase of his hippocampal volume to the 75th percentile, with an associated absolute increase in volume of nearly 12 percent.

In another instance, a 69-year old professional man and entrepreneur, who was in the process of shutting down his business, went on the protocol after 11 years of progressive memory loss. After six months, his wife, co-workers and he noted improvement in memory. A life-long ability to add columns of numbers rapidly in his head returned and he reported an ability to remember his schedule and recognize faces at work. After 22 months on the protocol he returned for follow-up quantitative neuropsychological testing; results showed marked improvements in all categories with his long-term recall increasing from the 3rd to 84th percentile. He is expanding his business.

Another patient, a 49-year old woman who noted progressive difficulty with word finding and facial recognition went on the protocol after undergoing quantitative neuropsychological testing at a major university. She had been told she was in the early stages of cognitive decline and was therefore ineligible for an Alzheimer’s prevention program. After several months on the protocol she noted a clear improvement in recall, reading, navigating, vocabulary, mental clarity and facial recognition. Her foreign language ability had returned. Nine months after beginning the program she did a repeat of the neuropsychological testing at the same university site. She no longer showed evidence of cognitive decline.

All but one of the ten patients included in the study are at genetic risk for AD, carrying at least one copy of the APOE4 allele. Five of the patients carry two copies of APOE4 which gives them a 10-12 fold increased risk of developing AD. “We’re entering a new era,” said Bredesen. “The old advice was to avoid testing for APOE because there was nothing that could be done about it. Now we’re recommending that people find out their genetic status as early as possible so they can go on prevention.” Sixty-five percent of the Alzheimer’s cases in this country involve APOE4; with seven million people carrying two copies of the ApoE4 allele.

Bredesen’ s systems-based approach to reverse memory loss follows the abject failure of monotherapies designed to treat AD and the success of combination therapies to treat other chronic illnesses such as cardiovascular disease, cancer and HIV. Bredesen says decades of biomedical research, both in his and other labs, has revealed that an extensive network of molecular interactions is involved in AD pathogenesis, suggesting that a broader-based therapeutic approach may be more effective. “Imagine having a roof with 36 holes in it, and your drug patched one hole very well—the drug may have worked, a single ‘hole’ may have been fixed, but you still have 35 other leaks, and so the underlying process may not be affected much,” Bredesen said. “We think addressing multiple targets within the molecular network may be additive, or even synergistic, and that such a combinatorial approach may enhance drug candidate performance, as well.”

While encouraged by the results of the study, Bredesen admits more needs to be done. “The magnitude of improvement in these ten patients is unprecedented, providing additional objective evidence that this programmatic approach to cognitive decline is highly effective,” Bredesen said. “Even though we see the far-reaching implications of this success, we also realize that this is a very small study that needs to be replicated in larger numbers at various sites.” Plans for larger studies are underway.

Cognitive decline is often listed as the major concern of older adults. Already, Alzheimer’s disease affects approximately 5.4 million Americans and 30 million people globally. Without effective prevention and treatment, the prospects for the future are bleak. By 2050, it’s estimated that 160 million people globally will have the disease, including 13 million Americans, leading to potential bankruptcy of the Medicare system. Unlike several other chronic illnesses, Alzheimer’s disease is on the rise--recent estimates suggest that AD has become the third leading cause of death in the United States behind cardiovascular disease and cancer.

THE BREDESEN PROTOCOL, Dr. Bredesen’s book describing for a lay audience the interventions described in this paper, will be released by Penguin Random House in May 2017. Dr. Bredesen hopes to eventually transform the perception and reality of Alzheimer’s disease from a death sentence to a preventable reversible condition.

Other collaborators on the study include Edwin C. Amos, Jonathan Canick, Mary Ackerley, Cyrus Raji, Milan Fiala, and Jamila Ahdidan. Multiple entities provided support for the research which supported the study. They include the National Institutes of Health (AG16570, AG034427 and AG036975). Please see paper for the complete list.

The Buck Institute for Research on Aging is the U.S.’s first independent research organization devoted to Geroscience – focused on the connection between normal aging and chronic disease. Based in Novato, CA, The Buck is dedicated to extending “Healthspan”, the healthy years of human life and does so utilizing a unique interdisciplinary approach involving laboratories studying the mechanisms of aging and those focused on specific diseases. Buck scientists strive to discover new ways of detecting, preventing and treating age-related diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, cancer, cardiovascular disease, macular degeneration, osteoporosis, diabetes and stroke. In their collaborative research, they are supported by the most recent developments in genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics and stem cell technologies. For more information: www.thebuck.org

The Easton Laboratories for Neurodegenerative Disease Research are part of the UCLA Department of Neurology which encompasses more than 26 disease-related research programs. This includes all of the major categories of neurological diseases and methods, encompassing neurogenetics and neuroimaging as well as health services research. The 140 faculty members of the Department are distinguished scientists and clinicians who have been ranked #1 in NIH funding for 9 consecutive years beginning in 2002. The Department is dedicated to understanding the human nervous system and improving the lives of people with neurological diseases, focusing on three key areas: patient/clinical care, research, and education. For more information, see http://www.neurology.ucla.edu/
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release gives the briefest nod to an alternative, stating that the protocol to reverse memory loss “follows the abject failure” of single-drug therapies for Alzheimer’s. In reality, many interventions, not only drugs, have been tried and none have been found to work.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Note: A media teleconference with researchers and patients from Johns Hopkins and New York University will be held on Wednesday, Nov. 30, from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. ET. To participate, U.S.-based media may call 855-698-2663; international media should dial 011-646-754-2524. The access code is 48330192. Phone lines open at 10:50 a.m., and all media should place speakers on mute unless posing a question. Reporters wishing to ask a question should email their name and outlet to david.march@nyumc.org during the briefing so they may be placed in a queue; the moderator will call on individual media members to ask a question in the order names and outlets were received.

In a small double-blind study, Johns Hopkins researchers report that a substantial majority of people suffering cancer-related anxiety or depression found considerable relief for up to six months from a single large dose of psilocybin -- the active compound in hallucinogenic "magic mushrooms."

The researchers cautioned that the drug was given in tightly controlled conditions in the presence of two clinically trained monitors and said they do not recommend use of the compound outside of such a research or patient care setting.

The Johns Hopkins team released its study results, involving 51 adult patients, concurrently with researchers from New York University Langone Medical Center, who conducted a similarly designed study on 29 participants. Both studies are published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology on Dec. 1.

The Johns Hopkins group reported that psilocybin decreased clinician- and patient-rated depressed mood, anxiety and death anxiety, and increased quality of life, life meaning and optimism. Six months after the final session of treatment, about 80 percent of participants continued to show clinically significant decreases in depressed mood and anxiety, with about 60 percent showing symptom remission into the normal range. Eighty-three percent reported increases in well-being or life satisfaction. Some 67 percent of participants reported the experience as one of the top five meaningful experiences in their lives, and about 70 percent reported the experience as one of the top five spiritually significant lifetime events.

"The most interesting and remarkable finding is that a single dose of psilocybin, which lasts four to six hours, produced enduring decreases in depression and anxiety symptoms, and this may represent a fascinating new model for treating some psychiatric conditions," says Roland Griffiths, Ph.D., professor of behavioral biology in the Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and of Neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. He notes that traditional psychotherapy offered to people with cancer, including behavioral therapy and antidepressants, can take weeks or even months, isn't always effective, and in the case of some drugs, such as benzodiazepines, may have addictive and other troubling side effects.

Griffiths says his team's new study grew out of a decade of research at Johns Hopkins on the effects of psilocybin in healthy volunteers, which found that psilocybin can consistently produce positive changes in mood, behavior and spirituality when administered to carefully screened and prepared participants. The study was designed to see if psilocybin could produce similar results in psychologically distressed cancer patients.

"A life-threatening cancer diagnosis can be psychologically challenging, with anxiety and depression as very common symptoms," says Griffiths. "People with this kind of existential anxiety often feel hopeless and are worried about the meaning of life and what happens upon death."

For the study, the investigators recruited 51 participants diagnosed with life-threatening cancers, most of which were recurrent or metastatic. They were chosen from a total of 566 individuals reached through flyers, web advertisements and physician referrals. Most participants had breast, upper digestive, GI, genitourinary or blood cancer, and each had been given a formal psychiatric diagnosis, including an anxiety or depressive disorder.

Half of the participants were female with an average age of 56. Ninety-two percent were white, 4 percent were African-American and 2 percent were Asian.

Each participant had two treatment sessions scheduled five weeks apart, one with a very low psilocybin dose (1 or3 milligrams per 70 kilograms) taken in a capsule and meant to act as a "control" placebo because the dose was too low to produce effects. In the other session, participants received a capsule with what is considered a moderate or high dose (22 or 30 milligrams per 70 kilograms).

To minimize expectancy effects, the participants and the staff members supervising the sessions were told that the participants would receive psilocybin on both sessions, but they did not know that all participants would receive one high and one low dose. Blood pressure and mood were monitored throughout the sessions. Two monitors aided participants during each session, encouraging them to lie down, wear an eye mask, listen to music through headphones and direct their attention on their inner experience. If anxiety or confusion arose, the monitors provided reassurance to the participants.

In addition to experiencing changes in visual perception, emotions and thinking, most participants reported experiences of psychological insight and often profound, deeply meaningful experiences of the interconnectedness of all people.

The researchers assessed each participant's mood, attitude about life, behaviors and spirituality with questionnaires and structured interviews before the first session, seven hours after taking the psilocybin, five weeks after each session and six months after the second session. Immediately after the sessions, participants completed questionnaires assessing changes in visual, auditory and body perceptions; feelings of transcendence; changes in mood; and more.

Structured clinical interviews, such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, and patient questionnaires, like the Beck Depression Inventory and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, assessed depression and anxiety. Other questionnaires assessed quality of life, death acceptance, meaningful existence, optimism and spirituality -- generally defined as a search for the meaning of life and a connection to something bigger than one's self. To measure the changes in attitudes, moods and behavior over time, the researchers administered a questionnaire that assessed negative or positive changes in attitudes about life, mood and behavior.

With regard to adverse effects, Griffiths says 15 percent of participants were nauseated or vomited, and one-third of participants experienced some psychological discomfort, such as anxiety or paranoia, after taking the higher dose. One-third of the participants had transient increases in blood pressure. A few participants reported headaches following the session.

"Before beginning the study, it wasn't clear to me that this treatment would be helpful, since cancer patients may experience profound hopelessness in response to their diagnosis, which is often followed by multiple surgeries and prolonged chemotherapy," says Griffiths. "I could imagine that cancer patients would receive psilocybin, look into the existential void and come out even more fearful. However, the positive changes in attitudes, moods and behavior that we documented in healthy volunteers were replicated in cancer patients."

Up to 40 percent of people with cancer suffer from a mood disorder, according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.

Anticipating wide interest in the psilocybin research from scientists, clinicians and the public, the journal solicited 11 commentaries to be co-published with the study results written by luminaries in psychiatry, palliative care and drug regulation, including two past presidents of the American Psychiatric Association, a past president of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology, the former deputy director of the U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy, and the former head of the U.K. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority. In general, the commentaries were supportive of the research and of using these drugs in a clinical setting as tools for psychiatry.

Additional authors included Matthew Johnson, Michael Carducci, Annie Umbricht, William Richards, Brian Richards, Mary Cosimano and Margaret Klinedinst, all of The Johns Hopkins University.

The study was funded by grants from the Heffter Research Institute, the RiverStyx Foundation, William Linton, the Betsy Gordon Foundation, the McCormick family, the Fetzer Institute, George Goldsmith, Ekaterina Malievskaia and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (R01DA03889).
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Again, the release does a good job here. For example, the release cites a lead researcher from the Johns Hopkins team saying that “traditional psychotherapy offered to people with cancer, including behavioral therapy and antidepressants, can take weeks or even months, isn’t always effective, and in the case of some drugs, such as benzodiazepines, may have addictive and other troubling side effects.” Would a more detailed comparison be valuable? Yes. Do we think the language in the release is sufficiently meaningful to merit a satisfactory rating? Also yes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Imagine plopping six cups of coffee grounds on the heads of patients just before they are wheeled into the operating room to have nose or throat surgery?

In essence, that is what a team of Vanderbilt University engineers are proposing in an effort to improve the reliability of the sophisticated "GPS" system that surgeons use for these delicate operations. They have designed a "granular jamming cap" filled with coffee grounds that does a better job of tracking patient head movements than current methods. They are disclosing the novel design and data on its effectiveness at the International Conference on Information Processing in Computer-Assisted Interventions in Barcelona on June 20.

Of course, the coffee grounds are not loose: they form a thin layer inside a stretchy silicone headpiece, which looks something like a black latex swim cap decorated with reflective dots. After the cap is placed on the patient's head, it is attached to a vacuum pump that sucks the air out of the cap, jamming the tiny grounds together to form a rigid layer that conforms closely to the shape of the patient's head. (This is the same effect that turns vacuum-packed coffee into solid bricks.)

Before surgery, a special scanner is used to map the location of the dots relative to key features on the patient's head: a process called registration. Then, during surgery an overhead camera observes the position of the dots allowing the navigation system to accurately track the position of the patient's head when the surgeon repositions it. The computer uses this information to combine a CT scan, which provides a detailed 3-D view of the bone and soft tissue hidden inside the patient's head, with the position of the instruments the surgeon is using and displays them together in real time on a monitor in the operating room.

"These are very delicate operations and a sophisticated image guidance system has been developed to help the surgeons, but they don't trust the system because sometimes it is spot on and other times it is off the mark," said Robert Webster, associate professor of mechanical engineering and otolaryngology, who is developing a surgical robot designed specifically for endonasal surgery. "When we heard about this, we began wondering what was causing these errors and we decided to investigate."

When Webster and his research team looked into the matter, they were surprised by what they found. They discovered it wasn't the hardware or the software in the guidance system that was causing the problem. It was the way the reflective markers were attached to the patient's head that was at fault. Typically, these "fiducial markers" are attached by an elastic headband and double-backed tape and are subject to jarring and slipping. Their tests found that skin movement and accidental bumps by operating room staff both produced large tracking errors.

"The basic assumption is that, after registration, the spatial relationships between the patient's head and the fiducial markers remains constant," said Patrick Wellborn, the graduate student who is making the presentation. "Unfortunately, that is not the case. For one thing, studies have shown that the skin on a person's forehead can move as much as a half an inch relative to the skull. And accidentally bumping or dragging cables over the headband can also produce significant targeting errors."

In fact, previous research has found that when everything goes well, the guidance system produces targeting errors of about 2 millimeters but, in about one operation out of seven, the target error is much larger, forcing the surgeon to redo the registration process.

"Actually, we do have a solution to this problem but it involves drilling and attaching the markers directly to the skull...which we don't like to do because it is painful and it's a step backwards from the majority of what we are doing," said Assistant Professor of Otolaryngology Paul Russell, who is collaborating with the engineers on the project.

So the team began thinking up alternative, non-invasive methods to attach these critical markers. Webster recalled some experiments that were done using coffee grounds to help robots grip irregularly shaped objects. Bladders filled with coffee grounds were built into the robot's gripper. When it grabbed an object, the bladders conformed to its shape. Then a vacuum was pulled, the coffee grounds became rigid and locked the object into place. The researchers decided to see if this technique could be applied to the problem.

In the last three years, they have gone through a number of designs. They began with headbands that had coffee-ground-filled bags over the temples. Their tests showed that these models could reduce the targeting error by about 50 percent. But the engineers still weren't satisfied.

Then, Wellborn, who was taking over the project, had a brainstorming session with fellow graduate student Richard Hendrick. Among the materials that his predecessor had left behind was a latex bald cap. "That sparked the idea of caps in general," Wellborn recalled. "We wanted something elastic that was form fitting, which led to the idea of a swim cap."

In addition to fitting extremely tightly to the head, the new design had another advantage. The headband system has only three fiducial markers attached on the ends of three thin rods to form a triangle. The new design allowed them to attach several dozen markers directly to the surface of the cap, which the researchers believe will also contribute to improving the guidance system's accuracy.

They designed three tests to determine how well this "granular jamming cap" performed relative to the current headband in reducing targeting error:
• They "bumped" both them from a number of different directions with a tennis ball filled with plastic particles swinging on the end of a string. They found that the cap reduced targeting errors by 83 percent.
• They simulated the case where a cable or other piece of equipment is accidentally pushed against the two by applying forces ranging from four to six pounds in different directions. They determined that the cap outperformed the headband by 76 percent when the forces were applied to the headband and by 92 percent when they were applied to the markers.
• They tested the effects of head repositioning by having an experienced surgeon reposition test subjects' heads six to seven times. In this case, the cap proved to have 66 percent lower error rates than the headband.

On the strength of these results, Vanderbilt University has applied for a patent on the design and the technology is available for licensing. (Interested parties should contact the Vanderbilt Center for Technology Transfer and Commercialization.)

"It's a very clever way--that doesn't involve drilling holes in patients' skulls--to greatly improve the accuracy of the guidance system when we are operating in the middle of a person's skull: a zone where the accuracy of the current system is inadequate," said Russell.

Study coauthors also include graduate student Neal Dillon and former postdoctoral fellows Jessica Burgner, professor engineering at Leibniz University in Hanover, Germany, Ray Lathrop, senior consultant engineer at Eli Lilly and Company, and Raul Wirz, medical imaging processing research scientist/engineer at Vanderbilt University Medical Center,

The research was supported by National Institutes of Health grant R01 EB017467 and National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship grant 144519.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release does discuss the use of stabilizing markers and points to their downside. Unfortunately, the release ignores the potential upside of the gold standard approach, greater precision in registration and greater precision of therapy.
The news release says researchers believe the cap will “contribute to improving the guidance system’s accuracy” by increasing the number of markers used to indicate head positioning as well as improving the stability of the markers. Currently, stabilizing markers would involve “drilling and attaching the markers directly to the skull…which we don’t like to do because it is painful and it’s a step backwards from the majority of what we are doing,” said assistant professor of otolaryngology Paul Russell, who is collaborating with the engineers on the project.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Deep sleep is critical to maintaining a robust memory, but both decline with age. A small new study published in suggests that one easy way for older adults to get deeper sleep and stronger memories is to listen to a certain soothing sound called “pink noise”—a mix of high and low frequencies that sounds more balanced and natural than its better-known cousin, “white noise.”

It may sound strange, but previous studies have found that playing so-called pink noise during sleep improves the memory of younger adults. “We wanted to see if it would work in older people, too,” says senior author Dr. Phyllis Zee, professor of neurology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. Older people tend to get less slow-wave sleep and are at greater risk for memory impairment.

Zee and her fellow researchers had 13 adults ages 60 and older spend two nights in a sleep lab. On both nights, the participants took a memory test at night, went to sleep wearing headphones and an electrode cap, and repeated the memory test in the morning.

On one of those nights, headphone-clad participants were played a series of short bursts of pink noise during deep sleep, spaced out enough to prevent the brain from getting used to and ignoring them. “The noise is fairly pleasant; it kind of resembles a rush of water,” says Zee. “It’s just noticeable enough that the brain realizes it’s there, but not enough to disturb sleep.” The sounds were timed to match their slow-wave oscillations. No noise was played during the other night.

After analyzing everyone’s sleep waves, the team found that people’s slow-wave oscillations increased on the nights punctuated by pink noise. Come morning, people who had listened to it performed three times better on memory tests than they had the other night. On the nights without the noise, memory recall did not improve as much.

Northwestern has a patent pending on the new technology, and one of the study authors has cofounded a company that plans to market it commercially. But first, says Zee, larger and longer studies are needed to confirm the findings and show that there are benefits to long-term use, rather than on just one night. The researchers hope to develop an affordable device that people can use at home.

Zee says that the effectiveness of pink noise is all in the timing. “The effect here, at least for memory, is quite related to the ability of the sound stimulus to enhance slow-wave sleep,” she says. “That’s very much tied to what part of the slow wave the stimulus is hitting on.”

That doesn’t mean there aren’t benefits to other soothing background sounds. Music, nature sounds and white (or pink) noise apps may still help improve sleep, she says—which, in itself, is good for the body and for the brain.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article does mention some other soothing sounds that might help people sleep better, such as music, nature sounds, or white noise apps. It would have been helpful to include some other strategies for improved sleep as well such as over-the-counter sleep aids, sleep hygiene (exercise, limiting naps, restricting certain foods before bedtime), and cognitive behavioral therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Swedish teenagers who consumed more folic acid got better school grades, a small study published in the journal Pediatrics has found.

But don’t run out and stock up on the B vitamin with the rest of your school supplies just yet, one expert warns.

“There is very little deficiency of folic acid in North America,” Deborah O’Connor, a nutrition researcher who was not involved in the study, told Reuters Health. “If you’re already sufficient, there is not a lot of evidence that taking more supplements will help.”

She said the teens in the study might have been deficient in folic acid, with levels a few times lower than what’s typically seen in North American kids.

Because a lack of the nutrient during pregnancy can cause severe birth defects in babies, certain foods are fortified with folic acid, also called folate, in North America. Most of the population is thought to get adequate amounts for that reason.

During the study, Sweden did not fortify foods, nor did kids use a lot of supplements. Folic acid is naturally present in green, leafy vegetables and legumes.

The new study is among the first to examine whether folate is tied to school achievements, according to Dr. Torbjorn Nilsson of Orebro University Hospital and his colleagues.

The researchers looked at 386 15-year-olds who were finishing up ninth grade. When all their grades from ten core classes were added up, there was a clear difference between teens who got the most and the least folic acid in their diets.

Teens in the top third of folic acid intake — more than 253 micrograms per day for girls and 335 for boys — scored grades of 139 out of 200, on average. Those in the bottom third — less than 173 micrograms folic acid per day for girls and 227 for boys — had an average score of only 120.

The differences remained even after the researchers accounted for gender, smoking, the mothers’ education and which schools the kids went to.

O’Connor, of the University of Toronto and the Hospital for Sick Children in Ontario, Canada, called the findings “pretty significant.”

Still, she said, you can’t be sure if the kids who performed better had a better diet in general or if some other hidden factor could explain the results.

“It’s not a randomized controlled trial, so you always wonder, are there other things going on that you weren’t able to control for?” she said. “Like most studies, it probably raises more questions than it answers.”

In the U.S., kids aged 9 to 13 should get a total of 300 micrograms of folate a day from food and supplements according to the Institute of Medicine’s “Dietary Reference Intakes.” Kids 14 and older and adults are urged to get 400 micrograms a day and pregnant women should get 600 micrograms.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned that the food supply in the US was folic acid fortified.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 7, 2009 (HealthDay News) -- Diabetes, heart attacks and other cardiovascular problems appear to be more common in men with prostate cancer who are treated with androgen deprivation therapy, which reduces or eliminates the male sex hormones that can promote cancer growth, a new study has found.

The finding indicates that androgen therapy is overused because its benefits have not been shown to outweigh its dangers in many cases, said Dr. Nancy L. Keating, associate professor of medicine and public health at Harvard Medical School and lead author of a report on the study published online Dec. 7 in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

"There are areas where hormone deprivation therapy has been shown to have a clear benefit," Keating said. "We're not suggesting that men who need hormone deprivation therapy should not have it. But lots of men get the therapy where it has not been shown to have a benefit."

One example is so-called PSA-recurrent cancer. Hormone deprivation therapy is started, Keating said, when levels of cancer-associated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) increase after surgery or radiation therapy, but there are no other indicators of danger.

"There has never been a trial showing an overall benefit in such cases," she said. "When you can have potentially serious adverse effects, you want to show caution."

Similarly, Keating said, no trial has shown an overall benefit for androgen deprivation therapy in cases where "watchful waiting" is chosen rather than radiation therapy or surgery for prostate cancer, Keating said.

"One third of men over 65 who don't have surgery or radiation get this therapy," she said. "Yet its effects have never been studied in a controlled trial."

Previous studies have shown potential dangers related to androgen deprivation therapy in older men, Keating said. The study she led looked at its effects on about 37,000 men treated for prostate cancer at Veterans Affairs hospitals.

Surgical removal of the testes was associated with a 40 percent increased risk for heart disease and a more than doubled risk for heart attack. Use of multiple hormone-blocking agents was associated with a 27 percent increased risk for heart disease.

The greatest risk was found for drugs that target gonadotropin-releasing hormone: 159.4 cases of diabetes per 1,000 person-years, compared with 87.5 for men who did not have androgen deprivation therapy, as well as a 35 percent increased risk for sudden cardiac death, a comparable increase in heart attack risk and a 22 percent increased risk for stroke.

Observational studies, which include all people with a condition, can never conclusively prove cause and effect, Keating acknowledged, because "the thing we can't account for is whether people who are on a treatment are different from those who aren't." But detailed evidence about the potential dangers of androgen deprivation therapy has not emerged from the more rigorous controlled trials that have been done "because they have looked only at cardiovascular deaths, and most patients who have heart attacks do not die of those heart attacks," she said.

Dr. Peter Albertsen, a professor and chief of urology at the University of Connecticut Health Center, said that "the point of this paper is to help physicians understand that long-term use of this therapy carries consequences." Albertsen wrote an accompanying editorial in the journal.

Anti-hormone therapy was developed to treat the pain and other problems of advanced prostate cancer, Albertsen said, and so it was generally used for only three to five years.

"Now, many more men are being started on androgen deprivation therapy long before there are any symptoms of prostate cancer so they may be on it for up to 15 years," he said. "We are beginning to realize that there can be significant problems in terms of cardiovascular risk. So the lesson is that if you start the therapy early, you should be sure that there is increased survival because there is a downside."

Dr. Eric A. Klein, chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Glickman Urological and Kidney Institute, said that the study "is confirmatory of a lot of other, smaller studies.

"There is a growing realization that we cannot use androgen deprivation therapy in a haphazard fashion," Klein said. "It does save lives or delay progression for men with metastatic prostate cancer so the trade-offs there are reasonable. But in many other cases, the downside probably exceeds the benefit."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION:  The story was about the harms associated with the use of androgen deprivation therapy earlier in the course of prostate cancer treatment.  It mentioned several approaches (surgical removal of the testes,  multiple hormone blocking drugs, and drugs that target gonadotropin-releasing hormone) and provided several data points for each, though the information provided did not always allow comparison of the approaches to each other.   Better organization of this information would have improved the readability of this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Dec. 27, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Heart failure patients have weakened hearts, but researchers say an experimental drug used for the first time in humans may repair heart cells and improve heart function.

According to the results of a small phase 1 trial, a single intravenous infusion of the drug cimaglermin was safe and, at high doses, improved heart function for at least three months.

"Right now we have many therapies that we use for heart failure, and these patients [in the study] were on all of those therapies and still had significant heart dysfunction," said lead researcher Dr. Daniel Lenihan. He's a professor of medicine and director of Vanderbilt University's heart clinical research program in Nashville.

People with heart failure often take a combination of drugs, Lenihan said. These include medications to lower blood pressure and diuretics to help remove excess fluid that builds up as a result of the heart's labored pumping ability. In addition, some people have implanted defibrillators or pacemakers.

Even with all these options, the death rate among these patients is "unacceptably high," Lenihan said.

Heart failure, a condition where the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs, is among the leading causes of death worldwide. A significant number of heart failure patients don't respond well to current treatments, particularly those patients whose left lower heart chamber, which pumps blood into the arteries, is weak, Lenihan said.

Cimaglermin acts as a growth factor for the heart, helping it repair itself following injury, Lenihan said. Specifically, it binds to the HER2 and HER4 receptors on the surface of heart cells that are important for cellular repair and survival, he explained.

Researchers have tried using stem cells to repair heart muscle in much the same way, he said, but these efforts have not been effective. "You don't see any sustained effect," he added.

A phase 1 trial like this one is designed to see if a new drug is safe, not to test its effectiveness. Before cimaglermin could be used to treat patients, it must prove its worth in a series of progressively larger and challenging trials and then be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The process can take several years. Based on these preliminary findings, larger trials are being planned, Lenihan said.

"This drug, although still in an experimental phase, might be an important way to improve heart function in patients with heart failure," he said.

For the study, Lenihan and his colleagues randomly assigned 40 patients to get an infusion of cimaglermin or a placebo.

Compared with patients who received a placebo, patients given a high dose of cimaglermin had a sustained increase in the heart's ability to pump blood. The improvement lasted 90 days, with the maximum increase in heart function reached in 28 days, the researchers found.

The most common side effects were headache and nausea directly after receiving the drug. One patient who received the highest dose of cimaglermin developed abnormal liver function, which cleared up over a two-week period, Lenihan said.

The study was funded by Acorda Therapeutics, the maker of cimaglermin, and the report was published online Dec. 26 in the journal JACC: Basic to Translational Science.

Dr. Nanette Bishopric is a professor of medicine at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine and the author of an accompanying journal editorial. "There haven't been breakthrough treatments for heart failure for a long time," she said.

Cimaglermin, however, may be such a drug, she said. "It's a remarkable thing that you could give a drug once and have it affect heart function three months later -- it's really extraordinary," she said.

Every drug currently used to treat heart failure has to be given daily or several times a day to get it to work, Bishopric said. "And when you stop taking it, it stops working," she said.

Despite the encouraging results of this first trial, a lot more testing will be needed before cimaglermin can be considered a standard treatment for heart failure, Bishopric said.

"These findings need to be replicated in larger trials, and you have to be able to predict whether improved heart function from cimaglermin will help people live longer and feel better," she noted.

For more on heart failure, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention alternatives for dealing with weakened left ventricular function, primarily through this paragraph:
“People with heart failure often take a combination of drugs, Lenihan said. These include medications to lower blood pressure and diuretics to help remove excess fluid that builds up as a result of the heart’s labored pumping ability. In addition, some people have implanted defibrillators or pacemakers.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The gene responsible for cystic fibrosis was discovered in 1989. Now, 22 years later, a drug that tries to compensate for the genetic defect might be nearing the market.

Vertex Pharmaceuticals announced Wednesday morning that the drug, VX-770, improved lung function in people with cystic fibrosis in a late-stage clinical trial. The drug also reduced the frequency of disease exacerbations that required treatment with antibiotics.

The caveat is that VX-770 is designed to counter one specific genetic mutation that accounts for about 4 percent of cases of cystic fibrosis. Vertex is working on another drug for the most common mutation, but that one is further behind in development.

Still, the news is expected to be greeted favorably by doctors and patients and by Wall Street.

“I’ve been doing clinical trials for 30 years in C.F. and these are amazing results,’’ Dr. Bonnie W. Ramsey, a lead investigator in the trial, said in an interview.

Dr. Ramsey, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Washington, was briefed on the results by Vertex.

The results were announced by a press release and have not been peer reviewed by experts.

About 30,000 Americans and 70,000 people worldwide have cystic fibrosis, a disease caused by defects in a gene responsible for the transport of chloride ions across cell membranes. People with the disease tend to have very thick mucus in their lungs, which leads to infections and lung damage. Many do not live past age 40.

Two inhaled antibiotics and one drug that loosens mucus are approved to treat cystic fibrosis, but nothing that directly improves chloride ion transport.

 

 In the trial, those who received VX-770 gained 10.6 percentage points more on a lung function test after 24 weeks than those getting a placebo, a difference that statistically was highly significant. Patients continued to take either drug or placebo for another 24 weeks and the improvement was sustained. Lung function, the primary endpoint of the trial, was measured by how much a person could exhale in one second, a standard test.

Investors had been expecting around a 5 percentage point improvement. In a note to clients Tuesday evening, before the results were known, an analyst at ISI Group, Mark Schoenebaum, said that an improvement of 10 percent would be a “home run’’ that could lead to $600 million in annual sales for the drug.

Dr. Ramsey, who has received research grants from Vertex, said that some patients could perceive a 10 percentage point change in lung function. She said other results of the trial were encouraging.

These included fewer exacerbations of the disease in those who got the drug, fewer self-reported respiratory symptoms, and a gain in weight, which is good for people with cystic fibrosis, who often have digestive problems. The saltiness of their sweat — a measure used to diagnose the disease — was markedly reduced, suggesting that the drug was having an effect on chloride ion transport.

The trial involved 161 people age 12 and older, all with at least one copy of the particular mutation, known as G551D. The main side effects, Vertex said, were headache, upper respiratory tract infections, nasal congestion, rash and dizziness.

Vertex said it hoped to apply in the second half of the year for approval of VX-770 in the United States and Europe. The company is awaiting results of a second trial of the drug, this one in younger children.

Vertex has not said how much it will charge for VX-770. But since there are only about 1,200 Americans who are candidates for the drug, the price is likely to be tens of thousands of dollars a year.

Vertex, based in Cambridge, Mass., was founded in 1989, coincidentally the same year the cystic fibrosis gene was discovered. It has not yet had a big commercial success and had a $2.5 billion net loss in the last five years.

The company is hoping that by late May it will win approval to sell a new type of drug for hepatitis C, which analysts expect will be a blockbuster.

The long time needed to develop a drug for cystic fibrosis is a lesson for those expecting a quick payout from the sequencing of the human genome, which was completed a decade ago. It is not enough to know the gene behind a disease. It can take years of research to determine how a mutation actually causes a disease and then to design a drug that corrects the problem.

Vertex received $75 million in financial support from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, one of the first nonprofit disease groups to give money to companies.

“These results are highly encouraging,’’ Robert J. Beall, president of the foundation, said in a statement Wednesday. “They provide scientific evidence that support our long-standing belief that targeting the underlying defect of C.F. may have a profound effect on the disease.’’
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: It summarizes the alternative treatments for CF. It would’ve been interesting to note what other therapies subjects in this study received.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 15, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A newer type of genetic test is better at detecting abnormalities that predispose a child to autism than standard genetic tests, new research has determined.

Researchers offered about 933 people aged 13 months to 22 years who had been diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder three genetic tests: G-banded karyotype testing, fragile X testing or chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), which has been available only for the past few years.

Karyotype tests identified chromosomal aberrations associated with autism in about 2 percent of patients, while the fragile X genetic mutation was found in about 0.5 percent of patients.

CMA detected chromosomal abnormalities in slightly more than 7 percent of patients, making it the best available genetic test for autism spectrum disorders, the study authors said.

"The CMA test alone has triple the detection rate of karyotyping or fragile X," said co-senior author Bai-Lin Wu, director of the Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory at Children's Hospital Boston. "CMA should be added to first-tier genetic testing for autism spectrum disorders."

The study appeared online March 15 and will be published in the April print issue of Pediatrics.

"When parents have a child diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder, one of the first questions they often ask is 'how did this happen?' " said Dr. Robert Marion, a pediatric geneticist at Children's Hospital at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City.

"In the vast majority of cases, we believe there is at least a genetic predisposition to autism, but the ability to identify a specific genetic cause has been very elusive," Marion said. "Part of that is because of the technology that's been available. A larger part is at this point, we just don't fully understand what the genetic mechanism that leads to autism is."

Standard practice is to offer children with autism two tests as a first-line genetic work-up: karyotype and fragile X testing, the researchers said.

In karyotyping, forms of which have been around since the 1960s, geneticists use a microscope to look for chromosomal abnormalities that are associated with autism, explained Dr. David Miller, a clinical geneticist and assistant director of the Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory at Children's Hospital Boston, which conducted the new research along with Boston's Autism Consortium.

Like karyotyping, CMA also looks for chromosomal abnormalities, but does so at 100 times the resolution of the earlier test, Miller said. CMA, a genome-wide test, can identify sub-microscopic deletions of duplications of DNA sequences, called copy-number variants, known to be associated with autism, he said.

"Think of chromosomes as a library full of books and each book as a gene," Miller said. "What we look for are shelves of books that have gone missing, which represent a missing fragment of a chromosome, or extra fragments of chromosome, that could contain genes related to autism."

While both Children's Hospital Boston and Montefiore have offered CMA testing for several years, not all hospitals do, nor does all insurance pay for it, the researchers noted.

The main purpose of genetic testing of children with autism is to help parents determine if they're at a higher risk of having another child with autism, Marion said.

If tests pinpoint an autism-related chromosomal abnormality in the child, the parents are then offered testing. If a parent is also found to have the abnormality, geneticists conclude that the couple is at higher risk of having a child with autism. (The precise risk depends on what the variant is.)

But if the parents don't have the abnormality, geneticists conclude that the deletion or duplication happened by chance, and the parents are probably not at any greater risk of having another child with autism than the general population, Marion said.

Still, there is much geneticists can't tell parents. Between 10 percent and 15 percent of autism cases can be traced to a known genetic cause, the researchers noted. Of that, CMA alone can detect 7 percent of those.

There are a few other genetic tests that can explain another few percentage points of autism cases.

But that leaves 85 percent or more families with little explanation for the disorder, Marion said.

"CMA is better, but it's not great," Marion said. "The vast majority of children who have autism have no identifiable genetic markers that will help in genetic counseling for future pregnancies. That is very frustrating."

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more on autism.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story provided data comparing the two standard genetic tests to the newer CMA test. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- While the majority of morbidly obese patients who undergo gastric banding say they are generally satisfied years later, almost 40 percent are saddled with major complications, while about half have to have their bands removed, a small, new Belgian study reveals.

The finding comes on the heels of a recent study out of the University of California, San Francisco that suggested gastric bypass surgery is superior to alternative surgical methods (such as gastric banding) for promoting weight loss and/or eliminating type 2 diabetes.

The current observations stem from a research effort led by Dr. Jacques Himpens, of the European School of Laparoscopic Surgery at the Saint Pierre University Hospital in Brussels, whose team assessed the status of 82 patients that had undergone the procedure known as "laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding" (LABG) more than a decade prior to the study launch.

Himpens and his colleagues outline their findings in the March 21 online issue and the July print issue of the Archives of Surgery.

LAGB creates a small pouch by placing a constricting ring, or band, around the top portion of the stomach; the smaller stomach size allows patients to feel full more quickly.

Since its introduction in 2001, the banding approach has become a popular alternative to "Roux-en-Y gastric by-pass" surgery, which involves the literal stapling of the stomach in order to redirect food past part of the small intestine to instigate reduced food absorption as well as a quicker sensation of satiety.

But LAGB surgery has come under criticism in the past for involving a relatively high risk for complications, including wound infection and injury to the spleen and esophagus, and a poor prognosis in terms of long-term quality of life. It is also been reported that LAGB patients are likely to regain much of their lost weight years down the road.

To explore satisfaction levels and the long-term complication history of gastric banding, in 2009 Himpens and his team examined a pool of patients who had undergone the surgery between 1994 and 1997.

The results: 12 years or more later, more than 60 percent of the banding patients said they were "satisfied" with their experience. On average, excess weight loss had been maintained at a level approaching nearly 43 percent, and quality of life appeared to be equal to that of patients who had not undergone the surgery.

However, 39 percent of the patients had experienced serious complications, including abnormal pouch expansion (9), band erosion (23) and band infection (1). Another 22 percent experienced relatively minor complications. Almost 50 percent had to have the bands entirely removed, while 60 percent needed to undergo subsequent surgery. The procedure "appears to result in relatively poor long-term outcomes," the researchers concluded.

One in six of the patients ended up deciding to have a gastric bypass procedure, and all of these patients demonstrated good outcomes following their subsequent surgery.

Himpens said that patients should limit their expectations with respect to banding, noting that "all weight-loss operations have a high failure rate". But he added that "it is still defendable for surgeons to continue doing this."

"The high failure rate of the band gastroplasty [in] the long term is not that much worse than other procedures," he noted. "[I] therefore think patients will continue to ask for the procedure."

But he cautioned that patients undergoing band surgery should do so knowing that they need to commit themselves to rigorous long-term follow-up.

Meanwhile, in a critique published alongside Himpens work, Dr. Clifford W. Deveney, a professor of surgery in the department of surgery at Oregon Health and Science University in Portland, concluded that the current study does "not shed a favorable light on the use of LAGB".

"The band has a spotty history," Deveney said. "Some groups have very good results, with 60 to 70 percent weight loss. But other groups have either poor weight loss or complications, or both."

"So I think," he continued, "that the patient should be made aware of these facts, and also that the weight loss is going to be less with the band than with a gastric bypass. And that it'll take longer to achieve the weight loss, because with gastric bypass most of the weight loss occurs over the first year, while with a band it takes five to six years."

"It's also easier to 'cheat' on the band," he added. "You can eat around the band and render it ineffective if you're not disciplined in following a healthy diet. With gastric bypass that's not as much of an issue. But all this is not to say that I think we shouldn't be doing bands. It's just not as good as bypass."

Dr. Mitchell S. Roslin, chief of bariatric surgery at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y., said he was not surprised by the findings.

"I always tell my patients that bands are like going a diet with a seatbelt," he said. "And that there's bound to be a 5 percent extraction rate of these bands per year that they're in. Which actually comes to about the same percent of band removals these researchers observed among their patients."

"I think the problem with the bands is simply that having a fixed obstruction underneath your esophagus is not a natural occurrence," Roslin noted. "And also these bands make it more difficult to eat, but they do not make every patient less hungry. So there's a big variability in treatment effect. You'll see patients who do great and patients who don't. Almost like a camel with two humps."

"So bands are easy to sell and very heavily marketed," he added. "But for many patients, there are better options."

For more on gastric banding, visit the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story relied on a critique published alongside the study from Dr. Clifford W. Deveney, a professor of surgery in the department of surgery at Oregon Health and Science University in Portland, to provide readers some good comparison information between  gastric bypass surgery and gastric banding. We would have liked to have seen a more detailed discussion of the evidence for both and also at lesat some mention of diet and exercise.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON -- Bacteria live on everyone’s skin, and new research shows some friendly germs produce natural antibiotics that ward off their disease-causing cousins. Now scientists are mixing the good bugs into lotions in hopes of spreading protection.

In one early test, those customized creams guarded five patients with a kind of itchy eczema against risky bacteria that were gathering on their cracked skin, researchers reported Wednesday.

“It’s boosting the body’s overall immune defenses,” said Dr. Richard Gallo, dermatology chairman at the University of California, San Diego, who is leading the work.

We share our bodies with trillions of microbes that live on our skin, in our noses, in the gut. This community — what scientists call the microbiome — plays critical roles in whether we stay healthy or become more vulnerable to various diseases. Learning what makes a healthy microbiome is a huge field of research, and already scientists are altering gut bacteria to fight diarrhea-causing infections.



Wednesday’s research sheds new light on the skin’s microbiome — suggesting that one day it may be possible to restore the right balance of good bugs to treat skin disorders, too.



“It’s a really important paper,” said Dr. Emma Guttman-Yassky of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, who wasn’t involved with the new research. “It does open a window for a potential new treatment.”

Healthy skin harbors a different mix of bacteria than skin damaged by disorders such as atopic dermatitis, the most common form of eczema. Those patches of dry, red, itchy skin are at increased risk of infections, particularly from a worrisome germ known as Staphylococcus aureus.

Gallo’s team took a closer look at how microbes in healthy skin might be keeping that bad staph in check.

They discovered certain strains of some protective bacteria secrete two “antimicrobial peptides,” a type of natural antibiotic. In lab tests and on the surface of animal skin, those substances could selectively kill Staph aureus, and even a drug-resistant strain known as MRSA, without killing neighboring bacteria like regular antibiotics do, the team reported in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

But those good bugs are rare in the skin of people with atopic dermatitis, Gallo said.

“People with this type of eczema, for some reason that’s not quite known yet, have a lot of bacteria on the skin but it’s the wrong type of bacteria. They’re not producing the antimicrobials they need,” he explained.

Would replenishing the good bugs help? “They’re normal skin bacteria, so we knew they would be safe,” Gallo noted.

His team tested five volunteers with atopic dermatitis who had Staph aureus growing on their skin’s surface — what’s called colonization — but didn’t have an infection. Researchers culled some of the rare protective bacteria from the volunteers’ skin, grew a larger supply and mixed a dose into an over-the-counter moisturizer. Volunteers had the doctored lotion slathered onto one arm and regular moisturizer on the other.

A day later, much of the staph on the treated arms was killed — and in two cases, it was wiped out — compared to the untreated arms, Gallo said.

“We’re encouraged that we see the Staph aureus, which we know makes the disease worse, go away,” he said.

The study couldn’t address the bigger question of whether exposure to the right mix of protective bacteria might improve atopic dermatitis itself, cautioned Mount Sinai’s Guttman-Yassky.

Next-step clinical trials are underway to start testing the effects of longer-term use.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story gives a tiny mention to the alternative for skin infections–antibiotics. This is a barely passing satisfactory:
“In lab tests and on the surface of animal skin, those substances could selectively kill Staph aureus, and even a drug-resistant strain known as MRSA, without killing neighboring bacteria like regular antibiotics do, the team reported in the journal Science Translational Medicine.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Jan. 25, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Just how successful is the procedure called catheter ablation at fixing irregular heartbeats that can be potentially fatal?

Pretty successful, a new study found, but there are caveats.

Burning or freezing specific areas of the heart can alleviate the common irregular heart beat called atrial fibrillation in 74 percent of patients. However, the procedure doesn't work for everyone and there are risks of complications, researchers report.

Atrial fibrillation increases the risk of early death by two times in women and 1.5 times in men. It causes 20 to 30 percent of all strokes and can decrease quality of life due to palpitations, shortness of breath, tiredness, weakness and psychological distress, the study authors explained.

About 2.7 million Americans suffer from atrial fibrillation, according to the American Heart Association.

For those whose atrial fibrillation can't be controlled with medications, catheter ablation may be recommended.

"Catheter ablation is a valid alternative for the management of atrial fibrillation with a satisfactory success rate," said study lead researcher Dr. Elena Arbelo.

But the procedure can have complications, which should be considered carefully by doctors and patients, said Arbelo, a senior specialist in the Cardiovascular Institute at the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona in Spain.

Complications can include fluid buildup around the heart, called cardiac tamponade, which makes it difficult for the heart to pump blood. Other complications include stroke or mini-stroke, Arbelo said.

In addition, many patients need to continue blood thinners and medications that control irregular heartbeats after the procedure, she explained.

During the procedure, a wire is threaded through the blood vessels into the heart and used to burn or freeze small areas of the upper chamber, called the atrium.

The burning or freezing creates a scar and stops abnormal electrical signals that cause the irregular heart rhythm, Arbelo said.

According to Dr. Hugh Calkins, "Atrial fibrillation ablation is a well-established procedure that has imperfect results." Calkins is a professor of medicine and director of the cardiac arrhythmia service at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.

The complication rate is higher than hoped, and the success rate is lower than hoped, he said.

"Patients don't get a lifetime certificate saying you're cured," Calkins said. "For one in four patients, atrial fibrillation comes back five years after the procedure. Patients should not be going into this thinking they will have a 99 percent cure rate with no risk," he added.

The new study included information from more than 3,600 patients in Europe, the Middle East and North Africa. Their average age was 59, and all had undergone catheter ablation.

Ablation was successful in 74 percent of patients, Arbelo said. These patients had no atrial arrhythmias -- irregular heart beats -- for three to 12 months after the procedure.

According to Arbelo, 91 percent of patients choose to have ablation to relieve symptoms, while 66 percent do so to improve their quality of life.

Atrial arrhythmias in the first three months after ablation were classified as early recurrences and not considered as failures, Arbelo said. In addition, 45 percent of patients who had a successful procedure were still taking antiarrhythmia drugs 12 months later.

About 11 percent suffered complications during the year after the ablation, she said.

After the procedure, patients with two or more risk factors for stroke should be prescribed oral blood thinners, while those with no risk factors don't need them, Arbelo suggested.

The study investigators found that 27 percent of patients with two or more risk factors for stroke were not on blood thinners, but one-third of low-risk patients were taking them.

Dr. Gregg Fonarow is a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles. He said, "Relief of symptoms in patients with atrial fibrillation can be challenging."

In certain patients, catheter ablation may reduce symptoms, improve quality of life and increase exercise capacity, though the impact on death and hospitalization risk is still being evaluated, he noted.

"Of concern is that complication rates are still higher than desirable for this procedure, and there was suboptimal use of stroke-preventing anticoagulation [anti-clotting] therapy after the procedure," added Fonarow, who was not involved with the study.

"Further trials are needed to evaluate the benefits and risks of catheter ablation and its potential role as first-line therapy," he suggested.

Catheter ablation is covered by most insurance, including Medicare, the researchers said.

The report was published online recently in the European Heart Journal.

For more about atrial fibrillation, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that medication is the first-line treatment: “For those whose atrial fibrillation can’t be controlled with medications, catheter ablation may be recommended.”
We do wish the story had made it clear that few people with atrial fibrillation fall into the group needing ablation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Minimally invasive surgery for a burst appendix appears to be more successful and less costly in the long run than the traditional operation, a new study hints.

Using the gentler technique, called laparoscopy, a surgeon makes small cuts in the abdomen before inserting a tiny camera inside, then performing the operation by watching a television monitor.

Doctors say this type of operation hurts patients less afterward than the conventional “open” method, which involves one long incision in the abdomen of up to 12 inches.

But experiments comparing the two kinds of procedure have yielded mixed outcomes, and some experts remain unconvinced that laparoscopy is worth its higher upfront cost.

The new study, in the Annals of Surgery, doesn’t settle that question. But it does suggest that laparoscopy could actually save thousands of dollars for some patients, when all costs — including physician fees, hospital fees and readmissions — are considered.

“You really want to look at the total cost, because that’s what society has to pay,” said Dr. Dmitry Oleynikov, who heads the Center for Advanced Surgical Technology at Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha and led the new study.

“Overall, this study shows benefit from laparoscopy on every aspect, including cost,” he told Reuters Health.

Appendix removals are one of the most common surgeries in the U.S., with some 750,000 procedures done every year, Oleynikov added.

With his colleagues, he looked back at some 40,000 such surgeries done at dozens of academic medical centers in the U.S. — roughly 14,000 open procedures and 26,000 laparoscopic ones.

For uncomplicated cases of appendicitis, in which the appendix is still intact, the tabs for the two surgeries came out about the same, at just over $7,800.

People who had the laparoscopic procedures also had lower death rates, at 0.07 percent versus 0.17 percent, fewer readmissions and a slightly shorter stay at the hospital.

When the appendix had burst, however, the open surgery racked up a considerably higher bill. On average, it cost $17,594, compared to $12,125 for the laparoscopic surgery.

Yet again, the patients who had laparoscopy fared much better than those who had conventional surgery.

“In healthy individuals, the death rate is very (small) for all groups of patients. But when you become sicker, laparoscopy is better,” said Oleynikov. “Substantial savings could be seen if open surgery is done in a laparoscopic fashion.”

But he acknowledged that the study has major limitations. First, it looks only at academic medical centers. And second, it’s not a randomized controlled trial, which means the patients being compared could be different in important ways, explaining at least part of the outcomes of the two types of surgery.

Indeed, those who had laparoscopy were younger and usually had less severe disease, which could have biased the results in favor of the minimally invasive procedure.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The focus of the story was the comparison between two surgical approaches.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It takes up to 15 years and $5 billion for a new drug to make it through testing and earn approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Before researchers try a compound on humans, it’s tested at labs in petri dishes and on animals, such as mice and monkeys. More often than not, these studies produce mixed data that don’t tell researchers much about whether it is safe and effective for humans.

For some time, scientists have been searching for ways to cut down on the cost and failure rate of drug testing. Researchers at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University have developed a beautiful solution: Organs-On-Chips.

The clear and flexible polymer microchips are lined with human cells. Each one represents a different human organ system, such as lungs, heart and intestines. The institute’s goal is to create 10 different organ systems that can be joined together by blood vessel channels to simulate human physiology on a microscale and provide a cheaper, more reliable way to test new drugs.

The sophisticated architecture of these organs-on-chips—which are about the size of a thumb drive—has also earned the Wyss Institute recognition in the art world with a Design of the Year award from the Design Museum and placement in the Museum of Modern Art’s permanent collection.

“The real power of this approach is that you have a window to the inner workings of life,” says Don Ingber, founding director of the Wyss Institute and a professor of Vascular Biology and of Bioengineering at Harvard University. “Anything you can ask at the molecular level, we could do in our chips.”

In 2008, the team built and tested its first “organoid” chip to mimic the mechanical function of human lungs. It contains tiny channels separated by a porous membrane to create two distinct, hollow passageways—one lined with human lung cells and the other with capillary blood vessel cells. Air is suctioned through the side channels to emulate breathing. Ingber and his team introduced bacteria into the chip’s lung channel and white blood cells into the capillary channel. They observed that the white blood cells permeated the membrane and attacked the bacteria in the lung cell channel—exactly what would happen in human lungs fighting off an infection.

In another experiment, the team at Wyss filled a chip’s lung cell channel with interleukin 2, a chemotherapy drug known to cause pulmonary edema, an accumulation of fluid in the lungs. When air entered the lung cell channel, the channel filled with fluid and then blood clots—exactly what happens in the lungs of patients who develop this life-threatening condition. This proved the chips could provide real world information to scientists studying the effects of new drug compounds.

The project has received support from the National Institutes of Health and the FDA. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency also recently awarded the institute a $37 million grant to create chips representing nearly all systems in the body. Ingber says some scientists are interested in using the chips to conduct research that would be unethical if performed on people, such as studying the effects of gamma radiation on the human body.

Of course, the chips have limitations. “We can’t mimic consciousness; we can’t mimic compression on a joint,” says Ingber.

Danilo Tagle, associate director for special initiatives at the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, a division of the NIH, is spearheading a similar organ-on-chip project. He suspects that in the beginning the chips will be used to “complement and supplement” animal studies, but will eventually become routine practice. The chips will also provide researchers with information on dosing at a much earlier stage in drug studies—particularly helpful because animals metabolize chemical substances at a different rate than humans. “You can go forward with a candidate drug with greater assurance and confidence that it will have the desired effect on humans,” says Tagle. “Biology is very complex.”

Incorporating the chips into drug testing could save millions of dollars and years of time on research. Some companies are already trying out the concept. Janssen Pharmaceuticals Company, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, is using a version of the chips to understand how blood clots in the lungs. The information is essential to reduce the risk for this side effect of oncology drugs.

Though there still aren’t enough data to prove the chips are reliable enough to put rodents out of a job, Ingber says it’s only a matter of time; they hope to have them tested and ready for market in two years. “The FDA has been very supportive,” he says. “They’ve told us if they are as good as animals that they would consider accepting data provided by a drug company from one of these models rather than an animal model.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The report describes laboratory testing on animal models, like mice and monkeys, and says chemicals are metabolized at a different rate in animals. We think that’s enough for a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 15, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An apple a day won't necessarily keep the doctor away, but three kiwis just might help, at least according to a small study that showed that the brown, fuzzy fruit may lower blood pressure levels.

Men and women with mildly high blood pressure who ate three kiwi fruits a day for eight weeks had systolic blood pressure levels that were 3.6 millimeters of mercury lower than those of volunteers who ate an apple a day. Systolic blood pressure is the upper number in a blood pressure measurement.

Kiwis may be small, but they pack a lot of nutrition in their green flesh. They are rich in lutein, a potent antioxidant, and this may be what is responsible for their blood pressure-lowering powers, said researchers who were led by Mette Svendsen of Oslo University Hospital in Norway. The study was to be presented Tuesday at the American Heart Association's annual meeting in Orlando, Fla.

Cardiologists were quick to caution that there is no single magic food or ingredient that is the key to heart health, but they all agreed that kiwi may have a place in the five daily servings of fruit and vegetables that are currently recommended as part of a heart-healthy diet.

The new study included 50 men and 68 women with an average age of 55 who were randomly assigned to eat three kiwis or one apple a day for eight weeks. Participants had blood pressure levels in the mildly elevated range of 128/85 when the study began. A blood pressure reading that is less than 120/80 is considered ideal. They changed nothing in their diet other than adding the fruit. Researchers measured blood pressure via 24-hour ambulatory monitoring, which is thought to be more precise than measuring it during a single point in time.

"Three kiwi a day improved 24-hour blood pressure more than an apple a day," the researchers concluded.

So, is kiwi the new "wonder" fruit?

"There is biological plausibility, but I would not go and grab three kiwis a day," said Dr. Nehal Mehta, a preventive cardiologist at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. "They are not easy to find or one of those fruits that people readily grab."

Moderation is the key with kiwis or any food, he said. "Three kiwis a day or 21 kiwis a week does not seem like moderation, and I would caution against eating that much," he said.

The new study may just "put kiwis on the map," he said. "When we say 'eat more fresh fruit,' we stick to the tried-and-true or anything that is handheld and peeled, but these findings suggest that a kiwi can be part of a heart-healthy diet," he said.

In addition, the study looked at the whole fruit, not individual nutrients. Don't start popping lutein in supplement form based on these results, he noted.

Dr. Suzanne Steinbaum, a preventive cardiologist with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, agreed. "Kiwi is not the wonder fruit, but certainly adding kiwi to your diet can help decrease mildly high blood pressure levels."

Dr. Elliott M. Antman, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said that while promising, the new study is small. "Don't count on this to be the complete answer to high blood pressure," he said. Whatever you do, "do not stop taking your blood pressure medications without talking to your doctor," he added.

Because this study was presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Dash diet is often recommended to lower blood pressure levels.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt because it at least mentioned the DASH diet, which is the main dietary intervention recommended in primary care for prehypertension and mild hypertension. The DASH diet is only a little more efficacious than the reported kiwi intervention. (for nonhypertensive patients, the DASH diet lowers the systolic BP 7.1 mm Hg).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Select patients age 90 years and older with aortic stenosis (AS) can benefit from a relatively new, minimally invasive surgery for aortic valve replacement, according to an article in the September 2015 issue of the Annals of Thoracic Surgery.
• Both transfemoral and transapical approaches to TAVR appear to be safe and effective for treatment of aortic stenosis in select patients age 90 years and older.
• By 6 months post-surgery, most quality-of-life measures had stabilized at a level considerably better than baseline, meaning patients quality of life was better than it was prior to surgery.
• Future studies are needed to address potential differences in outcomes between TF- and TA-TAVR groups.

As part of the PARTNER-I trial, Vinod H. Thourani, MD, from Emory University in Atlanta, and colleagues from 12 other institutions in the United States found that transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is a safe and effective way to treat aortic stenosis in nonagenarians who qualify for the surgical technique.

"Historically, extreme elderly patients can be at a very high risk for open surgery," said Dr. Thourani. "We still believe that for those 90 year olds who are low-or intermediate risk, surgical options may be a viable procedure. However, with the advent of TAVR technology, we can now offer these extreme elderly patients a treatment option that otherwise would have been high-risk or prohibitive."

Aortic stenosis is the most common acquired valve disease in elderly patients and affects nearly 3% of those over the age of 75, according to the American Heart Association. The ability to safely treat AS patients has become increasingly important; the US government predicts that the number of Americans over the age of 85 will exceed 11 million in the next 20 years.

For the study, the researchers used two different approaches: transfemoral TAVR (TF-TAVR), which is the traditional approach performed via the groin, and transapical TAVR (TA-TAVR), which is performed via the heart muscle. TA-TAVR is an alternative for patients who are medically ineligible for TF-TAVR secondary to severe peripheral vascular disease. While the current study did not evaluate other alternative options for TAVR, these techniques may include transaortic, transcaval, transcarotid, or trans-subclavian.

In the largest series published to date, between April 2007 and February 2012, 531 nonagenarians underwent TAVR: 329 with TF-TAVR and 202 with TA-TAVR.

"We evaluated perioperative, short-, and mid-term outcomes following both TF- and TA-TAVR," explained Dr. Thourani. "Compared with an age-sex-race-matched US population, the TAVR patients had a comparable risk of mortality, and quality of life improved within 6 months of the procedure. Our study shows that age alone should not preclude referral for TAVR in patients age 90 years and older."

The study also showed that the 30-day stroke risk was 3.6% in TF-TAVR patients and 2.0% in TA-TAVR patients. Major complications, such as bleeding or vascular issues, occurred in 35% of TF-TAVR patients and 32% of TA-TAVR patients, and more than 80% of patients were discharged home after the procedure.

"Future studies are needed to address potential differences in outcomes between TF- and TA-TAVR groups," said Dr. Thourani, "but I'm thrilled that we're able to give elderly people the chance to continue enjoying life in their golden years. Many would not have had that option without TAVR."

Thourani V, Jensen H, Babaliaros V, Kodali S, Rajeswaran J, Ehrlinger J, Blackstone E, Suri R, Don C, Aldea G, Williams M, Makkar R, Svensson L, McCabe J, Dean L, Kapadia S, Cohen D, Pichard A, Szeto W, Herrmann H, Devireddy C, Leshnower B, Ailawadi G, Maniar H, Hahn R, Leon M, Mack M. Outcomes in Nonagenarians Undergoing Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in the PARTNER-I Trial. Ann Thorac Surg 2015;100:785-93. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2015.05.021

Full text of the article is available to credentialed journalists upon request; contact Cassie McNulty cmcnulty@sts.org at +1 312 202 5865

About The Annals of Thoracic Surgery

The Annals of Thoracic Surgery is the official journal of STS and the Southern Thoracic Surgical Association. Founded in 1964, The Society of Thoracic Surgeons is a not-for-profit organization representing more than 6,800 cardiothoracic surgeons, researchers, and allied health care professionals worldwide who are dedicated to ensuring the best possible outcomes for surgeries of the heart, lung, and esophagus, as well as other surgical procedures within the chest. The Society's mission is to enhance the ability of cardiothoracic surgeons to provide the highest quality patient care through education, research, and advocacy.

Elsevier is a world-leading provider of information solutions that enhance the performance of science, health, and technology professionals, empowering them to make better decisions, deliver better care, and sometimes make groundbreaking discoveries that advance the boundaries of knowledge and human progress. Elsevier provides web-based, digital solutions -- among them ScienceDirect, Scopus, Elsevier Research Intelligence, and ClinicalKey -- and publishes over 2,500 journals, including The Lancet and Cell, and more than 33,000 book titles, including a number of iconic reference works. Elsevier is part of RELX Group plc, a world-leading provider of information solutions for professional customers across industries. http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that TAVR is primarily a treatment option for patients who would be at high risk for “open” surgery. The release also mentions that there are other ways to perform TAVR in addition to the ones studied here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A five week treatment with the synthetic hormone oxytocin significantly improved social, emotional and behavioral issues among young children with autism, according to University of Sydney research published today in Molecular Psychiatry.

The study, led by researchers at the University's Brain and Mind Centre, is thought to be the first evidence of a medical treatment for social impairments in children with autism. It is also the first clinical trial investigating the efficacy, tolerability and safety of intranasal-administered oxytocin in young children with autism.

Autism is a group of complex brain developmental disorders characterized by impairments in social interaction, communication, and stereotypical and repetitive behaviours. The diagnosed incidence is estimated to be one in 68 children and effective interventions remain limited.

Behavioural therapies can improve social, emotional and behavioural impairments but these are typically time consuming (40 hours per week), remain costly and show mixed outcomes. There is currently no medical treatment for these problems.

In this new study, 31 children aged three to eight years of age received a twice daily course of oxytocin in the form of a nasal spray.

"We used some of the most widely used assessments of social responsiveness for children with autism," said autism expert, Associate Professor Adam Guastella of the Brain and Mind Centre.

"We found that following oxytocin treatment, parents reported their child to be more socially responsive at home, and our own blind independent clinician ratings also supported improved social responsiveness in the therapy rooms of the Brain and Mind Centre," he said.

Overall, the nasal spray was well tolerated and the most common adverse events were thirst, urination and constipation.

This is the first time a medical treatment has shown this type of benefit for children with autism and findings reinforce outcomes from a longer sustained program of research by this team.

Over the last 10 years Brain and Mind Centre researchers have been documenting the benefits of oxytocin in humans, revealing that it enhances eye gaze, emotion recognition and memory across a range of populations.

Study co-author and co-director of the Brain and Mind Centre, Professor Ian Hickie noted the new results were a critical first advance in the development of medical treatments for the social deficits that characterize autism.

"The potential to use such simple treatments to enhance the longer-term benefits of other behavioural, educational and technology-based therapies is very exciting," he said.

Most recently the team has linked observed changes from treatment to brain changes associated with social circuitry. The next step in the research is to understand exactly how oxytocin changes brain circuitry to improve social behavior, and to document how related treatments might be used to boost established social learning interventions.

The researchers are seeking to further develop the potential of oxytocin-based interventions within the context of good multi-disciplinary care for autism.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release correctly states that behavioral therapies, the standard treatment for autism, are time-intensive, costly and sometimes offer minimal benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The number of Americans undergoing CT scans has increased dramatically in recent years, driving a significant increase in the amount of radiation that many people are being exposed to from medical procedures.

That trend is raising concern that the high-tech exams could cause a small but significant excess of cancers in coming decades and spurring debate about whether the increasingly ubiquitous tests are being overused, exposing millions of Americans to needless risk. "The radiation doses from CT have been pretty clearly demonstrated to increase cancer risk," said David J. Brenner, a professor of radiation oncology at Columbia University who co-authored the most recent of a series of reports in the past year warning about the potential risks of CT scans. "On an individual basis there's probably not a big risk, but a small cancer risk applied to an increasingly large population spells trouble down the road. That's the concern."

Although some prominent medical groups have issued warnings against overusing the exams -- especially for children -- some experts worry about frightening patients away from the invaluable tests.

"You don't want people to avoid getting a potentially lifesaving diagnosis or therapy because they are afraid to get a CT scan," said Arl Van Moore Jr., a Charlotte radiologist who chairs the American College of Radiology's board of chancellors. "When a scan is done the right way for the right reasons, the benefits clearly outweigh the risks of doing it."

CT (computed tomography), sometimes called CAT (computed axial tomography), is performed by computerized machines that scan patients with X-rays to create three-dimensional cross-sectional images of organs and other parts of the body, providing far greater detail than standard single X-rays.

The number of scans performed each year in the United States has increased sharply, rising from about 3 million in 1980 to at least 67 million in 2006. There are many reasons for the increase, including improvements in the technology that have speeded the procedure, a growing list of uses and a proliferation of the machines.

"CT has become ubiquitous," said Jason Launders, a senior project officer at the ECRI Institute, an independent nonprofit health-care research organization outside Philadelphia that released a report last year warning about the potential risks. "Now if you go into an emergency room you can be scanned in a few minutes. You can't get that kind of information any other way. So physicians tend to use CT as sort of a first line in working out a diagnosis."

The use of CT scans is expected to continue to rise as possible new applications, such as for lung and colon cancer screening, become more widespread.

While the value of CT scans for screening remains the focus of debate, no one questions the value of the tests for allowing doctors to quickly diagnose a wide variety of health problems, including head injuries, heart problems, cancer, appendicitis, fractures and gallstones.

"CT is probably the biggest advance in diagnostic radiology that has ever occurred," said Thomas Ohlhaber, deputy director of the Division of Mammography Quality and Radiation Programs at the Food and Drug Administration. "Exploratory surgery that was common 10 or 15 years ago has virtually disappeared and all the risks associated with that have gone away because of CT. But nothing comes free of risks."

The concern comes from the fact that CT scans expose patients to much more radiation than standard X-rays. A CT chest scan, for example, exposes a patient to more than 150 times more radiation than a standard chest X-ray. That's more than twice as much as a typical person receives from the environment in an entire year. (See graphic.)

The upsurge in CT use has fueled a big jump in the annual amount of radiation that each American is receiving from medical procedures of all kinds. The average level of that exposure has increased about 600-fold since 1980, according to a federal report being published this year.

"At the moment, about half of medical radiation exposure is from CT scans," said Fred A. Mettler Jr., a radiation health expert at the University of New Mexico who helped prepare the report. CT scans represented just a few percent of the average American's exposure to radiation from medical tests in 1980, he noted.

Because it would take decades to follow a large number of patients who have undergone CT scans to determine the exact risks posed by the exams, there are no direct data demonstrating the danger. But researchers have estimated the risk based on what is considered the best information available about the health effects of radiation -- data collected from survivors of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, as well as exposure of nuclear plant and medical workers.

Using that information, experts have estimated that every 1,000 to 2,000 CT scans may produce one fatal cancer that would not have occurred otherwise.

Although that overall risk is relatively small, the large number of scans being performed could translate into a significant number of cancers. Brenner and his colleagues estimate that CT scans may be responsible for perhaps 2 percent of all cancers in the United States. The ECRI Institute estimated the scans may be causing 6,000 extra cancers each year, half of them fatal.

"Twenty years from now we could see a huge bonus of cancer coming through because of indiscriminate use of CT today," Launders said. "That's the real issue people are worried about."

The individual risk varies depending on the age of the patient and the type of scan. Younger people face more risk than older people because they have more time for a cancer to develop. Children are especially vulnerable because their rapidly developing bodies are at least four times as sensitive to the damaging effects of radiation. A child's risk may run as high as one case of cancer for every 500 scans, experts say.

Among adults, "young women have the highest risk," said Andrew Einstein of Columbia University, who evaluated the risks from cardiac CT scans in a paper published in July in the Journal of the American Medical Association. A 20-year-old woman faced the greatest risk -- one additional cancer for every 143 scans, he reported.

Some question the estimates, saying the risk of exposure from radiation from multiple CT scans may not be the same as from radiation from an atomic bomb.

"It's very difficult, in our opinion to equate the data from Hiroshima, where you had an instantaneous entire-body dose of radiation, compared to a cumulative dose for multiple CT scans," said Moore, the radiologist. "It's apples and oranges. It's not really the same."

Einstein, Mettler and others, however, disagree. "Radiation is radiation. Those are X-rays that the folks at Hiroshima and Nagasaki got. These are X-rays from a CT scan. They're really the same thing," said Brenner, whose report was published in November in the New England Journal of Medicine. "If the dose is the same, then the risk is going to be the same."

Although the companies that make the CT machines have been developing new protocols designed to minimize radiation exposure, particularly for children, everyone agrees that the most prudent thing to do is to eliminate unnecessary use.

While there are scant hard data about how often CT scans are done needlessly, several experts estimated that perhaps one-third could be eliminated. There are many reasons CTs may be overused. Some CTs are full-body "virtual physicals" performed on people who appear perfectly healthy -- a practice widely opposed by medical authorities.

Some say part of the blame lies with physicians who have financial interests in imaging facilities. "There is statistical evidence that indicates that more scans are ordered when a physician has a financial interest than when he doesn't," said Moore.

Defensive medicine also plays a role, with some doctors ordering the tests to stave off accusations that they withheld the most cutting-edge technology from their patients.

In other cases, overuse results from worried patients and from parents demanding CT scans that may not be needed. Other times doctors may not realize how many tests involving radiation patients have already undergone -- information that could influence a doctor's decision -- or may order a CT scan when other tests that do not involve radiation, such as a blood test, an MRI or an ultrasound, would suffice. "There are alternatives that are arguably just as good," Brenner said.

And patients also can take more responsibility for reducing the number of unnecessary scans.

"If a patient walks in and says, 'Tell me what the dose is from this and tell me what the risk is,' they are going to make the doctor start thinking about it," Mettler said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions other kinds of tests, such as blood tests, MRIs or ultrasound.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
GOTHENBURG, SWEDEN (Reuters) - A wearable device that stimulates the sense of balance with electric “noise” could help Parkinson’s disease patients, according to Swedish scientists.

Scientists from the University of Gothenburg’s Sahlgrenska Academy have developed a portable pocket-sized vestibular, or balance, stimulation device in a bid to improve the lives of Parkinson’s sufferers.

The research was led by Associate Professor Filip Bergquist, who said the simple device was similar to the TENS (Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation) therapy which is used for pain relief, for example in child birth.

“So this is really not a very complicated device. It is a current device which is very similar to the ones that people use for pain relief with electrical stimulation of muscles and nerves, what’s called TENS. The difference is that we use a particular current profile which you can stimulate the balance organs with without creating a balance disturbance. So you do not get the impression that the world is moving or that you are moving, you actually do not feel anything,” Bergquist explained.

The device operates by providing stimulation via patches attached to the patient’s head behind the ears, where the vestibular system is located.

Parkinson’s disease is characterized by reduced levels in the brain of the hormone dopamine, a neurotransmitter that allows different regions of the brain to communicate with one another. Symptoms of advanced Parkinson’s disease include an impaired sense of balance, as well as tremors, poor mobility, slowness and stiffness.

Nearly all patients diagnosed with the disease are treated with levodopa, a drug that stimulates the production of dopamine in the brain. The effectiveness of oral levodopa reduces as Parkinson’s disease progresses in the patient and can lead to involuntary movements, or dyskinesia.

In earlier experiments on rats, researchers at Sahlgrenska showed that noisy electric stimulation of the balance organs could be used to change the activity of the brain, thereby balancing the effects of dopamine shortage and improving the animals’ motor skills and balance.

The researchers have also tested the method on ten Swedish Parkinson’s patients, in both medicated and unmedicated states. According to Sahlgrenska, on one day the patients received an active noise stimulation and on another day inactive treatment, not knowing which day the current was active. According to the research institute, the experiments showed that the active noise stimulation improved both the patients’ balance and the combined symptoms.

Parkinson’s sufferer Staffan Lindblom said he did not expect any great advances, but would be thankful for anything that would make living with the disease easier.

“I have become hardened in the sense that I do not have too great expectations. But I still believe that something will be found at some point which could be useful. There is extensive research in this field and I hope that it eventually will come up with a result. Not a significant result but a few steps forward would really be appreciated,” he said.

Unfortunately this particular treatment did not work on Lindblom, with Bergquist suspecting there could also be other causes to Lindblom’s balance problems.

Bergquist said he hoped the device could treat patients for whom the Levodopa drug, which turns into dopamine in the body and increases levels of the chemical, was not enough.

He also said they were working on the hypothesis that other diseases which affect the dopamine system, such as ADHD (Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder), could also benefit from this kind of treatment.

“What we are hoping for with this device is to find a treatment for movement disorders where Levodopa, Parkinson’s disease where Levodopa is not enough. And in particular in patients with Parkinson’s disease where there is problem with gait and balance. But this may not be restricted to Parkinson’s disease, so there may be other conditions with poor balance where you could use electrical stimulation of the vestibular organs, the balance organs to improve balance and gait,” he said.

The plan is now for the device to be tested in a longer-term study, where patients will be using it at home. If those trials prove successful, the developers hope the device could be available to the public within five years.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says that levodopa is commonly used to treat the symptoms associated with Parkinson’s, and notes that the drug’s efficacy tends to wane over time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Overweight people who used a new motivational intervention called Functional Imagery Training (FIT) lost an average of five times more weight than those using talking therapy alone, shows new research published today by the University of Plymouth and Queensland University.

In addition, users of FIT lost 4.3cm more around their waist circumference in six months - and continued to lose weight after the intervention had finished.

Led by Dr Linda Solbrig from the School of Psychology, the research involved 141 participants, who were allocated either to FIT or Motivational Interviewing (MI) - a technique that sees a counsellor support someone to develop, highlight and verbalise their need or motivation for change, and their reasons for wanting to change.

FIT goes one step further than MI, as it makes use of multisensory imagery to explore these changes by teaching clients how to elicit and practice motivational imagery themselves. Everyday behaviours and optional app support are used to cue imagery practice until it becomes a cognitive habit.

Maximum contact time was four hours of individual consultation, and neither group received any additional dietary advice or information.

Dr Solbrig, who completed the work as part of a PhD funded by The National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (CLAHRC) South West Peninsula, said: "It's fantastic that people lost significantly more weight on this intervention, as, unlike most studies, it provided no diet/physical activity advice or education. People were completely free in their choices and supported in what they wanted to do, not what a regimen prescribed."

The study showed how after six months people who used the FIT intervention lost an average of 4.11kg, compared with an average of 0.74kg among the MI group.

After 12 months - six months after the intervention had finished - the FIT group continued to lose weight, with an average of 6.44kg lost compared with 0.67kg in the MI group.

Dr Solbrig continued: "Most people agree that in order to lose weight, you need to eat less and exercise more, but in many cases, people simply aren't motivated enough to heed this advice - however much they might agree with it. So FIT comes in with the key aim of encouraging someone to come up with their own imagery of what change might look and feel like to them, how it might be achieved and kept up, even when challenges arise.

"We started with taking people through an exercise about a lemon. We asked them to imagine seeing it, touching it, juicing it, drinking the juice and juice accidently squirting in their eye, to emphasise how emotional and tight to our physical sensations imagery is. From there we are able to encourage them to fully imagine and embrace their own goals. Not just 'imagine how good it would be to lose weight' but, for example, 'what would losing weight enable you to do that you can't do now? What would that look / sound / smell like?', and encourage them to use all of their senses.

"As well as being delighted by the success of the study in the short term, there are very few studies that document weight loss past the end of treatment, so to see that people continued to lose weight despite not having any support shows the sustainability and effectiveness of this intervention."

Trisha Bradbury was one of the participants allocated to the FIT study, and she explains: "I lost my mum at 60, and being 59 myself with a variety of health problems, my motivation was to be there for my daughter. I kept thinking about wearing the dress I'd bought for my daughter's graduation, and on days I really didn't feel like exercising, kept picturing how I'd feel.

"I've gone from 14 stone to 12 stone 2 and have managed to lower the dosage I need for my blood pressure tablets. I'd still like to lose a touch more, but I'm so delighted with the mind-set shift."

Professor Jackie Andrade, Professor in Psychology at the University of Plymouth, is one of the co-creators of FIT, and she explains: "FIT is based on two decades of research showing that mental imagery is more strongly emotionally charged than other types of thought. It uses imagery to strengthen people's motivation and confidence to achieve their goals, and teaches people how to do this for themselves, so they can stay motivated even when faced with challenges. We were very excited to see that our intervention achieved exactly what we had hoped for and that it helped our participants achieve their goals and most importantly to maintain them."

The full study, entitled Functional Imagery Training versus Motivational Interviewing for Weight Loss: A randomised controlled trial of brief individual interventions for overweight and obesity is available to view in the International Journal of Obesity (doi: 10.1038/s41366-018-0122-1).
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release addresses this, sort of, when it states: “Most people agree that in order to lose weight, you need to eat less and exercise more, but in many cases, people simply aren’t motivated enough to heed this advice – however much they might agree with it. So FIT comes in with the key aim of encouraging someone to come up with their own imagery of what change might look and feel like to them, how it might be achieved and kept up, even when challenges arise.” That’s enough to earn it a satisfactory ranking, particularly since it is consistent with the underlying study. However, it would be more valuable to see how effective FIT is when used in conjunction with proven weight loss techniques.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A small company started by a neuroscientist at the University of Rochester has moved closer to providing doctors with what he says is a simple, computer-based tool to help detect early signs of Alzheimer’s disease or other forms of dementia.

Cerebral Assessment Systems has received marketing approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for Cognivue, a cognitive-assessment tool that functions somewhat like a video game. A patient can perform the inexpensive and simple test while a time-strapped primary-care physician tends to other patients. The 10-minute, non­invasive examination can detect subtle lapses in the brain’s perceptual ability that may signal the early stages of mental decline caused by dementia.

The federal government’s approval to market the device comes as Alzheimer’s researchers everywhere step up the pursuit for easier and more inexpensive ways to identify dementia in its earliest stages.

[Scientists are cautiously optimistic about progress toward finding treatments for Alzheimer’s disease]

“Look, there is a late-life tsunami of late-life cognitive decline coming at us, and health-care providers are standing on the beach,” said Charles J. Duffy, a neurology professor at the University of Rochester Medical Center who founded the company. “What we are all about is making cognitive care part of primary care.”

More than 5 million Americans have Alzheimer’s disease, the leading cause of dementia. That number is expected to reach 13.5 million by 2050, according to the Alzheimer’s Association. With the United States shifting toward an older society, the hope is that earlier detection can lead to earlier intervention to slow or arrest the disease, perhaps through medications working their way to the market or changes in lifestyle. In addition to Alzheimer’s, a person’s mental competency can be hindered by other conditions, such as untreated diabetes, thyroid conditions or toxic interactions among prescription medications.

Duffy said his tool holds promise as a relatively inexpensive and easy way to test people’s memory and ability to think.

With Cognivue, patients sit before a video screen that shows a series of images, such as a group of dots, that move around and fluctuate in clarity. Using a rotary-shaped mouse called a manipulandum, the patients try to follow the dots with a wedge-shaped cursor. The task becomes more difficult, especially for people with early stages of dementia, as the dots move around, changing their direction, speed and intensity.

“All perception is interpretive, and so what we’re doing is measuring that process,” Duffy said. Other parts of the test challenge memory recall or the ability to recognize letters and shapes.

Cerebral Assessment Systems’ device received de novo approval from the FDA, a streamlined process for reviewing medical devices that appear to be new enough to have no equivalent and pose little risk.

The Pittsford, N.Y.-based company’s FDA application included data from a comparative study involving 401 people recruited from 13 communities for older adults. The subjects, ranging in age from 55 to 95, were classified in three groups based on cognitive abilities: normal, mild cognitive impairment and impaired. Their performance on the Cognivue device was compared to their scores on an existing cognitive assessment test known as the St. Louis University Mental Status Examination (SLUMS).

The device would be available only for use by medical professionals as part of a more comprehensive assessment of cognitive function. It is not intended to be a standalone diagnostic tool, and its effectiveness for people with less than 12 years of education is not proven.

Linda M. Rice, a primary-care internist with about 1,200 patients in her Rochester practice, said that after a year of using the device in her clinic, she is convinced of its worth. About half of her patients are older than 65, and they often have questions about memory loss and their cognitive abilities.

But her options for rating their performance involve administering the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) , also known as the Folstein test, that uses a 30-point questionnaire. The test, which has been around since 1975, offers only a broad indication of cognitive abilities and fails to pick up borderline problems, she said.

“You have to be pretty bad to do poorly on this exam,” she said.

But the alternative involves referring patients for a battery of neuropsychiatric tests that can take hours to complete and cost $1,000 or more. The computer-based tool created by Duffy has helped Rice to convince some patients that it’s time to stop driving and to start them on medications sooner to slow the progress of Alzheimer’s.

“I think it’s a really potentially valuable tool,” said Leslie Algase, an internist who tends about 2,000 patients in Rochester, at least 30 percent of whom are older than 65. Algase, who said she has no financial ties to the company, agreed to use the Cognivue in her practice about three years ago after meeting Duffy at a conference.

Algase rates the device as about as accurate as the MMSE. But she said it’s more convenient and less time-consuming to administer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job in providing the reader with other testing methods and a bit about their complexity and time requirements.  We are told that the new approach is as good if not better that existing instruments.  So, we are giving the story a Satisfactory rating.  But again, we are never given any data supporting that viewpoint.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Another study evaluating the value of mammograms for younger women finds that screening can lower the risk of dying from breast cancer for women in their 40s.

The study, done in Sweden, found that women who were screened cut their risk by 29 percent. That means screening 1,250 women five times over a 10-year period would save one life, study author Hakan Jonsson said during a teleconference Wednesday. The research was published online Wednesday in the journal Cancer and is to be presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's annual Breast Cancer Symposium, which starts Friday in National Harbor, Md.

The findings will no doubt do little to quell a controversy that has existed since the 1980s over the value of mammography screenings for women in their 40s.

Last year, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommended that women in their 40s not at high risk for breast cancer could forego mammograms until they turned 50 and, even then, it said they only needed to undergo screening once every two years.

That recommendation met with outrage from breast cancer specialists, while other organizations, including the American Cancer Society, continued to recommend annual mammograms for women in their 40s.

To further stir the pot, a Norwegian study released last week found that routine mammograms accounted for only about one-third of the decline in breast cancer death rates seen recently.

The value of mammograms for women 50 and older is not in question.

Speaking at the teleconference, Dr. Jennifer Obel, chair of the American Society of Clinical Oncology's communications committee, said: "This study adds to our knowledge of mammogram performance in this age group. Many women aged 40 to 49 want unambiguous recommendations. While the optimal schedule of regular mammograms continues to be discussed by experts in the field, the critical message here is that all women starting at age 40 should talk to their doctor to understand the benefits and risks of screening and to understand what is best."

"Mammography has been shown in study after study to reduce breast cancer deaths in women aged 40 to 49," Obel added. "The real message is that any time we order a diagnostic test, we need to discuss that test with our patients. It remains the best method we have available to detect breast cancer early in the general population."

The authors of the new research, the largest epidemiological study of its kind, looked at screening and mortality data for women in Sweden. Although screening is mandated for woman aged 50 to 69 in that country, the decision to screen earlier is made by individual counties.

The study authors compared death-registry data on women in their 40s who had been invited by their county to be screened with data on women who had not been invited. In all, more than 1 million women were involved in the study and the follow-up period was a lengthy 16 years.

The reduction was estimated at 26 percent to 29 percent, depending on the model used, according to the study. The reduction was greater when only those women that actually attended screening were considered.

The benefits were greater in women aged 45 to 49, vs. those aged 40 to 44, the researchers said.

Jonsson, an associate professor of cancer epidemiology at Umea University in Sweden, could not pinpoint exactly why his findings differed from those of other studies. He mentioned certain differences in methodology as a possible factor, as well as the possibility that mammographic techniques have improved over the years.

In another study released during the Wednesday press conference, researchers from M.D. Anderson Cancer Center at the University of Texas in Houston found that overall survival rates among breast cancer patients in the past six decades have increased, a trend due largely to earlier detection and treatments.

"There was a significant improvement in survival overall, including all patients with all stages of breast cancer...even those who had disseminated cancer," said study author Dr. Aman Buzdar, a professor of medicine and breast medical oncology at M.D. Anderson.

Although the data, which covered breast cancer patients who were treated at M.D. Anderson between 1944 and 2004, came from a single institution, Buzdar said he believes the results can be generalized to other breast cancer patients.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on mammography.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does not discuss the option of NOT screening. It does quote Dr. Jennifer obel saying "While the optimal schedule of regular mammograms continues to be discussed by experts in the field, the critical message here is that all women starting at age 40 should talk to their doctor to understand the benefits and risks of screening and to understand what is best."  But the story had already framed the new study as counter to the US Preventive Services Task Force recommendations last November – yet this quote is almost the same thing that USPSTF recommended last Fall.   
ONLY because the story at least cited the USPSTF’s concerns aboutr screening in the 40s, we will give it a barely satisfactory score, because that at least implies there’s an option of foregoing screening. But we easily could have gone the other way with this criterion score as well. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental drug touted as a breakthrough for treating severe postpartum depression is showing some promising results in a small clinical trial.

Sage Therapeutics, based in Cambridge, Mass., reported on Tuesday that 7 of the 10 women who took the drug in the trial experienced significant improvement in their depression within 60 hours of the injection. That effect was maintained for 30 days.

Among the 11 women who took the placebo, just one experienced remission within 60 hours.

Interestingly, none of the patients who took the drug reported psychiatric side effects, such as abnormal dreams, insomnia, and anxiety — but 5 of the 11 women on the placebo reported such symptoms. A few patients in each group experienced dizziness or a sedative effect.

Sage’s drug is designed to change the traffic patterns in the brain. There’s a natural push and pull between neurotransmitters called NMDA receptors and the GABA receptors that regulate their flow in the brain. In cases of severe depression, that equilibrium gets out of whack, and Sage’s drug is meant to restore it, modulating those GABA receptors to allow NMDA to do its job.

The data could represent a “paradigm shift in how the disease is thought about,” CEO Jeff Jonas said in a conference call.

But before anyone shifts anything, Sage will need more data. The early results are “promising and exciting,” said Dr. Allison Baker, a psychiatrist at Massachusetts General Hospital’s Center for Women’s Mental Health, but “we need to see replication of this data over a much wider range in terms of numbers.”

The study is small and has not been peer-reviewed; Sage disclosed the results in a press release. The company has not submitted study data to federal regulators and isn’t at this point seeking approval of the drug, known as SAGE-547, for postpartum depression. Its next steps: expanding the trial to enroll more women and to determine optimum doses.

“I think it’s incumbent upon us … to find a lower dose that might be just as useful,” especially for nursing mothers, Jonas said.

Women in the trial were asked not to breastfeed for the first 10 days after receiving the injection. The drug has a “very, very short half-life” in the body, Jonas said, meaning that it can be metabolized quickly.

The company is also testing SAGE-547 as a treatment for a rare form of epilepsy. It’s in late-stage trials on that front. It’s also working on an oral form of the drug.

Though preliminary, the early results on postpartum depression are tantalizing. One of the drug’s most promising features: It appears to work quickly — some women in the study started experiencing relief after 24 hours. By contrast, traditional antidepressants can take weeks to begin working. The only other treatment for postpartum depression is talk therapy.

SAGE-547’s apparent speed is what’s getting the most attention in the psychiatric community, Baker said. In the early days of motherhood, women ideally build competency and confidence in their parenting. Dealing with postpartum depression derails that process, and it’s linked to increased rates of anxiety and mood disorders among children, she said.

“If we could essentially nip those within 60 hours or even 24 hours and then keep that at bay for at least 30 days, that’s pretty compelling when you think of the alternative,” Baker said.

A serious mood disorder that affects as many as 1 in 7 women after childbirth, postpartum depression can lead to panic attacks, inconsolable sadness, and deep feelings of inadequacy. Some women have thoughts of harming their baby or themselves.

Jonas, a Harvard-trained psychiatrist, has long experience working with treatments for mental illnesses such as depression. He wrote the book “Everything You Need To Know About Prozac” in the early 1990s, in part to counter fear-mongering about the antidepressant.

This story has been updated with additional information.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This is a barely passing satisfactory as the story does briefly acknowledge alternatives. The only reference to conventional antidepressant treatment is that it doesn’t work as quickly as this experimental drug appears to. Talk therapy is mentioned, but there is no mention of its effectiveness. While it is true that antidepressants can take weeks, they and mood stabilizing drugs for women with bipolar disorder do treat postpartum depression. In women with a history of this highly recurrent condition, antidepressant treatment may be started or maintained during pregnancy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Drugs To Prevent Weak Bones Linked To Unusual Fractures In Women

There's fresh evidence pointing to a troubling link between commonly used osteoporosis drugs and a rare type of thighbone fracture.

When a hip bone breaks because of osteoporosis, the fracture usually involves either the ball at the top of the femur or the narrow neck just below the ball. The unusual fractures that may be associated with certain osteoporosis drugs called bisphosphonates occur lower on the bone. Ironically, that's where the femur, the longest bone in the body, is usually strongest.

These unusual fractures can occur suddenly without any trauma, such as a fall. And they can be complex breaks that are difficult to fix and slow to heal.

In the study, published in current issue of JAMA, researchers looked at 716 of these fractures in more than 200,000 Ontario women who had taken bisphosphonates.

Women who had taken the drugs for five years or longer had nearly a three times higher risk of suffering atypical fractures compared with women who had only transient exposure to such drugs.

That's called the relative risk, and it seems alarming. But the "absolute risk" of these unusual fractures is still pretty low — 13 fractures per year for every 10,000 people taking bisphosphonates for five years or longer. That is, long-term users have a risk of about a tenth of 1 percent.

Moreover, the study verified that long-term use of bisphosphonate drugs reduces the risk of typical osteoporosis fractures by 24 percent. That's obviously a lot more benefit than risk.

"The big message really is the number of typical hip fractures is much, much larger than the number of unusual thigh fractures," says Dr. Gillian Hawker of St. Michael's Hospital in Ontario, an osteoporosis specialist and study author. "So although we believe there is an increased risk of these unusual fractures, it doesn't outweigh the benefit" of taking osteoporosis drugs.

Merck, which makes Fosamax, the original and leading bisphosphonate drug, criticizes the new study. The company said in a statement to Shots that women who had atypical fractures were different from those who didn't. For instance, they started out with a history of more fractures, so the comparison isn't valid.

"Merck believes that the results must be interpreted with caution and should not be overstated," says the company's statement.

Still, the accumulating evidence that there is a risk of these serious, unusual fractures associated with bisphosphonates is getting a lot of attention in the medical community.

Last fall the Food and Drug Administration issued a "safety update" urging doctors and patients to be on the lookout for the problem. Often, the FDA says, an atypical fracture is preceded by pain in the thigh, apparently from a small stress fracture that signals bone weakness. "Although it is not clear if bisphosphonates are the cause, these unusual femur fractures have been predominantly reported in patients taking bisphosphonates," the FDA says.

The concern is heightened by another, even rarer possible side effect – osteonecrosis of the jaw. Basically, it means that part of the jawbone dies.

Some reports – including one published earlier this month in the Journal of Dental Research — have found a higher risk of the jaw problem in dental patients taking bisphosphonates.

Again, Merck disputes the connection. Earlier this month it convinced a New Jersey jury that Fosamax did not cause one woman's jaw problems.

Amid all the debate, many specialists are wondering if women on bisphosphonates should take a "holiday" from the drug from time to time. The idea is that perhaps they'd get the osteoporosis benefit without the risks of osteonecrosis and unusual fractures. "You could do five years on, five years off," Dr. Clifford Rosen, a bone specialist at Maine Medical Center, tells Shots. "Some people are doing three on and three off."

But at some point, should these patients start taking the drug again? "I don't think anybody knows," Rosen says. "The thought is you would have to put them back on at some time."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: One strength of the story was its ending, with a discussion with a bone specialist about the option of taking a drug “holiday” from time to time, and the question of whether women who stop taking it temporarily should start again.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - National guidelines help doctors decide how to treat high blood pressure. But tailoring those guidelines to better fit individuals could prevent many more heart attacks and strokes, say developers of a computer model that makes those calculations.

Their study, published Monday in the Annals of Internal Medicine, estimated the effects of using “individualized guidelines” to make decisions on treating high blood pressure.

It found that the tailored approach could prevent 43 percent more heart attacks and strokes than the simpler, general recommendations used now.

Currently, U.S. guidelines recommend treatment if blood pressure rises above 140/90 mm Hg, or above 130/80 mm Hg if a person has diabetes or chronic kidney disease.

Doctors generally add their own judgment to that decision as well. If, for instance, a person has slightly elevated blood pressure but is otherwise at low risk for heart problems, then lifestyle changes might be enough.

But the new study looked at a more sophisticated way of estimating individual patients’ needs. Researchers used a computer-based “risk calculator” that took into account a person’s age, cholesterol levels, family history of heart disease and any diabetes diagnosis.

It also factored in what’s known about different types of patients’ responses to various blood pressure medications.

The researchers then used data from a long-term study of 15,800 Americans to estimate the effects of applying the individualized guidelines.

Overall, they found, the tailored method could prevent 43 percent more heart attacks and strokes than national guidelines, if healthcare costs were kept the same.

If, on the other hand, the number of heart attacks and strokes prevented were kept the same, the individualized guidelines would accomplish that result at a 67 percent cost savings versus the national guidelines.

The goal of using the risk calculator “is the same as the physician’s desire to take into account the ‘whole patient’ when discussing treatment options with patients,” said lead researcher Dr. David M. Eddy.

The problem with the old-fashioned way, he told Reuters Health in an email, is that there are many pieces of information about a patient to consider.

“It is impossible for the human brain to digest it all and estimate accurately the patient’s risks or how they would benefit from treatments,” he said.

According to Eddy, risk calculators like the one in the study could, eventually, help doctors give patients real numbers. A doctor might tell you, for example, what your risk is of developing diabetes in the next 20 years, and how much you could cut that risk if you lose a certain amount of weight (and keep it off).

Eddy is a founder of Archimedes, Inc., a San Francisco-based company that has developed a computer-based mathematical model to aid in healthcare decisions. The calculator used in this study is a simplified version of that model.

Eddy said that the calculator, or others like it, could be integrated into electronic health records. A patient’s information could be automatically fed to the calculator, and the results would then be displayed on a computer for the doctor and patient to discuss.

A researcher not involved in the work said it was a “nice study” that is a first step toward showing that tailored guidelines could have benefits.

“This shows that there might be better ways for physicians to choose who gets treated and who does not,” said Dr. Douglas K. Owens of the VA Palo Alto Health Care System in California, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

General guidelines, like those for treating high blood pressure, are kept fairly simple so they are easy to remember, Owens told Reuters Health in an interview. Doctors, ideally, then adapt those guidelines to individual patients’ situations.

However, Owens said, “it’s hard to do all of that in your head. This gives them a tool.”

Now the looming questions are how to implement risk calculators in doctors’ practices — and, Owens said, whether that benefits patients’ health in the real world.

“The general theme is that we can do better, and we may have an opportunity to improve patients’ health outcomes,” Owens said. “That’s the hope.”

He said he thinks electronic health records will be key to putting individualized guidelines into practice.

And right now, there is a way to go before most doctors will have those systems in place.

A recent government survey found that the percentage of U.S. doctors using electronic health records is on the rise, but still fairly low.

About one-quarter of surveyed doctors said they had “basic” electronic medical record systems in their offices. Only about 10 percent had a “fully functional” system that included extensive information on patients’ medical history.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The entire focus of the story was a comparison of a “tailored medicine” approach to existing guidelines for treatment of high blood pressure.
It would have been interesting to explore whether this is the only model for tailoring clinical information to arrive at better clinical outcomes or whether there are other models available for this purpose.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 14 (HealthDay News) -- A drug commonly used to prevent excess bleeding in surgeries could keep thousands of people from bleeding to death after trauma, a new study suggests.

The drug, tranexamic acid (TXA) is cheap, widely available around the world and easily administered, experts said. It works by significantly reducing the rate at which blood clots break down, the researchers explained.

"When people have serious injuries, whether from accidents or violence, and when they have severe hemorrhage they can bleed to death. This treatment reduces the chances of bleeding to death by about a sixth, " said researcher Dr. Ian Roberts, a professor of epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in the U.K.

According to Roberts, each year about 600,000 people bleed to death worldwide. "So, if you could reduce that by a sixth, you've saved 100,000 lives in one year," he said.

The report, which was primarily funded by philanthropic groups and the British government, is published in the June 15 online edition of The Lancet.

For the study, Roberts and colleagues in the CRASH-2 consortium randomly assigned more than 20,000 trauma patients from 274 hospitals across 40 countries to injections of either TXA or placebo.

Among patients receiving TXA, the rate of death from any cause was cut by 10 percent compared to patients receiving placebo, the researchers found. In the TXA group, 14.5 percent of the patients died compared with 16 percent of the patients in the placebo group.

When the researchers looked at deaths from bleeding, those in the TXA group experienced a 15 percent reduction in mortality. Among patients receiving TXA, 4.9 percent died from bleeding, compared with 5.7 percent of the patients receiving placebo, they found.

Although there was some worry that TXA might lead to more heart attacks, strokes or clots in the lungs, the researchers observed no such increase among patients getting the drug.

Dr. Jerrold H. Levy, deputy chair for research at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta and author of an accompanying journal editorial, said that, "these data are really neat, because any therapy to reduce mortality in trauma is, I think, a major finding."

Using this drug to treat trauma patients is a completely new idea, Levy said. "I think people should consider it [TXA] following trauma on the basis of this study," he said.

Currently, TXA is not generally used in emergency rooms to treat trauma patients, but Roberts believes that this study could change that.

"It's not our job to tell doctors how to treat their patients, but this is a drug that is safe and effective in a condition where people have a high risk of death," he said.

The researchers believe that TXA could have even wider uses, such as reducing brain bleeds after brain injury. The drug could also be used to reduce postpartum bleeding, which the researchers say causes some 100,000 deaths a year worldwide.

In fact, a trial to see whether TXA can reduce postpartum bleeding has started, the team noted.

Levy however, cautioned that the results of this study apply only to TXA and do not mean that people should try similar drugs hoping for similar results.

"Everybody wants to be creative, but you have to look at the data, and they used TXA," Levy said. "You can't get creative and say 'Ah, one of the other drugs will do the same thing' -- you don't know that, and that's one of my concerns."

For more information on trauma, visit the U.S. National Institute of General Medical Science.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Unlike the competing coverage from the AP and NPR, this story mentions the fact that there are other drugs which help promote clotting and might be useful for trauma patients. The story correctly warns that the benefits of TXA can’t be generalized to other drugs without additional research.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors and patients “traditionally see palliative care as something extended to a hospitalized patient in the last week of life,” said Dr. Jennifer S. Temel, an oncologist and author of the paper. “We thought it made sense to start them at the time of diagnosis. And we were thrilled to see such a huge impact. It shows that palliative care and cancer care aren’t mutually exclusive.”

Dr. Atul Gawande, a Harvard Medical School surgeon and writer who just published a long article in The New Yorker about hospitalized patients’ suffering before death, called the study “amazing.”

“The field was crying out for a randomized trial,” he added.

Although the study could not determine why the patients lived longer, the authors and other experts had several theories: depression is known to shorten life, and patients whose pain is treated often sleep better, eat better and talk more with relatives. Also, hospitals are dangerous places for very sick people; they may get fatal blood infections, pneumonia or bedsores, or simply be overwhelmed by the powerful drugs and radiation attacking their cancer.

Saying the study was “of critical importance,” Dr. R. Sean Morrison, president of the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, said it was the “first concrete evidence of what a lot of us have seen in our practices — when you control pain and other symptoms, people not only feel better, they live longer.”

There is sometimes tension between medical specialties, since surgeons and oncologists often view cancer as a battle, while palliative care specialists are seen as “giving up.”

Palliative care typically begins with a long conversation about what the patient with a terminal diagnosis wants out of his remaining life. It includes the options any oncologist addresses: surgery, chemotherapy and radiation and their side effects. But it also includes how much suffering a patient wishes to bear, effects on the family, and legal, insurance and religious issues. Teams focus on controlling pain, nausea, swelling, shortness of breath and other side effects; they also address patients’ worries and make sure they have help with making meals, dressing and bathing when not hospitalized.

Hospice care is intensive palliative care including home nursing, but insurers and Medicare usually cover it only if the patient abandons medical treatment and two doctors certify that death is less than six months away.

During the debate over President Obama’s 2009 health care bill, provisions to have Medicare and insurers pay for optional consultations with doctors on palliative and hospice care led to rumors, spread by talk-show hosts like Rush Limbaugh and Glenn Beck and by the former vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin, that the bill empowered “death panels” that would “euthanize” elderly Americans.

Legislators eventually removed the provisions. In practice, Medicare and private insurers do pay for some palliative care, said Dr. Gail Austin Cooney, a former president of the palliative medicine academy. “But it’s piecemeal,” she said. “The billing is complicated, and for many physicians that’s enough of a deterrent to not bother.”

Dr. Cooney herself had such care along with surgery and chemotherapy for ovarian cancer in 2008.

“I decided I wanted every drop of chemotherapy they could give me, and it was very painful, dumping the drugs directly into my belly,” she said. She needed powerful painkillers, and also chose alternative-medicine options like acupuncture and “energy work” for nausea and fatigue.

“I’m rigid — I had my last chemo treatment on Christmas Eve because I wanted it on the day I was due for it,” she said. “But I couldn’t have completed the program without the psychosocial support.”

Palliative care experts now want to study patients with other cancers, heart disease, stroke, dementia and emphysema. But the National Institutes of Health is under budget pressure, and the other major source of money for medical research, the pharmaceutical industry, has little incentive to study palliative care. This trial was paid for by the American Society of Clinical Oncology and private philanthropy.

“Philanthropists tend to focus on curing cancer,” Dr. Temel said. “But we can’t ignore people who need end-of-life care.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: As noted in the competing reviews, the point of the study was to compare early palliative care with existing standard cancer treatment. However, this story, like the others, could have provided more information about what standard cancer treatment — the current "existing alternative" — entails. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
N-acetylcysteine reduced PTSD symptoms, cravings, and depression in veterans with PTSD and substance use disorder in a randomized controlled pilot trial conducted at the Medical University of South Carolina and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center

N-acetylcysteine, when combined with group cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), reduced symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), cravings, and depression significantly more than CBT alone in veterans with co-occurring PTSD and substance use disorder, a particularly difficult-to-treat population, according to the findings of a randomized controlled pilot trial conducted by researchers at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center.

This trial is the first to use NAC as a pharmacotherapy for PTSD and a broad range of SUDs. The results were published online ahead of print on October 11, 2016 by the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.

The National Center for PTSD estimates that seven to eight percent of Americans will have PTSD at some point in their life. The numbers are even worse for veterans: it is estimated, for example, that 30 percent of Vietnam veterans will have experienced PTSD at some point in their life. Approximately 40 to 50 percent of veterans with PTSD also have a substance use disorder (SUD).

"Addiction goes along with virtually every psychiatric disorder at a higher percentage than it does in the general population" said Peter W. Kalivas, Ph.D. the senior author on the article and chair of the Department of Neuroscience at MUSC. "People who are prone to psychiatric disorders are also prone to addiction."

Currently, there are no well-explored pharmacological treatments for patients with co-occurring PTSD/SUD. Although selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have been approved by the FDA for treatment of PTSD, pharmacological treatments for co-occurring PTSD/SUD have yielded suboptimal results.

Groundbreaking basic science research by Kalivas has shown that levels of glutamate transporters are decreased in SUDs and that administration of the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine can help restore those levels and guard against relapse in animal models of SUD. Because evidence suggests that SUDs and PTSD share overlapping neurobiological pathways, Sudie E. Back, Ph.D., lead author on the article, hypothesized that NAC treatment with CBT would be a novel approach to treat co-occurring PTSD and SUD. Back is a professor in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at MUSC and a staff psychologist at the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center.

In the eight-week randomized controlled trial led by Back and Kalivas, 35 veterans with PTSD and SUD, all of whom were receiving cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for their SUD, were randomized to either 2400 mg/day of NAC or placebo. The average age of the veterans was 49 years and many were veterans of the Vietnam War. To be included, veterans had to have abstained from substance use for at least seven days. Of the veterans enrolled in the trial, 83% completed it, a very high rate for this difficult-to-treat population.

Veterans in the NAC-treated group showed a 46% reduction in PTSD symptoms, compared with a 25% reduction in the placebo group on the Clinical-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), which assesses trauma history and symptom severity. The threshold CAPS score for diagnosis of PTSD is 50.

"As a group, the NAC-treated veterans were below diagnostic level for PTSD at the end of treatment," said Back. "For PTSD, these are some of the best outcomes we have seen in the literature for a medication."

Craving and depression were also reduced in the NAC-treated group. The amount of craving was reduced by 81% and the frequency of craving by 71% in the NAC group, compared with 32% and 29% in the placebo group. "Craving is a key component of substance use in relapse," said Back. "If you have a medication that can really reduce craving, that will go a long way to helping people stay clean and sober." Depression, gauged using the Beck Depression Inventory, was reduced 48% in the NAC group vs. 15% in the placebo group.

Veterans in the study had low rates of substance use during the trial, and the study found little effect of medication on use, perhaps due to the fact that all participants were receiving SUD treatment and exhibiting low levels of use. This finding could also be due to the relatively limited number of participants or to the chronic nature of the participants' PTSD. "This is a tough patient population with SUD to work with." said Kalivas. "We have Vietnam vets that have had PTSD for 15 to 20 years. This is not an easy-to-turn-around population."

Although these early, promising findings show that NAC reduced PTSD symptoms, craving, and depression, NAC should not be used as a monotherapy or substitute for evidence-based behavioral treatment, but instead be seen as an adjunct therapy that enhances it.

"We would not advocate using it instead of therapy," said Back. "But this could be something to help prevent relapse when used alongside a behavioral treatment."

NAC is available over the counter and does not cause side effects at the doses used in the study, but it degrades quickly when stored, is contraindicated in patients with asthma, and can cause nausea at higher doses and so should always be obtained and administered under a physician's supervision.

The next steps in Back's research are to run a longer-term trial of NAC in veterans with PTSD and SUD and to use MRS magnetic spectroscopy to better explore the effect of NAC on glutamate levels in patients with PTSD and SUD.

Founded in 1824 in Charleston, The Medical University of South Carolina is the oldest medical school in the South. Today, MUSC continues the tradition of excellence in education, research, and patient care. MUSC educates and trains more than 3,000 students and residents in six colleges (Dental Medicine, Graduate Studies, Health Professions, Medicine, Nursing, and Pharmacy), and has nearly 13,000 employees, including approximately 1,500 faculty members. As the largest non-federal employer in Charleston, the university and its affiliates have collective annual budgets in excess of $2.2 billion, with an annual economic impact of more than $3.8 billion and annual research funding in excess of $250 million. MUSC operates a 700-bed medical center, which includes a nationally recognized children's hospital, the Ashley River Tower (cardiovascular, digestive disease, and surgical oncology), Hollings Cancer Center (a National Cancer Institute-designated center), Level I Trauma Center, Institute of Psychiatry, and the state's only transplant center. In 2016, U.S. News & World Report named MUSC Health the number one hospital in South Carolina. For more information on academic programs or clinical services, visit musc.edu. For more information on hospital patient services, visit muschealth.org.

Located in historic downtown Charleston, South Carolina, the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center is a tertiary care teaching hospital providing the highest level quality care from cardiology to neurology to primary and mental health care for 70,000 Veterans along the South Carolina and Georgia coast. The Ralph H. Johnson VA achieved a 5-Star rating according to VA's Strategic Analytics for Improvement and Learning Value (SAIL) model. The SAIL rating ranks the Charleston VA in the top 10 percent of VA medical centers nationwide for quality of care and efficiency. The Charleston VA is also ranked in the top 10th percentile according to the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). HEDIS is an independent review that measures performance of 90 percent of America's health plans and facilities in both the public and private sector on dimensions of care and service. The Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center is a center of excellence for robotic surgery and orthopedics, and is the first VA National Tele-Mental Health Hub providing care for Veterans across the U.S. The 149-bed hospital includes six community based outpatient clinics, a 20-bed nursing home, women's health, and the full range of inpatient and outpatient care, including medical and surgical intensive care. The VAMC provides more than 875,000 outpatient visits and approximately 4,400 in-patient stays annually. With more than 2,500 employees, Charleston VA has an annual budget of $458 million, research funding of more than $21 million, and more than 100 principal investigators participating in approximately 300 research studies. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions other treatments for PTSD (such as SSRI antidepressants) even though we don’t learn how effective those treatments are compared to N-acetylcysteine. The lead researcher very helpfully mentions that the drug should not be used without cognitive behavioral therapy or other forms of psychological counseling.
The news release places the results of the study in a positive light noting, “Currently, there are no well-explored pharmacological treatments for patients with co-occurring PTSD/SUD. Although selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have been approved by the FDA for treatment of PTSD, pharmacological treatments for co-occurring PTSD/SUD have yielded suboptimal results.”
While SSRI’s have been the most studied to date, other drugs that have been studied in preliminary trials could have been mentioned, including prozosin, prazosin, guanfacine, atomoxetine, topiramate, memantine, acamprosate, and ketamine. A 2014 article in Addictive Behaviors journal describes some of these: “Pharmacological treatment of comorbid PTSD and substance use disorder: recent progress.” (Addictive behaviors 39.2 (2014): 428-433.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The research will be highlighted by study authors during a special press conference to be moderated by Tobias S. Köhler, MD, MPH, FACS, AUA spokesperson and associate professor of Surgery at Southern Illinois University on May 8, 2016 at 7:30 a.m. PT in the San Diego Convention Center.

Testosterone therapy is used to treat men with clinically diagnosed testosterone deficiency (serum T levels <300 ng/dL), also known as hypogonadism. It is often administered as a gel, patch, injection or implant (pellet). There is currently no oral form of testosterone therapy approved for use in the United States by the Federal Drug Agency; however researchers from Houston, TX and Torrance, CA have been evaluating the long-term safety and tolerability of LPCN 1021, a novel oral testosterone undecanoate formulation for the treatment of low testosterone.

Throughout a 52-week study period, a total of 315 hypogonadal men were randomized either to LPCN 1021 or T gel (active control). Of the 315 men, 210 were randomized to LPCN 1021 and 105 were randomized to active control. Following a 13-week efficacy phase, men continued to receive their assigned treatment for up to 52 weeks. They returned at weeks 26, 39 and 52 for safety assessments, which included an evaluation of adverse events, clinical laboratory tests and physical examinations.
• LPCN 1021 was well tolerated and had a favorable safety profile in the long-term management of hypogonadal patients
• No hepatic, cardiac or drug-related serious adverse events were reported
• The most common drug-related adverse events for LPCN 1021 and T gel 1.62 percent were acne (2.9 percent vs. 2.9 percent, respectively), headache (0.5 percent vs. 3.8 percent, respectively), weight increase (2.4 percent vs. 0 percent, respectively), hematocrit increase (1.9 percent vs. 0 percent, respectively), liver enzyme level increase (1.4 percent vs. 0 percent, respectively), fatigue (0.5 percent vs. 1.9 percent, respectively), and hypertension (0.5 percent vs. 1.9 percent, respectively)
• Lipid parameters (i.e., cholesterol, LDL, HDL, and TG) were comparable between treatment groups at Week 52
• Androgenic parameters including hematocrit, hemoglobin, platelet, prothrombin, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) showed no significant differences in change from baseline to end of study between treatments

"Based on the results of this study, we might be closer than ever to having an oral form of therapy to treat the millions of men with hypogonadism," said Dr. Köhler. "Making sure an oral treatment is safe and effective for men and for the children and partners at risk for inadvertent testosterone transference is the top priority, and what we've found so far has shown we're on the right track."

About the American Urological Association: The 111th Annual Meeting of the American Urological Association takes place May 6 – 10 at the San Diego Convention Center in San Diego, CA.

Founded in 1902 and headquartered near Baltimore, Maryland, the American Urological Association is a leading advocate for the specialty of urology, and has more than 21,000 members throughout the world. The AUA is a premier urologic association, providing invaluable support to the urologic community as it pursues its mission of fostering the highest standards of urologic care through education, research and the formulation of health policy.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that this oral form of testosterone was compared with T gel. It also names other delivery forms including a patch, injection or implant (pellet) 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People with psoriasis who haven’t seen improvement with standard treatments now have a new option. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the injectable drug Siliq (broadalumab) for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in adults.

Because of an association with suicidal thoughts and behaviors, Siliq will be sold with a “black box” warning and should be considered only for patients whose psoriasis has not responded—or has stopped responding—to phototherapy or to other systemic medicines taken orally or via injection.

Plaque psoriasis is an autoimmune condition that causes cells to build up on the surface of the skin, forming thick red patches and flaky silver-white scales. Current treatment options for psoriasis include topical treatments (like corticosteroids) phototherapy (using an ultraviolet light box or a laser) and systemic drugs—delivered via a pill, an injection or an IV infusion—that work throughout the body.

Siliq is unique because it binds to the receptor of a protein called interleukin-17, a known contributor to inflammation. By blocking the receptor from being activated, it keeps the body from receiving signals that can fuel inflammatory responses and psoriasis progression. Two other psoriasis drugs currently on the market work similarly, but instead bind to the protein itself.

This small difference is significant, says Dr. Richard Fried, a member of the National Psoriasis Foundation medical board, since responses to drug treatments can vary dramatically from person to person. “Having another agent in our armamentarium that works by a different mechanism is a welcome addition and may prove beneficial to many psoriasis suffers,” he says in an email. (Fried says he has no involvement with the drug or the drug company.)

In the three clinical trials considered for drug approval, more than 50% of patients who used Siliq achieved total skin clearance—the ultimate goal of psoriasis treatments—within a year. The most common side effects of the drug were joint and muscle pain, headache, fatigue, diarrhea, throat pain, nausea, flu, low white blood cell count, fungal infections and reactions at the injection site.

The drug also comes with a more serious warning, as well. In a total of six clinical trials totaling about 6,200 participants, six suicides were reported by people receiving Siliq. People with a history of suicide attempts or depression had an increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior.

Because of these events, the labeling for Siliq will include a Boxed Warning, and the drug will only be available through a restricted REMS (Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy) program. In order to prescribe it, doctors must be certified with the program and must counsel patients about this risk. Patients must also agree to seek medical attention should they experience new or worsening mood changes, anxiety or suicidal thoughts.

A causal association between Siliq and increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior has not been established. Fried, a dermatologist and clinical psychologist, points out that psoriasis itself can be associated with mental health problems.

“Effective treatment has consistently shown reduction in the incidence and severity of depression and reduced likelihood of suicide,” says Fried. He adds that the data on Siliq suggests that it is not only effective in treating psoriasis, but that many patients experience improvement in anxiety and depression, as well.

Siliq, like other psoriasis medications, also affects the immune system. It can raise patients’ risk of infections and shouldn’t be used by people with certain chronic conditions, such as Crohn’s disease or active tuberculosis infections. People should also avoid immunizations with live vaccines while being treated with Siliq.

“Patients and their health care providers should discuss the benefits and risks of Siliq before considering treatment,” said Dr. Julie Beitz, director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, in an agency press release.

The drug’s recommended dosage schedule is an injection once a week for the first three weeks, followed by an injection every other week. Valeant Pharmaceuticals, Siliq’s manufacturer, says that pricing information is not available at this time, and expects to begin sales and marketing in the second half of 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses other drugs–two of which target a specific protein rather that Siliq’s target of a protein’s receptor molecule–as well as mentioning that the disease can be treated with “topical treatments (like corticosteroids)” and “phototherapy (using an ultraviolet light box or a laser).”
Yet, we wish the story would have explored more deeply the reality that there are a lot of new and expensive drugs available for patients with psoriasis, and where this new drug fits in remains to be seen–especially considering its black box warning.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 25, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Swedish scientists report that they've successfully implanted "biosynthetic" corneas in 10 patients, potentially paving the way for more accessible treatment for those with cornea-related vision problems.

"The patients' own cells and nerves grew back, and there was an overall improvement in vision," said study co-author May Griffith.

Currently, some cornea patients get transplanted corneas from donors who have died. "Human donor corneas work very well," Griffith said. "However, there is a shortage of good quality corneas that can be used for transplantation."

The shortage means trouble for many of those whose corneas -- the clear surface at the front of the eye -- have been injured or damaged by illness. An estimated 5 million people in the world have an eye disease called trachoma that affects the cornea, and another 1.5 million to 2 million are thought to have developed cornea-related blindness through other diseases or trauma.

For more than a century, doctors have considered transplantation of corneal tissue from deceased donors to be the best treatment, the study authors wrote. Artificial corneas are another option, but they're difficult to implant into the eye and can cause side effects, the researchers said.

In the new study, researchers tested corneal implants that are "biosynthetic," meaning they're created with the help of living tissues. In this case, the corneas are produced with the help of human collagen -- a kind of protein -- that's grown in yeast. The mock corneas were then placed into the eyes of 10 patients after the diseased corneas were removed.

"We were pleasantly surprised that in six patients, vision improved from about 20/400 to 20/100, meaning that these patients could see objects four times farther away than before the operation," said Griffith, director of the Integrative Regenerative Medicine Center at Linkoping University in Sweden.

The researchers went one step further and gave contact lenses to the patients. With the lenses in place, they all had improved vision, Griffith said.

Why didn't they all get better vision immediately without the contact lenses? "We believe that sutures used in this study resulted in roughness on the surface," Griffith said. "The contact lenses compensated for the surface roughness, resulting in improved vision. We will use less disruptive sutures in our next clinical study, and this should correct this problem."

As for side effects, Griffith said the patients didn't report any pain or discomfort, and there were no signs that their bodies tried to reject the corneas, a risk that people face when they get transplanted organs.

As for cost, Griffith said the biosynthetic corneas "in theory" should be cheaper than donated corneas. Griffith said a German study recently found that donated corneas cost about $2,500.

The next step in research, Griffith said, is to create a "new generation" of cornea implants and test them on a wider variety of patients.

The study appears in the Aug. 25 issue of Science Translational Medicine.

Dr. Mark J. Mannis, chair of the Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science at the University of California, Davis Eye Center, said the findings in the study appear to be valid. "This is true cutting-edge work and brings an exciting new option to the repertoire of corneal transplant surgeons," he said.

For more about corneal transplants, try the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does compare the treatment to human corneal transplants. It could have talked about plastic corneas, too. Dr. Mark J. Mannis, the one independent source in the story refers to a "repertoire of corneal transplant surgeons." What else is in that repertoire? It would be nice to know, and it would be even nicer to know how this procedure stacks up against the other options in terms of costs and benefits. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Medical researchers have recently returned to this plant product to investigate its effect on blood pressure and explore opportunities to put it to use in modern medicine and the home management of conditions.

Researchers have concluded that one glass of beetroot juice a day is enough to significantly reduce blood pressure in people with high blood pressure. They conducted a placebo-controlled trial with dozens of participants.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), high blood pressure is either the primary cause of or contributes to more than 1,000 deaths in the United States every day.

Because of the widespread impact of high blood pressure, researchers are likely to investigate in some depth any simple dietary interventions that could potentially benefit the wider population.

High blood pressure is a serious public health concern. It increases the risk of more dangerous health conditions, such as heart attack, stroke, and chronic heart failure. High blood pressure is also a major risk factor for kidney disease.

Beetroot contains high levels of dietary nitrate (NO3), which the body converts into biologically active nitrite (NO2) and nitric oxide (NO). In the human body, NO relaxes and dilates blood vessels.

Other leafy vegetables, such as lettuce and cabbage, also have high levels of the compound. They take it up from the soil through their roots.

A meta-analysis of 16 trials was published in The Journal of Nutrition in 2013.

The researchers found that "Inorganic nitrate and beetroot juice supplementation was associated with a significant reduction in systolic blood pressure."

One major trial was carried out at Queen Mary University of London (QMUL) in the United Kingdom and published in the journal Hypertension. The research was funded by the British Heart Foundation.

They found the following results:

For the trial, Prof. Amrita Ahluwalia of the vascular pharmacology department at QMUL and her colleagues recruited 64 people aged between 18 and 85 years.

Half of the participants were taking prescribed medication for high blood pressure but did not reach their target blood pressure, and the rest had been diagnosed with high blood pressure but were not yet taking medication for it.

The participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group consumed a 250-milliliter (ml) glass of beetroot juice, and the other group had the same, except their beetroot juice was nitrate-free.

The nitrate-free beetroot juice was the basis of the placebo group.

All groups consumed the juice daily for 4 weeks. They were also monitored for 2 weeks before and after the study, bringing the total trial period to 8 weeks.

The trial was double-blind, which means neither the administering clinicians nor the patients knew whether the beetroot juice they were given was the placebo or the active supplement.

During the 4 weeks in which they were taking the juice, patients in the active supplement group, whose beetroot juice contained inorganic nitrate, experienced a reduction in blood pressure of 8/4 millimeters of mercury (mmHg).

The first figure is systolic pressure, generated when the heart is pumping, and the second figure is diastolic pressure, created when the heart is relaxing and filling with blood. The 8/4-mmHg reduction brought the blood pressure of many participants back into the normal range.

In the 2 weeks after they stopped drinking the juice, their blood pressure returned to the higher levels noted at the start of the study.

This is the first study that shows evidence of dietary nitrate supplementation's long-lasting benefit in a group of patients with high blood pressure.

The patients in the active supplement group also experienced a 20 percent or so improvement in blood vessel dilation capacity, and their artery stiffness reduced by around 10 percent.

Studies show that these changes are linked to a reduced risk of heart disease.

There were no changes in blood pressure, blood vessel function, or artery stiffness in the placebo group.

The authors note that the reduction achieved in the active supplement group is close to that achieved by medication. The average reduction in blood pressure caused by a single anti-hypertension drug is 9/5 mmHg.

To put the importance of these findings in context: The authors note that large-scale observational studies show that for every 2 mmHg increase in blood pressure, the risk of death from heart disease goes up 7 percent and the risk of stroke by 10 percent.

Commenting on the findings, Prof. Ahluwalia says:

She says that one reason the findings are exciting is that they open up the potential for people with high blood pressure to increase dietary nitrate in a way that can be easily worked into their daily lives while still providing a positive benefit.

"It is hugely beneficial for people to be able to take steps in controlling their blood pressure through non-clinical means, such as eating vegetables," Prof. Ahluwalia adds. "We know many people don't like taking drugs life-long when they feel okay, and, because of this, medication compliance is a big issue."

"The possibility of using a natural product, rather than another pill, to help lower blood pressure, is very appealing," adds Dr. Amoils.

Prof. Ahluwalia advises that people looking to increase their daily nitrate intake should avoid boiling vegetables, as the nitrate dissolves in water. Instead, "steaming, roasting, or drinking in a juice all has a positive effect," she notes.

As for the next step in confirming the relationship between beetroot juice and blood pressure, she says this was a small trial. The next stage would be a larger study that tries to replicate the findings over a longer period with a much larger group of people who have high blood pressure.

Here is a link to a wide range of natural beetroot products. Please note that this will open an external site.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does make the point (through a quote borrowed directly from a news release) that for some high blood pressure patients, complying with daily doses of drugs to combat their condition, “when they feel ok,” presents a major problem, and therefore, obtaining the same therapeutic outcome though eating specific foods would be “hugely beneficial.” The story also notes that there are other sources of dietary nitrate other than beet juice, including leafy greens such as lettuce and cabbage.
We’ll award a satisfactory here, but we note that the story could have mentioned several other dietary approaches that are also associated with lowering of blood pressure. The best known are lowering sodium intake and the related “DASH diet.” Weight loss and exercise are also among the range of blood pressure-lowering alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Treating stroke patients who have lost control and awareness of one side of their body with magnetic stimulation to the brain may improve their symptoms, researchers said today.

In a new, small study published in the journal Neurology, patients who were given quick bursts of stimulation over a couple of weeks improved by about 20 percent on tests of vision and attention, while those who got a fake stimulation treatment didn’t improve significantly.

But researchers said it’s still unclear what types of patients might benefit from the treatment and by how much.

About half of people who have a stroke end up with difficulty processing or reacting to things on one side of their body, most often on the left side after a stroke in the right side of the brain, said Dr. Anna Barrett, director of stroke rehabilitation research at the Kessler Foundation in West Orange, New Jersey, who wasn’t involved in the new study. That post-stroke condition is known as neglect.

“People that have that tend to do much worse in their eventual recovery,” Barrett said. “They’re less likely to become completely independent.”

Most of those patients can improve with therapy and exercises, she said, but the process is often slow, and keeping people in the hospital during it is costly.

She said that because of that, the new findings are “promising,” but added that brain stimulation is still an experimental technique, and not ready to be used as part of normal stroke rehabilitation.

For the study, Italian researchers randomly assigned 20 patients with neglect to get real or fake magnetic stimulation in ten sessions over two weeks, in addition to their conventional rehab program. The treatment involved an electromagnetic coil placed over the left side of the brain that transmitted pulses of electrical currents.

Similar types of stimulation treatment are used in some patients with depression or during spinal surgery, according to Barrett. The device costs about $50,000.

Nine people in each group completed all the treatment sessions.

Before treatment, right after and another two weeks later, stroke patients were given tests to measure their visual-spatial skills, as well as attention and concentration. Those including drawing and shape-copying tests, as well as menu reading and map navigating tasks.

Patients in both groups started out with an average mark of about 170 on the tests, which are scored from 0 to 227 combined.

The “real” magnetic stimulation group improved by about 16 percent right after the treatment and 23 percent at the later time point, while there was no significant benefit seen in patients given the fake stimulation.

The researchers said that it’s not clear what the amount of improvement they observed would mean for patients in their daily lives.

But, lead author Dr. Giacomo Koch said, “What we found is that the improvement was more marked in those patients that were more impaired.”

Koch, from the Santa Lucia Foundation in Rome, told Reuters Health he thinks those patients with more severe problems would likely see a benefit outside of just test results.

He said that larger studies at multiple treatment sites are needed to determine how helpful magnetic stimulation can be in stroke recovery. But he was optimistic about the treatment’s future.

“I think in a few years this could become another tool that could be used systematically in the neurorehabilitation wards,” Koch said. He added that the treatment isn’t painful, and only takes a few minutes for each session.

Close to 800,000 people in the U.S. suffer a stroke each year, mostly older adults. For those with neglect, doctors typically prescribe cognitive rehabilitation, in which therapists teach skills and help the patient become more aware of the affected side of the body.

Barrett, also from the University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, said that she wonders whether stimulation could help patients achieve the goals that are most important to regaining independence after a stroke, such as using the bathroom.

It’s also not clear if the treatment might help most neglect patients, or if the findings only apply to certain groups, she told Reuters Health.

The ideal option might end up being a combination treatment that involves stimulation in certain patients and other therapies that address a range of skills important for regaining function, Barrett added. But, she said, “That all remains to be investigated.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says that doctors typically prescribe cognitive rehabilitation for patients with post-stroke “neglect” symptoms, but that progress is often slow and the associated hospital stays costly.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Finally, the world might be catching a break when it comes to drug-resistant gonorrhea.

A new study suggests that a vaccine that protects against a strain of meningitis may also ward off the sexually transmitted infection.

The research, conducted in New Zealand, found that the gonorrhea rate among teens and young adults there who had received a meningitis B vaccine during an emergency campaign in the early 2000s was significantly lower than the rate seen in people of the same age who weren’t vaccinated.

Researchers in Quebec say they saw the same phenomenon after a meningitis outbreak there, and previously published data from Cuba and Norway also hint of the vaccine’s unexpected benefit.

“It’s quite probably real,” said Helen Petousis-Harris, lead author of the New Zealand article and head of immunization research and vaccinology at the University of Auckland.

The findings are observational. Clinical trials will need to be conducted to see if the effect researchers have observed is actually due to the meningococcal B vaccine. But confirmation would be good news for the prevention and control of gonorrhea.

The last remaining drugs to cure this sexually transmitted infection are showing signs they may only have a few more years of usefulness left.

“While it is still very early days, these findings represent a positive step in the search for a vaccine against this common and distressing disease that is increasingly resistant to antibiotic treatment,” said Robin Gaitens, a spokeswoman for GSK, which owns the product that contains this meningitis component.

Why would a vaccine designed to protect against a strain of bacteria that causes meningitis also prevent gonorrhea infection? Some biology is useful here.

Meningitis is a condition — inflammation of the membranes that surround the brain and the spinal cord — that can be triggered by some viruses and several types of bacteria.

One of the latter is Neisseria meningitidis, sometimes known as meningococcal disease. It is the only form of bacterial meningitis that triggers epidemics.

Despite the fact that gonorrhea and meningitis are quite different from one another, the bacteria that cause Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria meningitidis are actually related.

Meningococcal disease is rare but very dangerous. It can kill, and quickly. People who survive the infection can suffer permanent brain damage or may lose one or several limbs.

Because of the severity of the consequences, health officials often mount emergency vaccination campaigns in response to outbreaks of Neisseria meningitidis.

There are vaccines for several Neisseria meningitidis strains, but designing a vaccine to protect against the B strain was a particularly difficult nut to crack. As a consequence, the vaccine component that was made to protect against B targets a different part of the bacterium, Petousis-Harris said.

That may explain why the B vaccine appears to offer some protection against Neisseria gonorrhea. Meningococcal vaccines that protect against the other strains do not seem to have the same effect.

“A lot of these vaccines have been used widely globally,” Petousis-Harris said. “And what’s happened with gonorrhea? Nothing. Gonorrhea carries on its merry little way.”

New Zealand had a very bad meningococcal outbreak in the early 2000s caused by the B strain. A special vaccine that only protected against that strain was made; it was used between 2004 and 2008.

Petousis-Harris and her colleagues looked later to see if gonorrhea rates had changed after that meningococcal vaccination campaign. They found people who were vaccinated were 31 percent less likely to be infected with gonorrhea than those who hadn’t received the meningococcal B vaccine.

The study, published Monday in the Lancet, was funded by GSK and Auckland Uniservices, the commercialization arm of the University of Auckland.

The single-component vaccine used by New Zealand is no longer made. But the same component is one of several in the Bexsero vaccine, which was used in Quebec when the government decided to vaccinate against meningococcal B disease in a part of the province with a high relative rate of cases a few years ago.

Dr. Jean Longtin, head of the province’s public health laboratory, said he and some colleagues decided to look at whether the vaccination campaign was having an impact on gonorrhea rates in that area after reading about an early observation from Norway.

“In Quebec we saw the exact same effect as New Zealand,” said Longtin, who said his group is still analyzing its findings. “Gonorrhea rates have been going down in the vaccine group whereas in the non-vaccine group it’s following the rest of the province.”

It is not clear how long the protection — if it’s real — will actually last. But even a few years of protection could help significantly reduce the spread of gonorrhea, experts argue.

“Mathematical modeling has shown that even a vaccine of moderate efficacy and duration could have a substantial effect on the transmission and prevalence of gonorrhea, if coverage in the population is high and protection lasts during the highest risk period,” Kate Seib, of Australia’s Institute for Glycomics, wrote in a commentary that accompanied the study.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There’s no discussion of other strategies to address the spread of gonorrhea. The CDC has urged the development of new treatments for gonorrhea. Public health education, including condom use, can prevent new cases. A report sponsored by health agencies in the U.S. and the United Kingdom highlighted the need for strong data-driven public health surveillance to better understand how resistant strains evolve and get transmitted, as well as point-of-care diagnostic testing to identify resistant strains. At least a line or two discussing these alternatives would have informed readers that the vaccine isn’t the only solution.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MEMPHIS, Tenn., Oct. 26, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Imagine. A nick of the skin, a flash of cold and 25 minutes on an exam table. For thousands of women, this may soon replace surgery as a treatment for breast cancer.

Cryoablation, using extreme cold to destroy diseased cells, is potentially the first ever procedure to treat breast cancer tumors without the trauma of surgery. Following numerous limited studies, a growing number of women are now being treated with the technique as part of a groundbreaking clinical trial involving leading breast cancer specialists across the country. Utilizing IceCure Medical's innovative IceSense3™ cryoablation system, the multi-center trial is examining cryoablation of certain types of breast cancer. Potentially, it will usher in a new and gentler pathway for the treatment of a disease that affects one in every eight women annually.

The benefits of cryoablation over traditional breast cancer surgery are significant. The procedure is typically performed in a physician's office under ultrasound guidance in less than 30 minutes. It involves a small incision and placement of an IceSense3™ nitrogen-cooled probe into the center of a tumor to freeze it from the inside out. The diseased cells then crack open and die. Eventually they are absorbed by the immune system and new cells take their place.

By contrast, surgical cancer removal often means several hours in the operating room, complications of general anesthesia and weeks or months of recovery. Surgery also typically involves significant breast tissue damage and disfigurement due to large incisions and removal of sizable breast mass.

Cryoablation, however, precisely targets the tumor site and involves insertion of only a slim probe. Therefore, it boasts fast recovery time, significantly improved cosmetic results and greater patient comfort overall. In fact, most women are able to resume normal activities almost immediately following treatment. They experience minimal scarring and excellent cosmetic results.

Physicians participating in the trial report that patients feel minimal discomfort and can watch the procedure on the ultrasound screen. Most are extremely relieved to avoid painful, disfiguring surgery and long recovery times.

"For women with certain types of breast cancer, cryoablation is showing promise as an alternative to surgery, particularly for patients over age 65," says Susan K. Boolbol, MD, Chief of the Appel-Venet Comprehensive Breast Service, Mount Sinai Beth Israel, who is participating in the trial. "For older patients the risks associated with invasive procedures and general anesthesia as well as the discomfort of long recoveries also makes this procedure particularly desirable. As our understanding of tumor biology grows, the ability to offer treatment options other than surgery is important."

"There is growing awareness treatment should be based on individual tumor biology. We are excited to be participating in this trial where some breast cancer patients can be treated without surgery," adds Richard Fine, MD, The West Comprehensive Breast Center, Memphis, TN, another surgeon active in the cryoablation trial. "Over the next 15 years, women 65 and older will make up one of the fastest growing populations diagnosed with breast cancer. We are confident that the ICE3 trial can prove certain women can be successfully treated less aggressively than in the past. The option of a non-surgical treatment has significant benefits for patients and the overall health care system."

Cryoablation is well-established in the treatment of liver, kidney, prostate and other cancers. Its effectiveness in breast cancer has been proven in a number of smaller studies, including a recent American College of Surgeons Oncology Group (ACOSOG) trial and extensive long-term ongoing, unpublished studies in Japan. The ICE3 trial, which began patient enrollment in October 2014, will significantly expand data on the technique as a treatment for breast cancer. Patents will be followed for five years to ensure they remain cancer free.

Developed by IceCure Medical (Caesarea, Israel/Memphis, TN), specifically for breast applications, the IceSense3 Cryoablation System™, has a long history of successful treatment of benign breast fibroadenomas. The ongoing refinement of the technology makes treatment more precise and extremely reliable. The IceSense3™ device delivers a stable cycle of extremely cold temperatures and relies on a maneuverable, disposable probe and compact high tech console. For the first time, these advances make precise targeting of tumors extremely reliable.

The ICE3 trial is recruiting and following women aged 65 years and older diagnosed with certain tumor sub-types and measuring less than 1.5 centimeters in diameter. Developed by a diverse, esteemed scientific advisory board, the trial is underway at 20 carefully selected sites throughout the United States. As a market leader in cryoablation treatment of breast disease, IceCure will utilize its resources to provide clinical and technological support to sites in the cancer trial.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: ICE3 is compared extensively to surgery, which is the leading treatment for breast cancer. However, it would have helped to put the treatment into context with preceding and follow-up treatments, including radiation and chemotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For those plagued with peanut allergies, protection may eventually come in the form of a patch worn on the skin, a new study suggests.

In the second phase of a drug trial, half of participants wearing the highest dose “peanut patches” for a year were able to consume the equivalent of four peanuts without reacting, researchers reported Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology.

It means that “they are not going to have to worry about traces of peanut in a package that came from a plant where peanuts were used or minor contamination of food in a restaurant,” said the study’s lead author, Dr. Hugh Sampson, a professor of pediatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine and director of the Jaffe Food Allergy Institute at Mount Sinai.

That's a potentially life-saving development. Consuming even trace amounts of a food allergen can cause a reaction. About 15 million Americans have food allergies, including 1 in 13 children, according to the Food Allergy Research and Education (FARE) group. Eight foods account for 90 percent of all reactions: milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, soy, wheat, fish and shellfish.

Unlabeled allergens are a leading cause of food recalls in the U.S. and the number of food allergy-related visits to hospitals are on the rise, according to the Food and Drug Administration.

The FDA recently warned people with peanut allergies to avoid foods containing ground cumin, after traces of peanut powder were found in the ground spice.

In the skin patch trial, the international team of researchers randomly assigned 221 volunteers, ages 6 to 55, to wear a placebo patch or a patch containing peanut protein at one of three doses: 50 micrograms, 100 micrograms or 250 micrograms.

At the end of a year, 50 percent of those wearing the high-dose 250 microgram patch were able to tolerate consuming at least one gram of peanut protein. The same dose worked for nearly 54 percent of kids, 6 to 11.

The skin patch — intended to desensitize patients to peanuts by exposing them to tiny amounts of the allergen — may be particularly appealing to children who are too frightened to try oral or under-the-tongue therapy.

“Many have been told all their lives that if they ingest peanuts they will have a severe reaction and die," he said. "So it’s tough to get them to take it. With this you just slap a little patch on their backs.”

Although some volunteers experienced redness and itchiness at the site of the patch, there were no serious side effects. Just two dropped out because of flare-ups of eczema.

“The goal for most practicing allergists and for most parents is to get a child to the point where if there is an accidental ingestion of peanut it would not be as risky or life-threatening,” said Dr. Amy Stallings, an assistant professor of pediatrics in the division of allergy and immunology at the Duke University Medical Center who is not affiliated with the new study. “And the patch may be a way of doing this that is safer.”

The patch study's results are promising, although researchers need to continue following the participants for another year, Sampson said. It could be several more years before the patch will be available for consumers.

Researchers are trying to discover why food allergies have increased among children — the number of kids living with peanut or tree nut allergies tripled between 1997 and 2008, studies show — but there’s no clear answer. Allergies to peanuts and tree nuts tend to begin in childhood and are usually lifelong.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Although the story makes no overt effort to compare this intervention with alternatives, it does allude to such strategies as “oral or under-the-tongue therapy.” We’ll call this a borderline satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental Ebola vaccine was highly protective against the deadly virus in a major trial in Guinea, according to results published today in The Lancet. The vaccine is the first to prevent infection from one of the most lethal known pathogens, and the findings add weight to early trial results published last year. [1]

The vaccine, called rVSV-ZEBOV [2], was studied in a trial involving 11,841 people in Guinea during 2015. Among the 5,837 people who received the vaccine, no Ebola cases were recorded 10 days or more after vaccination [3]. In comparison, there were 23 cases 10 days or more after vaccination among those who did not receive the vaccine.

The trial was led by the World Health Organization, together with Guinea's Ministry of Health and other international partners.

"While these compelling results come too late for those who lost their lives during West Africa's Ebola epidemic, they show that when the next Ebola outbreak hits, we will not be defenceless," said Dr Marie-Paule Kieny, WHO's Assistant Director-General for Health Systems and Innovation, and the study's lead author [4].

The vaccine's manufacturer, Merck, Sharpe & Dohme, this year received Breakthrough Therapy Designation from the United States Food and Drug Administration and PRIME status from the European Medicines Agency, enabling faster regulatory review of the vaccine once it is submitted.

Since Ebola virus was first identified in 1976, sporadic outbreaks have been reported in Africa. But the 2013-2016 West African Ebola outbreak, which resulted in more than 11,300 deaths, highlighted the need for a vaccine.

The trial took place in the coastal region of Basse-Guinée, the area of Guinea still experiencing new Ebola cases when the trial started in 2015. The trial used an innovative design, a so-called "ring vaccination" approach - the same method used to eradicate small pox.

When a new Ebola case was diagnosed, the research team traced all people who may have been in contact with that case within the previous 3 weeks, such as people who lived in the same household, were visited by the patient, or were in close contact with the patient, their clothes or linen, as well as certain "contacts of contacts". A total of 117 clusters (or "rings") were identified, each made up of an average of 80 people.

Initially, rings were randomised to receive the vaccine either immediately or after a 3-week delay, and only adults over 18 years were offered the vaccine. After interim results were published showing the vaccine's efficacy, all rings were offered the vaccine immediately and the trial was also opened to children older than 6 years.

In addition to showing high efficacy among those vaccinated, the trial also shows that unvaccinated people in the rings were indirectly protected from Ebola virus through the ring vaccination approach (so-called "herd immunity"). However, the authors note that the trial was not designed to measure this effect, so more research will be needed.

"Ebola left a devastating legacy in our country. We are proud that we have been able to contribute to developing a vaccine that will prevent other nations from enduring what we endured" said Dr KeÏta Sakoba, Coordinator of the Ebola Response and Director of the National Agency for Health Security in Guinea [4].

To assess safety, people who received the vaccine were observed for 30 minutes after vaccination, and at repeated home visits up to 12 weeks later. Approximately half reported mild symptoms soon after vaccination, including headache, fatigue and muscle pain but recovered within days without long-term effects. Two serious adverse events were judged to be related to vaccination (a febrile reaction and one anaphylaxis) and one was judged to be possibly related (influenza-like illness). All three recovered without any long term effects.

It was not possible to collect biological samples from people who received the vaccine in order to analyse their immune response. Other studies are looking at the immune response to the vaccine including one conducted in parallel to the ring trial among frontline Ebola workers in Guinea.

"This both historical and innovative trial was made possible thanks to exemplary international collaboration and coordination, the contribution of many experts worldwide, and strong local involvement," said Dr John-Arne Røttingen, Specialist Director at the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, and the chairman of the study steering group [4].

In January, GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance provided US$5 million to Merck towards the future procurement of the vaccine once it is approved, prequalified and recommended by WHO. As part of this agreement, Merck committed to ensure that 300,000 doses of the vaccine are available for emergency use in the interim, and to submit the vaccine for licensure by the end of 2017. Merck has also submitted the vaccine to WHO's Emergency Use and Assessment Listing procedure, a mechanism through which experimental vaccines, medicines and diagnostics can be made available for use prior to formal licensure.

Additional studies are ongoing to provide more data on the safety of the vaccine in children and other vulnerable populations such as people with HIV. In case of Ebola flare-ups prior to approval, access to the vaccine is being made available through a procedure called "compassionate use" that enables use of the vaccine after informed consent. Merck and WHO's partners are working to compile data to support license applications.

The rapid development of rVSV-EBOV contributed to the development of WHO's R&D Blueprint, a global strategy to fast-track the development of effective tests, vaccines and medicines during epidemics.

Also published in The Lancet (embargo as above), is a phase 2 trial of a different Ebola vaccine candidate, the recombinant adenovirus type-5 Ebola vaccine. The trial was led by the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology and was conducted in Sierra Leone in 2015. It involved 500 healthy participants, followed for 6 months - 250 were given a high dose vaccine, 125 a low-dose and 125 a placebo. The study found that the vaccine was safe and induced an immune response that peaked at 28 days, but decreased during the six months post injection. One serious adverse event was reported, in an individual with a history of asthma. Further research on this vaccine is needed in order to assess its efficacy.

The rVSV-ZEBOV trial is funded by WHO, with support from the Wellcome Trust, the United Kingdom Department for International Development, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Norwegian Institute of Public Health through the Research Council of Norway, the Canadian Government through the Public Health Agency of Canada, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, International Development Research Centre and Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development and Médecins Sans Frontières.

The trial team includes experts from The University of Bern, the University of Florida, the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Public Health England, the European Mobile Laboratories among others. The trial was designed by a group of experts including the late Professor Donald A. Henderson of John Hopkins University, who led the WHO smallpox eradication effort by using the ring vaccination strategy.

[1] http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)61117-5/abstract 

[2] VSV-EBOV was developed by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The vaccine was licensed to NewLink Genetics, who in turn licensed it to Merck & Co. The vaccine works by replacing a gene from a harmless virus known as vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) with a gene encoding an Ebola virus surface protein. The vaccine does not contain any live Ebola virus. Earlier trials have shown the vaccine to be protective in animals, and be safe and produce an immune response in humans. 

[3] Analysis only included cases occurring 10 days after receiving the vaccine to account for the incubation period of the Ebola virus. 

[4] Quotes direct from authors and cannot be found in the text of the Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release also briefly summarizes a study of a different Ebola vaccine candidate being developed by a Chinese organization. This study, also published in the same issue of The Lancet, was much smaller, involving only 500 participants, and suggested that the effectiveness of this vaccine declined during the first six months after the initial injection.
To be even more thorough, the release might have acknowledged that still other vaccines are under development by GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson and at least one other pharmaceutical company.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CLEVELAND, Ohio (May 17, 2017)--Fennel, an anise-flavored herb used for cooking, has long been known for its health benefits for a variety of issues, including digestion and premenstrual symptoms. A new study confirms that it is also effective in the management of postmenopause symptoms such as hot flashes, sleeplessness, vaginal dryness, and anxiety, without serious side effects. The study outcomes are published online today in Menopause, the journal of The North American Menopause Society (NAMS).

The use of complementary and alternative medicine for the management of menopause symptoms has surged in recent years as women have attempted to identify alternatives to hormone therapy (HT). Although HT is the most effective treatment for managing most menopause symptoms, some women have turned to herbal medicine because they are either not candidates for HT or are concerned about the negative publicity surrounding potential side effects. Fennel, an herb containing essential oils, has phytoestrogenic properties. Phytoestrogens are estrogen-like chemicals in plants that have been used to effectively treat a wide array of menopause symptoms.

In this small trial of 79 Iranian women aged 45 to 60 years, soft capsules containing 100 mg of fennel were administered twice daily for eight weeks. Improvements were compared between the intervention and placebo groups at four, eight, and 10 weeks, with a significant statistical difference documented. In the end, fennel was concluded to be a safe and effective treatment to reduce menopause symptoms without serious side effects. The study described in the article "Effect of Foeniculum vulgare Mill. (fennel) on menopausal symptoms in postmenopausal women: a randomized, triple-blind, placebo-controlled trial" is one of the first clinical studies to examine the benefits of fennel for managing menopause symptoms, even though it had been previously studied and confirmed to manage premenopause symptoms.

The study was completed in Tehran, Iran, where the average age of women at menopause is younger than in the United States: 48.2 years versus 51 years, respectively. Some of the most common adverse effects of menopause are hot flashes, vaginal dryness, sleep problems, joint and muscular discomfort, exhaustion, irritability, anxiety, and depression.

"This small pilot study found that, on the basis of a menopause-rating scale, twice-daily consumption of fennel as a phytoestrogen improved menopause symptoms compared with an unusual minimal effect of placebo," says Dr. JoAnn Pinkerton, executive director of NAMS. "A larger, longer, randomized study is still needed to help determine its long-term benefits and side effect profile."

Founded in 1989, The North American Menopause Society (NAMS) is North America's leading nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting the health and quality of life of all women during midlife and beyond through an understanding of menopause and healthy aging. Its multidisciplinary membership of 2,000 leaders in the field--including clinical and basic science experts from medicine, nursing, sociology, psychology, nutrition, anthropology, epidemiology, pharmacy, and education--makes NAMS uniquely qualified to serve as the definitive resource for health professionals and the public for accurate, unbiased information about menopause and healthy aging. To learn more about NAMS, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release cites hormone therapy (HT) as the most effective treatment for symptoms, while noting concerns about HT’s potential side effects.
A broader discussion about managing hot flashes (the most bothersome symptom for most women) by avoiding alcohol and spicy foods, wearing layers, and other interventions would have been helpful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COLUMBIA, Mo. (Oct. 29, 2015) - Rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm is one of the most dramatic medical emergencies a person can face. It usually strikes without warning, killing approximately 50 percent of those who experience it before they reach a hospital. Of those who do get to a health facility alive, only about 50 percent survive. When diagnosed through screening, aortic aneurysms are carefully monitored for signs of enlargement, and surgical intervention often is needed to prevent rupture of the vessel. Now, University of Missouri researchers have found that patients who took cholesterol-lowering medications before endovascular surgery experienced fewer complications and better outcomes.

"Although this condition usually occurs in men older than 50 with a family history of the disease, anyone can have an abdominal aortic aneurysm," said Todd Vogel, associate professor and chief of the Division of Vascular Surgery at the MU School of Medicine, and lead author of the study. "Most patients with this disease are older and tend to have other health conditions such as high cholesterol. In an effort to prevent cardiovascular disease they take statin medications. These cholesterol-lowering medications protect blood vessels from plaque formation and stress, and in some cases can even slow the progression of aortic aneurysms. We wanted to understand the impact statin use has on surgical outcomes when repairing this type of aneurysm."

Vogel's research team reviewed nearly 20,000 cases where patients either had open surgery or an endovascular repair - a minimally invasive procedure that uses a catheter to access the aneurysm. The team then identified patients who took cholesterol-lowering medication before surgery.

"Our research showed that patients who took statins before either open or minimally invasive interventions had better outcomes compared to those who did not take statin medications," Vogel said. "The patients who took statins and had endovascular repairs had a 26 percent decrease in mortality up to one year after surgery. Patients who took statins and had traditional open procedures also did better, but the difference was not nearly as significant as with endovascular repair. The bottom line is that patients who used statins were more likely to survive during and after an elective endovascular procedure."

Additionally, the study showed that statin use also reduced post-surgical complications for patients with other health issues such as peripheral artery disease, a condition that causes arterial blockages of blood vessels in the limbs.

"This information could be beneficial to patients who are about to have elective endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair," Vogel said. "However, further research is needed to assess the benefits of using statins before surgical repair of other types of aneurysms."

The study, "The Impact of Preoperative Statin Therapy on Open and Endovascular Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Repair Outcomes," recently was published in Vascular, the official publication of the International Society for Vascular Surgery.

The MU School of Medicine has improved health, education and research in Missouri and beyond for more than 165 years. MU physicians treat patients from every county in the state, and more Missouri physicians received their medical degrees from MU than from any other university. For more information, visit http://medicine. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release compares surgery outcomes with or without statins.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 12, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Blood pressure drugs that block the protein angiotensin appear to reduce the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia, a new study finds.

"We think it [angiotensin] is one of the most important factors determining healthy blood vessels and also acts in the brain to help neurons to be a little more resilient," said Dr. Benjamin Wolozin, a professor of pharmacology and neurology at Boston University and senior author of a report on the findings, published online Jan. 13 in BMJ.

That report describes a study of more than 819,000 U.S. veterans, nearly all men, that found that those taking blood pressure medications that block cell receptors for angiotensin had a lower risk for dementia than those taking other cardiovascular medicines.

A similar but smaller protective effect was found for a related drug, lisinopril (Prinivil, Zestril), which blocks production of the active form of angiotensin.

Angiotensin causes blood vessels to constrict, raising blood pressure. It is produced when enzymes act to convert a precursor molecule, angiotensinogen. Lisinopril is a member of a drug family called ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors. Other examples of ACE inhibitors are benazepril (Lotensin), enalapril (Vasotec) and ramipril (Altace).

Reducing angiotensin production by giving ACE inhibitors can lower blood pressure. The same effect can be achieved with drugs that block the cell receptors through which angiotensin acts. Called angiotensin receptor blockers, these drugs have a greater protective effect against dementia than ACE inhibitors, the study found. Such drugs include candesartan (Atacand), irbesartan (Avapro), losartan (Cozaar) and valsartan (Diovan).

In the study, men taking an angiotensin receptor blocker had a 24 percent lower incidence of dementia than those taking other cardiovascular drugs. The risk was 19 percent lower for men taking ACE inhibitors. The risk was nearly halved for those taking both angiotensin-targeting drugs.

In men with Alzheimer's disease, use of an angiotensin receptor blocker reduced admission to nursing homes by half. Combined angiotensin medication therapy reduced nursing home admissions by two-thirds.

Wolozin said that it's not clear why the drugs would have a beneficial effect on the brain, but improved blood flow probably plays a role.

"If you get no blood to the brain, you're not going to think well," he said. "Also, in brain cells there is more than one kind of angiotensin receptor. By blocking bad receptors, you are left with the good ones so that helps neurons become more resilient."

But the evidence is not sufficient to support routine use of angiotensin receptor blockers to prevent Alzheimer's disease, Wolozin said. The new report describes an observational study, one that lacks the strict controls that are needed for convincing proof.

"Any study like this is hypothesis-generating," he said. "You only know for sure when you have done clinical prospective trials."

His advice for anyone considering angiotensin receptors blockers to reduce dementia risk: "They should consult with their physicians." There are potential hazards, such as too-low blood pressure that can lead to damaging falls, Wolozin said.

Caution was urged by Dr. Richard B. Lipton, vice chairman of neurology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City, who has done work on the genetics of Alzheimer's disease.

The angiotensin hypothesis makes sense, Lipton said, because improved blood flow to the brain helps nerve cells and reduces formation of Alzheimer's-related amyloid protein.

But there have been a number of observational studies implicating various molecules, including estrogens, in dementia, he said. "The sequence is that when you do the randomized trial, you don't get the same effect," Lipton said.

On the other hand, such randomized trials usually include people who are close to having Alzheimer's disease, and "it could be different if you gave the drugs earlier," Lipton said.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has more on blood pressure medications.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story did note other observational studies that have "implicated various molecules" in dementia.  We’ll again give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two drugs already on the market — an antifungal and a steroid — may potentially take on new roles as treatments for multiple sclerosis. According to a study published in Nature today, researchers discovered that these drugs may activate stem cells in the brain to stimulate myelin producing cells and repair white matter, which is damaged in multiple sclerosis. The study was partially funded by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), part of the National Institutes of Health.

Specialized cells called oligodendrocytes lay down multiple layers of a fatty white substance known as myelin around axons, the long “wires” that connect brain cells. Myelin acts as an insulator and enables fast communication between brain cells. In multiple sclerosis there is breakdown of myelin and this deterioration leads to muscle weakness, numbness and problems with vision, coordination and balance.

“To replace damaged cells, the scientific field has focused on direct transplantation of stem cell-derived tissues for regenerative medicine, and that approach is likely to provide enormous benefit down the road. We asked if we could find a faster and less invasive approach by using drugs to activate native nervous system stem cells and direct them to form new myelin. Our ultimate goal was to enhance the body’s ability to repair itself,” said Paul J. Tesar, Ph.D., associate professor at Case Western Reserve School of Medicine in Cleveland, and senior author of the study.

It is unknown how myelin-producing cells are damaged, but research suggests they may be targeted by malfunctioning immune cells and that multiple sclerosis may start as an autoimmune disorder. Current therapies for multiple sclerosis include anti-inflammatory drugs, which help prevent the episodic relapses common in multiple sclerosis, but are less effective at preventing long-term disability. Scientists believe that therapies that promote myelin repair might improve neurologic disability in people with multiple sclerosis.

Adult brains contain oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), which are stem cells that generate myelin-producing cells. OPCs are found to multiply in the brains of multiple sclerosis patients as if to respond to myelin damage, but for unknown reasons they are not effective in restoring white matter. In the current study, Dr. Tesar wanted to see if drugs already approved for other uses were able to stimulate OPCs to increase myelination.

OPCs have been difficult to isolate and study, but Dr. Tesar and his colleagues, in collaboration with Robert Miller, Ph.D., professor at George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences in Washington, D.C., developed a novel method to investigate these cells in a petri dish. Using this technique, they were able to quickly test the effects of hundreds of drugs on the stem cells.

The compounds screened in this study were obtained from a drug library maintained by NIH’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS). All are approved for use in humans. NCATS and Dr. Tesar have an ongoing collaboration and plan to expand the library of drugs screened against OPCs in the near future to identify other promising compounds.

Dr. Tesar’s team found that two compounds in particular, miconazole (an antifungal) and clobetasol (a steroid), stimulated mouse and human OPCs into generating myelin-producing cells.

Next, they examined whether the drugs, when injected into a mouse model of multiple sclerosis, could improve re-myelination. They found that both drugs were effective in activating OPCs to enhance myelination and reverse paralysis. As a result, almost all of the animals regained the use of their hind limbs. They also found that the drugs acted through two very different molecular mechanisms.

“The ability to activate white matter cells in the brain, as shown in this study, opens up an exciting new avenue of therapy development for myelin disorders such as multiple sclerosis,” said Ursula Utz, Ph.D., program director at the NINDS.

Dr. Tesar and his colleagues caution that more research is needed before miconazole and clobetasol can be tested in multiple sclerosis clinical trials. They are currently approved for use as creams or powders on the surfaces of the body but their safety administered in other forms, such as injections, in humans is unknown.

“Off-label use of the current forms of these drugs is more likely to increase other health concerns than alleviate multiple sclerosis symptoms. We are working tirelessly to ready a safe and effective drug for clinical use,” Dr. Tesar said.

This work was supported by the NINDS (NS085246, NS030800, NS026543), the New York Stem Cell Foundation and the Myelin Repair Foundation, New York City.

The NINDS is the nation’s leading funder of research on the brain and nervous system. The mission of NINDS is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease.

The National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences is a distinctly different entity in the research ecosystem. Rather than targeting a particular disease or fundamental science, NCATS focuses on what is common across diseases and the translational process. The Center emphasizes innovation and deliverables, relying on the power of data and new technologies to develop, demonstrate and disseminate advancements in translational science that bring about tangible improvements in human health. For more information, visit http://www.ncats.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release earns a Satisfactory rating by speaking to the current treatments that are available: “Current therapies for multiple sclerosis include anti-inflammatory drugs, which help prevent the episodic relapses common in multiple sclerosis, but are less effective at preventing long-term disability.”
To earn extra credit here, the release could have provided a comment about other research into improving myelin production. This includes ongoing clinical trials being conducted by Biogen and others targeting myelin production in MS.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have announced the development of a highly accurate and reliable technique for diagnosing prostate cancer. The Dundee University-based team say they have used an ultrasound process called shear wave elastography (SWE) to detect prostate tumours. The method is non-invasive and cheaper than current detection techniques.

Prostate cancer has become the most common cancer in men in the UK. One in eight men will develop the condition at some point in their lives with more than 47,000 new cases being diagnosed every year. Men aged 50 or over, men with a family history of prostate cancer, and black men are at greatest risk of developing the condition.

“Current diagnosis of prostate cancer is extremely inefficient, leading to unnecessary treatments for many patients,” said the Dundee University team’s leader, Professor Ghulam Nabi. “Our new method is far more accurate and also allows us to identify the difference between cancerous and benign tissue in the prostate without the need for invasive surgery.”

The prostate is a small gland in the male reproductive system and is normally about the shape and size of a walnut. Current methods for determining if a prostate has become cancerous include a physical examination of the prostate (known as a digital rectal examination or DRE), MRI scans, a biopsy or tests to determine levels of the chemical prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in the blood.

Each carries problems. PSA results can be unreliable; a DRE is not good at identifying which cancers are benign and which need treatment; MRI scans cannot always give a definitive answer; while a biopsy carries a risk of infection and is expensive.

The new method aims to get round the problems by targeting the prostate with ultrasound. Cancerous tissue is stiffer than normal tissue so shear waves are slowed as they pass through a tumour.

“We have been able to show a stark difference in results between our technology and existing techniques such as MRI,” added Nabi. “The technique has picked up cancers which MRI did not reveal. We can now see with much greater accuracy what tissue is cancerous, where it is and what level of treatment it needs. This is a significant step forward.”

The trial tests involved around 200 patients. “Now we need to use this on a wider scale to build more data but there is clearly the potential to really change the way we manage prostate cancer,” Nabi said.

SWE technology is already used in diagnosing breast cancer and liver diseases. However, to make it applicable to prostate cancer a special probe had to be developed by the team.

“The technique now needs to be tested in a much larger number of men to confirm just how well it can detect the aggressive cancers, while also ruling out those who do not have prostate cancer,” said Simon Grieveson, head of research funding at Prostate Cancer UK, which funded the Dundee project (with support from the Movember Foundation).

“With an average of one man dying every 45 minutes from prostate cancer in the UK, the need for a more reliable test that can identify dangerous forms of the disease earlier is greater than ever.”

In the past few years, a number of celebrities have revealed that they had been diagnosed with prostate cancer and have joined campaigns to raise awareness of the disease, including Michael Parkinson, Ian McKellen and most recently Stephen Fry, the comedian and former rector of Dundee University, who this year described how he had surgery to deal with a prostate tumour.

“This breakthrough comes at a time when prostate cancer is being pushed to the forefront of our consciousness in the UK, not least because of the disturbing upward trend in its prevalence,” said Fry. “It is therefore doubly exciting to hear of the new techniques in diagnostic imaging.

Number of cases of prostate cancer diagnosed every year in the UK

The number of men who die each year from the disease

Proportion of UK men who will get prostate cancer in their lifetime
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention several current methods of detecting and diagnosing prostate cancer — the PSA (prostate-specific antigen) test, a digital rectal exam (DRE), the use of MRI imaging, and an invasive biopsy, which are all alternatives to this new test.  The story also points out the shortcomings of each of those approaches. However, this is a just-passing Satisfactory, since all of this information was taken directly from the university’s news release (see below).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OTTAWA, ON - August 21, 2017 - Researchers at the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO) looked at the incidence of and risk factors associated with sedation-related adverse events in pediatric emergency departments as part of a multi-centre observational study published today in JAMA Pediatrics.

When children and youth present at an emergency department and require an immediate painful procedure, it is standard to sedate the patient so they can tolerate the treatment. Procedural sedation is commonly used for painful or uncomfortable procedures like setting fractures, repairing lacerations and draining abscesses in emergency departments worldwide.

"Although sedation-related serious adverse events occur infrequently, recognition and early intervention is necessary to ensure patient safety," said Dr. Maala Bhatt, lead author, director of pediatric emergency research at CHEO, and assistant professor at the University of Ottawa. "We've been able to identify sedation medications and practices associated with the best clinical outcomes, which is practice-changing."

According to the authors, this study represents the largest and most robust prospective emergency department procedural sedation cohort to date. It includes children from six emergency departments across Canada, sedated with six different medication combinations.

The results of the study show that choice of sedation medication had the biggest impact on the incidence of adverse events and need for significant interventions in response to those events. The incidence of serious adverse events was lowest among patients sedated with ketamine-alone and highest among patients sedated with combination drugs ketamine plus propofol or fentanyl.

The overall incidence of adverse events in the study population was 11.7%. The most common events were a decrease in oxygen saturation (5.6%) and vomiting (5.2%). Significant interventions in response to an adverse event were rare, occurring in only 1.4% of children. Two other practices - receiving an opioid prior to sedation and having a laceration repair - were associated with the occurrence of vomiting, oxygen desaturation and need for significant interventions.

"The low rate of serious adverse events and significant interventions supports the safety of procedural sedation in the hands of emergency department physicians," said Dr. Bhatt. "While all sedation medications and combination of medications are effective and safe in the hands of experienced providers, ketamine-alone is associated with the fewest serious adverse events and significant interventions, making it a logical choice for providing procedural sedation for children in emergency departments."

Co-authors include: Drs. Maala Bhatt, David W. Johnson, Jason Chan, Monica Taljaard, Nick Barrowman, Ken J. Farion, Samina Ali, Suzanne Beno, Andrew Dixon, C. Michelle McTimoney, Alexander Sasha Dubrovsky, Nadia Sourial and Mark G. Roback for the Sedation Safety Study Group of Pediatric Emergency Research Canada (PERC).

This study was funded by a Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) team grant in Pediatric Emergency Medicine.

The CHEO Research Institute coordinates the research activities of the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO) and is affiliated with the University of Ottawa. Its three programs of research include molecular biomedicine, health information technology, and evidence to practice research. Key themes include cancer, diabetes, obesity, mental health, emergency medicine, musculoskeletal health, electronic health information and privacy, and genetics of rare disease. The CHEO Research Institute makes discoveries today for healthier kids tomorrow. For more information, visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release names propofol and fentanyl as two alternatives to ketamine, among the six medications evaluated. We give it credit for providing this general comparison of sedation drugs:
“The incidence of serious adverse events was lowest among patients sedated with ketamine-alone and highest among patients sedated with combination drugs ketamine plus propofol or fentanyl.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration has approved a new treatment that could help millions of older adults who are nearly blinded by macular degeneration. It’s a miniature telescope implanted directly into the eye that magnifies images to more than twice their size.

Findings from the clinical trials show that the telescope does improve vision for the majority of patients. Still, there are some concerns about corneal damage, since the telescope is relatively large inside the eye. And the population who might benefit from the new device is somewhat limited. The treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery. And for those who catch the disease early on, there may be better options.

But for 80-year-old Marian Orr, the implanted telescope was just what she needed. Orr has a big family: five children, eight grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. That means lots of graduations, weddings and school events. In other words, lots to see. So when Orr's vision began to decline in her mid 70s, she got worried. Both her father and uncle went blind in their 60s, and she knew macular degeneration was often inherited.

Orr says her sight gradually diminished. It got to the point "where I couldn't see. If I looked at you straight on, I couldn't see your face, could only see your head," she says. "I couldn't see the eyes and the nose. I could just see the round head that was all, sort of like a halo was all over it."

This blurred vision is pretty typical of macular degeneration.

Orr couldn't see things in a store. Her daughter took her grocery shopping. Orr couldn't identify pots, pans and dishes in her kitchen. And the outdoors became an unfamiliar, startling place.

So when Orr's cousin read about an experimental treatment for macular degeneration, Orr quickly got in touch with one of the researchers, had some basic tests, and before she knew it, she was one of more than 200 patients to have an experimental miniature telescope implanted in her eye.

Dr. Kathryn A. Colby, ophthalmic surgeon at Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston and assistant professor of ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, calls the pea-sized technology a true "breakthrough" that could help millions of patients who, until now, have had no treatment options. Colby was one of the principal investigators in the clinical trials of the miniature telescopes. They were conducted at 28 leading ophthalmic centers and included 219 patients with end-stage, age-related macular degeneration. She was not Orr's doctor.

What happens with age-related macular degeneration is that the center of the retina deteriorates, and people gradually lose sight. Colby says if you think of the eye as an old-style camera with film, then the retina is the film. Over years of wear and tear, it degenerates and weakens and no longer transmits full images to the brain. That's why Orr saw blank spots where people's noses and eyes should be in their faces, sort of like "holes in the film," says Colby.

Colby says that by magnifying the image, the telescope allows the part of the vision that's missing to become smaller. And so the "blanks" in the image appear to fill up, presenting the individual with a nearly complete image.

But, like all telescopes, when vision is narrowly focused, the peripheral view gets lost. This is why the telescope is implanted in only one eye. The other eye is used for peripheral vision.

Colby says that's also why patients need to learn to use the implanted telescope eye for near activities. For example, if they're looking to see what time it is on a clock, they use the eye with the implanted telescope. But if they're scanning the room to see exactly where the clock is, they use the other eye, which also has end-stage macular degeneration.

After surgery, patients do a variety of eye exercises to train their eyes to work together. It wasn't hard for Orr, who was used to wearing contacts, one for distance and one for close-up. For her, the tiny new eye telescope has put the "bustle" back into her life.

"I'm very active in my church. And I am a lunch buddy at one of the schools nearby," she says. Orr has lunch every week with the children in the first and second grades. She reads a lot, even books with regular-sized print, which her daughter gives her. She can read the newspaper and watch TV. "I'm busy," she says. "That's for sure!"

Practically all the patients in the telescope study with Orr had their vision improve. And 75 percent of them, like Orr, had major improvement. But because the telescope is relatively large, patients risk damage to the cornea. In the study, 10 out of 219 patients had corneal problems. Five required a corneal transplant. As a result, the Food and Drug Administration plans to monitor safety for at least five years for the next set of patients who receive the telescope.

Despite its terrific potential, the new eye telescope isn't for everyone. Dr. George Williams is an ophthalmologist and retinal surgeon associated with the American Academy of Ophthalmology. He sees lots of patients who might qualify for the eye telescope.

But he also sees a lot of patients who cannot be candidates. For one, the treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery.

"In order to implant this device, we need to remove the natural lens, or the cataract, and then use a portion of the natural lens to position and support the telescope," says Williams.

Cataract surgery removes the natural lens and, in most cases, replaces it with an artificial lens, which means there is no foundation for the telescope.

And for patients who are in the early stages of macular degeneration, Williams says that medications approved just six years ago are effective and a lot less invasive than the telescope. The drugs are injected directly into the eye on a monthly basis. And with this treatment, doctors are able to prevent severe visual loss in over 90 percent of patients. In nearly half of all patients, visual improvement is significant.

So the take-home message: If you're over 60 and you begin to experience visual loss, get yourself to an eye specialist as soon as possible to see if you can be treated with medication to stabilize and even reverse the vision loss you've experienced. If that happens, Williams says, then patients may never get to the point where they need a telescope in their eye.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Again, this could be a model for other stories. It places the new surgery in the context of existing surgeries and compares it to drug treatments, even explaining how those treatments and surgeries are performed, all in just a few sentences. Every story should have a section like this: 
"Cataract surgery removes the natural lens and, in most cases, replaces it with an artificial lens, which means there is no foundation for the telescope. And for patients who are in the early stages of macular degeneration, Williams says that medications approved just six years ago are effective and a lot less invasive than the telescope. The drugs are injected directly into the eye on a monthly basis. And with this treatment, doctors are able to prevent severe visual loss in over 90 percent of patients. In nearly half of all patients, visual improvement is significant." 
The only thing that would have made this better is if the reporter had asked at least one more source besides Williams for comments and context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Millions of Americans suffer from pet allergies that prevent them from enjoying the benefits of owning a dog or a cat. Thea Joyce is among them, but couldn’t bear the thought of having to give up her two cats, Kirby and Lennon.

“It was really bad,” Joyce, 29, told FoxNews.com. “I was just itchy all the time and sneezing all the time. I was really uncomfortable and miserable.”

Joyce tried over-the-counter medications but couldn’t find relief. She consulted an allergist at Weill Cornell Medicine/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, where a clinical trial involving immunotherapy toothpaste was taking place.

The toothpaste, called Allerdent, works to keep breath fresh and fight cavities while also offering the same benefits as an allergy shot or drops. Researchers found that applying the extracts found in a shot to the lining of a patient’s mouth worked just as well to alleviate symptoms.

“The patients who came in were treated for the very things that they were sensitive to, and that included indoor allergens, like dustmite and pet dander, as well as outdoor allergens such as tree pollen, grass pollen, ragweed pollen,” Dr. William Reisacher, an associate professor of otolaryngology and director of allergy services at Weill Cornell Medicine/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, told FoxNews.com.

Joyce, who lives in the Bronx, New York, signed on for the year-long study that required six of the 12 volunteers to brush their teeth for two minutes using two pumps of the toothpaste in either the morning or night, and the other six to use drops under their tongue. Volunteers using the toothpaste were also required to log their usage in a journal.

Both groups reported a significant decrease in their symptoms, including Joyce, who was in the toothpaste group.

Allerdent is not covered by insurance, meaning Joyce spends about $400 every three months but said the cost is worth it.

“I used to be so irritable because I was so uncomfortable,” Joyce said. “But now I don’t really feel allergy symptoms anymore.”

To find a prescribing doctor for Allerdent in your area or to find more information, visit Allovate.com.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that normal treatments incorporate shots or drops of allergen extracts as a way of sensitizing patients.It also mentions medications.
We’ll award a minimal Satisfactory on that basis, but we’d note that it’s not clear how long the participants used the toothpaste before they started to see a decrease in their symptoms. Usually allergy medication works anywhere from 30 minutes to a few hours to a few days. We saw no comparison on this factor between the toothpaste and regular allergy medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experiment in Thailand involving more than 16,000 men and women has demonstrated for the first time a small but measurable protective effect of an AIDS vaccine.

The vaccine, a complicated mixture of six "prime" and "booster" shots, reduced a person's risk of becoming infected by about one-third compared with people getting placebo injections.

The results were barely significant on statistical grounds, perplexing for scientific reasons and unanticipated by most researchers. Nevertheless, the first positive result for an AIDS vaccine after two decades of experimentation is being called a milestone.

"Conceptually, we now know a vaccine is possible," said Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which paid for most of the six-year trial. "Whether the vaccine is going to look anything like this one I don't know. But at least we know it can be done."

The vaccine is not licensed or being produced in large amounts. It is unlikely -- but not impossible -- that any country would consider it effective enough to be used as a public health measure against HIV.

Instead, the chief usefulness of the "ALVAC-AIDSVAX" vaccine is likely to be what it can teach virologists about what is happening in the immune system when a person is even somewhat protected from HIV.

"We really need to go through the data to see if there are effects here that are potentially useful," said Col. Jerome Kim, a physician involved in the study, which was run by the U.S. Army, the National Institutes of Health and Thailand's Ministry of Public Health.

He predicted that information gained from the trial after the results are fully analyzed will have "important implications for the design of future HIV vaccines."

Other researchers were less sanguine about the study but did not want to be quoted by name as being skeptical when only a few details of the results have been released.

"I just think it's too early really," said one, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for that reason. "It is in a kind of gray zone, and I think we should really get the data and look at it and see what it all means."

That the vaccine is at least nominally a success comes as a surprise.

Early in the decade, more than 20 prominent researchers wrote an open letter to the journal Science urging the federal government to cancel the Thai trial because the vaccine was so unpromising. The study cost $105 million, most of it provided by the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Good job comparing this vaccine approach with other vaccines. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“What we found is that where patients were applying Latisse, especially in areas where the hair was thinner and wispier and less pigmented, the hair grew thicker, stronger and healthier,” he said.

Though some users of Latisse have experienced skin discoloration, Dr. Bauman said he had never seen any such reaction on the scalp of his patients.

Certainly, Mr. Paduda, who used Latisse daily from November through February, is a happy customer. By the third week, he said, both he and friends he asked for reactions were seeing results. “I even busted out the old ‘before’ and ‘after’ pictures,” he said. “It was a noticeable difference.”

But Latisse does not appear to be a silver bullet for hair loss. Instead, it appears to work in much the same way as Rogaine or Propecia: All three can strengthen and darken hair that grows from a dying follicle, but none can bring a dead one back to life. The result is an enhanced, refortified hairline rather than a brand new head of hair.

Aside from hair transplants, which can cost about $10,000 each and do not always look natural, the only current hope for complete replacement is hair cloning, the act of producing entirely new hair from the DNA of an existing one, which researchers have been attempting, unsuccessfully, for years.

A pair of researchers last year claimed to grow new hair by combining plucked hair with a wound-healing powder made by ACell, a regenerative-medicine company in Columbia, Md. Though the claim was met with some skepticism by other clinicians, the idea that ACell’s powder, which has been approved by the government, could facilitate new hair growth has breathed new life into the race to clone hair.

Dr. Robert M. Bernstein, clinical professor of dermatology at Columbia University, is now one of several researchers experimenting with the product.

“It’s just a question of time now” before hair cloning becomes a reality, Dr. Bernstein said. “We keep on moving back that time, but I think there’s absolutely no doubt that it’s going to be done.”

He believes hair cloning will be commercially available within 10 years. This may sound like a long time to wait, but “it’s important to remember that baldness is unlike other conditions where you can progress past the point of being helped,” Dr. Bernstein said. “Once we have a cure for hair loss, everyone will be able to benefit.”

It has been been 14 years since the F.D.A. approved a new hair-loss remedy (Propecia, in 1997), so it is understandable that anticipation for a new one might be running high. One advantage of Latisse is that it needs to be applied only once a day (Rogaine needs to be applied twice; Propecia is taken once daily), and does not seem to cause reactions in people who are allergic to minoxidil.

It is, however, expensive: a month’s supply of Latisse can cost up to $150, and that is in amounts appropriate for use merely on the eyelashes. Rogaine, which is also available over the counter now, costs about $25 a month, and a month’s supply of Propecia runs about $75. (Even Mr. Paduda has now switched to Propecia, citing cost.)

The potential for Latisse is not lost on Allergan. The company initiated a Phase 1 clinical study in August to determine whether bimatoprost can be used as a treatment in men and women suffering from hair loss (alopecia).

“There is a great deal of interest in developing other uses of bimatoprost,” Heather Katt, a spokeswoman for Allergan, wrote in an e-mail message, “and Allergan is exploring ways to pursue that pathway through the F.D.A. approval process.”

For those too impatient to wait, there is also the bold and fashionable solution of shaving one’s head.

But the fact is that many men — and women — simply do not accept baldness easily.

“Hair has been an evolutionary sign of health and sexuality and youth, and that doesn’t change,” Dr. Bernstein said. “Shaved heads look cool, but not everyone wants one, and not everyone looks good with one.”

“I have really dark eyebrows,” he said. “I would look like a psycho if I shaved my head.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses a number of alternatives, and even provides price information for some. It says, for example, “For those too impatient to wait, there is also the bold and fashionable solution of shaving one’s head.” We do wish, though, that some comparative effectiveness information had been given.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For hours on a recent morning at the , Dr. Andrew Lowy painstakingly performed the therapy on a patient.

After slicing the man’s belly wide open, he thrust his gloved hands deep inside, and examined various organs, looking for . He then lifted the small intestine out of the body to sift it through his fingers.

As he found tumors, he snipped them out. “You can see how this is coming off like wallpaper,” Dr. Lowy said as he stripped out part of the lining of the man’s abdominal cavity.

After about two hours of poking and cutting, Dr. Lowy began the so-called shake and bake. The machine pumped heated chemotherapy directly into the abdominal cavity for 90 minutes while nurses gently jiggled the man’s bloated belly to disperse the drug to every nook and cranny.

The treatment is formally called cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, or Hipec.

Recent converts include University Hospitals Case Medical Center in Cleveland, in the , and even Massachusetts General. The is looking at it, according to people in the field. Advocates predict that the number of procedures could grow to 10,000 a year from about 1,500 now.

The therapy has even been featured on an episode of the TV series “Grey’s Anatomy.”

But Dr. Ryan, a gastrointestinal oncologist, suggested in an interview that the procedure was being extended to because “you can’t make a living doing this procedure in appendix cancer patients.”

He debated the procedure publicly at the recent annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. While some patients did seem to live much longer than expected, he said that they had been carefully selected and might have fared well even without the therapy.

Proponents say that if cancer has spread into the abdominal cavity but not elsewhere, then lives can be prolonged by removing all the visible and killing what’s missed with Hipec.

By contrast, said Dr. Paul Sugarbaker, a surgeon at Washington Hospital Center and the leading proponent of Hipec, “there are no long-term survivors with systemic chemotherapy — zero.”

Dr. Sugarbaker, who opposed Dr. Ryan in the debate, said that it has long been known that cancerous cells are unable to withstand as much heat as healthy cells. And putting the chemotherapy on top of tumors should be more effective than systematically delivering it through the bloodstream.

One randomized trial done more than a decade ago involving 105 patients in the did show a striking benefit. The median survival of those getting surgery and Hipec, plus intravenous chemotherapy, was 22.3 months, almost double the 12.6 months for those getting only the intravenous chemotherapy. But 8 percent who got the surgery and Hipec died from the treatment itself. And critics say that since that trial was conducted, new drugs have come to market that allow patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to live two years with intravenous chemotherapy alone.

A new trial in the has been temporarily suspended so that researchers can find a way to recruit patients. After nearly a year only one patient had enrolled, because people were reluctant to chance winding up in the control group, according to one of the investigators.

While proponents contend that the risk of dying from the surgery has been reduced since the Dutch trial, the procedure still lasts eight hours or more and full recovery can take three to six months. “It’s maximally invasive,” said Dr. Sugarbaker, who often removes the “spare parts” — organs a patient can live without, like the spleen, the gall bladder, the ovaries and the uterus.

The cost of the surgery and Hipec, including hospitalization, ranges from $20,000 to more than $100,000, doctors said. While and insurers generally pay for the operation, the heated treatment may not be covered. But doctors added it may be if it is described merely as chemotherapy. Some patients, like Ms. Borges, who is a fitness devotee, recover well and say the procedure staved off a death sentence.

But Dr. Alan Venook, a colon cancer specialist at the , said that a couple of patients referred by him had “died miserable deaths. One lost much of her abdominal wall to infection and just died in misery.”

Another risk is that the surgery may be done unnecessarily. CT scans cannot pick up many of the small tumors, so it is often unclear how much cancer is inside until the patient is opened.

In June, Dr. Lowy sliced open a woman and saw, to his horror, that she had more tumors than he could remove. Taking out only some would not improve her chances of survival, so he closed the incision, and she is now starting intravenous chemotherapy.

Things with the male patient, Andy S., went better. A 41-year-old father of two from near , Mr. S. agreed to let a reporter observe the surgery, but asked that his full name not be published because he did not want his cancer history to surface through searches.

Mr. S. had eventually diagnosed as . But the appendix was found to be cancerous. Such cancers typically spew mucus containing tumor cells into the abdominal cavity. So he signed up for surgery and Hipec with Dr. Lowy.

“I’ve had to say my goodbyes to everybody,” Mr. S. said the day before the operation. “I had to talk to my priest. I had to do all these things I never thought I’d have to do at 41. I wouldn’t wish it on my worst enemy, but I have to go through with it.”

Dr. Lowy explored the entire cavity from the diaphragm to the pelvis. He found mucus in several spots that he sopped up with a cloth and also tiny tumors the size of a pencil eraser that had implanted in several spots. He snipped those out and sewed up the wounds. He removed the right side of the man’s colon and the omentum, a fatty structure.

Then two Y-shaped tubes hooked to the Hipec machine were inserted into the abdominal cavity, one to deliver the chemotherapy and the other to bring the drug back to the machine to be reheated. The incision was sewn up around the tubes so the chemotherapy would not leak.

The man’s belly was filled with three liters of saline fluid and the chemotherapy, a generic drug called mitomycin C, heated to 42 degrees Celsius, or nearly 108 degrees Fahrenheit. Any hotter could have caused injuries. Bloated with liquid, the man’s torso resembled a water bed.

After 90 minutes, the fluid was drained and the incision reopened for a final check before the patient was stitched up. The procedure took six hours.

“We got all of the visible disease, and he didn’t have a lot of visible disease,” Dr. Lowy said with satisfaction.

Mr. S. left the hospital eight days later, happy to have undergone the treatment. “I want to have the best chance I can have to never see this again,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Various comparisons were made – on both sides of the debate.
A proponent of the new method said:  ““there are no long-term survivors with systemic chemotherapy — zero.”
But the story also said: “critics say that …new drugs have come to market that allow patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to live two years with intravenous chemotherapy alone”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, March 2, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- The new chemotherapy drug eribulin extends the lives of metastatic breast cancer patients who have received extensive treatment, according to a new study.

The researchers found that among patients whose cancer had spread, those who took the drug lived a median of 2.5 months longer than those who received a physician-chosen treatment -- 13.1 months versus 10.6 months.

The study included 508 women who were given eribulin and 254 women who received treatment of the physician's choice, which was defined as: any single-agent chemotherapy, hormonal or biological treatment approved for cancer treatment; radiotherapy; or symptomatic treatment alone.

The most common side effects in both groups were fatigue and depletion of white blood cells. Numbness and pain stemming from nerve damage were the most common adverse event connected to eribulin that led women to drop out of the study (24, or 5 percent).

The study, known as the EMBRACE trial, was funded by Eisai Inc., which markets eribulin. Dr. Javier Cortes, of the Vall d'Hebron University Hospital and Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology in Barcelona, Spain, and colleagues published the findings in the March 3 online edition of The Lancet.

"This global phase 3 study establishes a potential new standard treatment for women with heavily pretreated metastatic breast cancer, for whom there was previously no chemotherapy treatment with proven survival benefit," the authors wrote.

In a related editorial, Drs. Nancy U. Lin and Harold J. Burstein, of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School in Boston, said: "EMBRACE provides much needed, high-level evidence for chemotherapy use in patients with heavily pretreated breast cancer. And that evidence suggests that the methods to treat advanced breast cancer are growing, the treatment challenge in refractory disease is a little bit less daunting, and the treatment results are a little bit better than they were before."

Commenting on the study, Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, said, "The findings of this trial are exciting because they will propel eribulin into wider use. This drug shows much promise, and it should certainly be included in additional trials to fully establish its benefit."

"It would be interesting to see if the drug offers the same benefit in women that have not been treated with multiple drugs before exposure to eribulin," she added.

The Metastatic Breast Cancer Network has more about metastatic breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The survival benefit for women who were treated with eribulin is clearly presented.  The article also included the definition of the treatment of the physician’s choice that was used by the study authors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 27, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Brilinta, an experimental anti-clotting medication currently awaiting U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval, performed better than the industry standard, Plavix, when used in tandem with low-dose aspirin, a new study finds.

Heart patients who took Brilinta (ticagrelor) with low-dose aspirin (less than 300 milligrams) had fewer cardiovascular complications than those taking Plavix (clopidogrel) plus low-dose aspirin, researchers found.

However, patients who took Brilinta with higher doses of aspirin (more than 300 milligrams) had worse outcomes than those who took Plavix plus high-dose aspirin, the investigators reported.

Antiplatelet drugs are used to prevent potentially dangerous blood clots from forming in patients with acute coronary syndrome, including those who have had a heart attack.

Brilinta has already been approved for use in many other countries. In July 2010, an FDA panel voted 7-to-1 to approve the use of Brilinta for U.S. patients undergoing angioplasty or stenting to open blocked arteries, but the approval process is still ongoing.

The panel's recommendation was based in part on prior findings from this study, called the Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes (PLATO) trial.

In this latest analysis of PLATO findings, researchers found that patients who took Brilinta with low-dose aspirin were 16 percent less likely than those who took Plavix with low-dose aspirin to have a heart attack or stroke, or to die within a year.

The findings were reported Monday in an American Heart Association online conference.

One expert said the new information is valuable.

"The study highlights that if one chooses to use ticagrelor in subjects with acute coronary syndromes, it would be logical to use aspirin 81 milligrams per day (and not 325 mg daily)," said Dr. Jeffrey S. Berger, assistant professor of medicine and director of cardiovascular thrombosis at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City. "Of note, there is little reason to ever use aspirin 325 mg except in the acute setting of a heart attack or stroke," he added. "A higher aspirin dose (325 mg versus 81 mg) increases the risk of bleeding without increasing the efficacy of the drug."

A study author agreed that for most patients, using the drug with a lower dose of aspirin is usually warranted.

"Patients with acute coronary syndrome have options to prevent recurrent events," study lead author Dr. Kenneth W. Mahaffey, co-director of cardiovascular research at the Duke Clinical Research Institute, and associate professor of medicine at Duke University Medical Center, said in an AHA news release. "Physicians choosing to use ticagrelor in countries where it is approved and available should consider using a low-dose of maintenance aspirin with the drug."

The data and conclusions of the research should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The American Academy of Family Physicians outlines medicines used to treat patients with acute coronary syndrome.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The main PLATO study was a comparison of an experimental drug (ticagrelor) to an approved one (clopidogrel).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The most common sexually transmitted disease is often silent and invisible: human papillomavirus (also called HPV). But in some people HPV leads to genital warts and cancers – notably, cervical cancer.

The vaccines Gardasil and Cervarix were designed as a prevention for young women who have not yet been exposed to HPV. Men up to age 26 are also eligible for Gardasil to protect against HPV. But there are a lot of people out there who still have HPV, and nothing protects against all 130 strains of the virus. At least half of all sexually active males and females have had HPV, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

A Pennsylvania start-up company called Inovio Pharmaceuticals has developed an experimental vaccine for people who already have HPV and precancerous lesions that are associated with it. A new study demonstrating the vaccine's safety and potential effectiveness was published this week in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

 

 The experimental vaccine does not use the live HPV virus; it is formulated in synthetic DNA and pure water. It uses the immune system of the treated women to fight off cancer, said Joseph Kim, president and CEO of Inovio Pharmaceuticals and study co-author.

Worldwide, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer after breast cancer, with about 493,000 new cases and 274,000 deaths annually, the study said. HPV causes about 5% of cancers globally.

Some women, because of their particular genetic makeup, can clear precancerous lesions on their own and would not need this vaccine. This happens in anywhere from 10% to 25% of women infected with HPV, Kim said.

No one knows why some women have this capability and others do not, but for those who lack it the Inovio vaccine is "giving our immune system a little boost," Kim said.

Eighteen women with high-grade precancerous cervical lesions participated in the phase 1 study.

Study authors say the vaccine is formulated to work against all cancers caused by HPV types 16 and 18, including cervical, anogenital (anal and genital), and head and neck cancers. The researchers did not observe any side effects.

In the next phase of this research 150 women worldwide are participating, but they are not included in these published results, Kim said.

The phase 1 results are very early in the experimentation of this vaccine. The study was not done as a randomized controlled trial, the gold standard for determining whether a drug works better than chance. Also, 18 people is a small number for examining the effects of a medication.

Given those drawbacks, it’s not appropriate to draw too many conclusions from this study, says Dr. Diane Harper, a prominent HPV researcher at the University of Missouri – Kansas City’s School of Medicine. Harper contributed to the studies on both HPV vaccines that are currently available, Cervarix and Gardasil, and is not involved with this research.

“Several therapeutic vaccines have shown great promise in phase 1 and then not panned out in phase 2,” she noted in an e-mail.

The vaccine consists of three injections in the arm over three months, Kim said. The vaccine trains T-cells in the body to go after cervical cells with potentially cancerous genes embedded in them.

Inovio is using this technology to develop vaccines for prostate cancer and HIV also, Kim said.

“We certainly have a technology that can change the medical field by being able to program and generate strong immune responses that are specific and effective,” he said.

Kim said the next phase results should be out at the end of 2013; then comes a larger phase 3 trial with about 500 patients, to be concluded around 2016 or 2017.

HPV is spread through genital contact, including oral sex, and partners can bounce the virus back and forth between them, making it harder to clear naturally. Kissing is not known to deliver this STD.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There was some discussion of alternative approaches –  Gardasil and Cervarix.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Epclusa to treat adult patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) both with and without cirrhosis (advanced liver disease). For patients with moderate to severe cirrhosis (decompensated cirrhosis), Epclusa is approved for use in combination with the drug ribavirin. Epclusa is a fixed-dose combination tablet containing sofosbuvir, a drug approved in 2013, and velpatasvir, a new drug, and is the first to treat all six major forms of HCV.

“This approval offers a management and treatment option for a wider scope of patients with chronic hepatitis C,” said Edward Cox, M.D., director of the Office of Antimicrobial Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

Hepatitis C is a viral disease that causes inflammation of the liver that can lead to diminished liver function or liver failure. There are at least six distinct HCV genotypes, or strains, which are genetically distinct groups of the virus. Knowing the genotype helps inform treatment recommendations and the duration of treatment. Approximately 75 percent of Americans with HCV have genotype 1; 20-25 percent have genotypes 2 or 3; and a small numbers of patients are infected with genotypes 4, 5 or 6. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, HCV infection becomes chronic in approximately 75 to 85 percent of cases. Patients who suffer from chronic HCV infection over many years may have complications, such as bleeding, jaundice (yellowish eyes or skin), fluid accumulation in the abdomen, infections, liver cancer and death.

The safety and efficacy of Epclusa for 12 weeks was evaluated in three Phase III clinical trials of 1,558 subjects without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis (mild cirrhosis). Results demonstrated that 95–99 percent of patients who received Epclusa had no virus detected in the blood 12 weeks after finishing treatment, suggesting the patients’ infections had been cured. The safety and efficacy of Epclusa was also evaluated in a clinical trial of 267 subjects with decompensated cirrhosis (moderate to severe cirrhosis), of whom 87 subjects received Epclusa in combination with ribavirin for 12 weeks, and 94 percent of these patients had no virus detected in the blood 12 weeks after finishing treatment.

The most common side effects of Epclusa include headache and fatigue. Epclusa and ribavirin combination regimens are contraindicated for patients for whom ribavirin is contraindicated.

Epclusa carries a warning for patients and health care providers that serious slowing of the heart rate (symptomatic bradycardia) and cases requiring pacemaker intervention have been reported when amiodarone is used with sofosbuvir in combination with another HCV direct-acting antiviral. Co-administration of amiodarone with Epclusa is not recommended. Epclusa also carries a warning not to use with certain drugs that may reduce the amount of Epclusa in the blood which could lead to reduced efficacy of Epclusa.

Epclusa was reviewed under the FDA’s priority review program, which provides for an expedited review of drugs that treat serious conditions and, if approved, would provide significant improvement in safety or effectiveness.

Epclusa is manufactured and marketed by Gilead Sciences, Inc., of Foster City, California.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency is also responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release explains in some detail that different HCV patients may follow different drug regimens, depending on their particular strain of virus and other characteristics of their infection. A bit more explanation about how patients and providers may choose whether to use Epclusa or other alternatives and how they will compare would have been helpful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With a cure rate approaching 90 percent, acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) - the most common type of childhood cancer - is often hailed as one of the "success stories" of modern cancer treatment. But up to 20 percent of patients with a high risk of relapse are not cured. That could change with the results from a clinical trial co-led by investigators from NYU Langone Medical Center, which shows giving high doses of a commonly-used chemotherapy drug increases the survival rate for these patients.

The high-dose methotrexate protocol outlined in the study - along with a parallel finding that the steroid decadron is beneficial for younger (but not older) patients - has quickly become the standard practice for the treatment of high-risk ALL patients in North America, the researchers report in the April XX issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

For more than 50 years, ALL patients have been treated with a combination of steroids and methotrexate, among other agents. Patients classified as high risk for relapse--those with a high white blood cell count or who are more than 10 years old--are treated with a standard phase of therapy where methotrexate is given in a gradual, escalating dosage. The current study showed that an alternative schedule of high-dose methotrexate was superior. Prior to the release of the initial study results, which were first presented last year at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), the standard of care for high-risk ALL patients in North America was escalating methotrexate.

"One of the improvements in outcome for ALL overall has been using methotrexate in a more intense fashion, by giving higher doses," said senior investigator William L. Carroll, MD, the Julie and Edward J. Minskoff Professor of Pediatrics, director of the Stephen D. Hassenfeld Children's Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders at NYU Langone and director emeritus of NYU Langone's Perlmutter Cancer Center. "We designed this study to compare high dose and escalating methotrexate to determine the best way to use this drug to increase the survival of high-risk ALL patients."

This was a large-scale study involving pediatric cancer centers across the country. More than 3,000 patients with high-risk ALL were enrolled in the randomized clinical trial, which was run by the Children's Oncology Group, a multi-institutional clinical trials consortium supported by the National Cancer Institute. The investigators found that patients in either arm responded very well overall to treatments, but those in the high dose group had a significantly better outcome, by 5 to 6 percent, which translated into a significantly decreased relapse rate for these patients.

The clinical protocol also examined how to best use a steroid formulation called decadron to treat high-risk ALL patients. Steroids as a class of drugs are one of the most effective medications in the treatment of ALL. Previous studies by the Children's Oncology Group showed that in standard risk ALL patients--those with low white blood cell counts or under 10 years of age--decadron prevented relapse in both the spinal fluid and in the bone marrow. Decadron, however, can increase the infection rate, particularly in high-risk ALL patients, when given for the full 28-day induction period.

During this clinical trial, the investigators decreased the duration of decadron from 28 days to 14 to determine if patients could avoid the side effect of increased infection while still benefiting from the steroid's anti-leukemic effects. They found that patients 10 years and older saw no benefit from decadron, and, in fact, were at much higher risk for a debilitating bone condition called osteonecrosis. Patients under 10 years of age, however, did benefit from the shorter decadron exposure with no increased side effects.

"The improvement in cure rates for ALL over the last few decades, for the most part, has not come through the introduction of new medications, but through using existing medications in new ways, in terms of their dose and schedule," Dr. Carroll said. "This clinical trial illustrates that despite what seem to be remarkable outcomes for kids with ALL, we have not reached a plateau. The outcomes are getting better and better."

Dr. Carroll's co-authors are Eric C. Larsen at Maine Children's Cancer Program, Scarborough, ME; Meenakshi Devidas and Si Chen at the University of Florida; Wanda L. Salzer at the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Fort Detrick, MD; James B. Nachman at the University of Chicago; Elizabeth A. Raetz at the University of Utah; Mignon L. Loh at the Benioff Children's Hospital and the University of California, San Francisco; Leonard A. Mattano Jr. at HARP Pharma Consulting; Catherine Cole at Princess Margaret Hospital for Children and University of Western Australia; Alisa Eicher at Doernbecher Children's Hospital, Portland, OR; Maureen Haugan at Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago; Mark Sorenson at University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics; Nyla A. Heerema and Julie M. Gastier-Foster at The Ohio State University School of Medicine; Andrew A. Carroll at the University of Alabama at Birmingham; Michael J. Borowitz at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions; Brent L. Wood at University of Washington; Cheryl L. Willman at University of New Mexico; Naomi J. Winick at University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas; and Stephen P. Hunger at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

The research was supported by the National Institutes of Health and the National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release is comparing the efficacy of treatment regimens using different drugs so alternative treatments for B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia are noted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"I am the mother to a beautiful 30-year-old woman, she was diagnosed with a meningioma tumor," said Glenda Wimberly.

When Rianta Wimberly started going blind from an inoperable brain tumor, her mother Glenda got on the Web, found a radiation treatment called proton beam therapy and sent a desperate email to doctors at Massachusetts General Hospital, CBS News' Dr. Emily Senay reports.

"She has lost her peripheral vision and is experiencing difficulty seeing," Glenda wrote.

Just weeks later, Rianta was getting the therapy and the tumor was shrinking.

"With four treatments left, I have 98 percent of my vision left," Rianta said.

And with no side effects. That's because proton beam radiation is highly targeted - delivering its dose only to the tumor and sparing the surrounding tissue, which is important for certain rare cancers.

"It's a real delight to be able to offer patients proton therapy you see that during the treatment they have less side effects," said Jay Loeffler, the chair of radiation oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center.

But proton beam therapy is at the heart of the debate over rising health-care costs. It's the most expensive device in medicine today.

The technology is two decades old, but Mass. General is one of five proton centers, and there are eight others in the works.

The massive facility at the University of Pennsylvania - soon to be the world's largest - will cost $140 million.

"This is three stories. This gantry that spins around the patient; this rotates completely around the patient," said Dr. James Metz of the University of Pennsylvania Abramson Cancer Center.

"Close to a million tons of equipment," Metz said.

"So this is the cyclotron itself, this is a 200-ton piece of machinery that accelerates the protons to 230 million electron volts," Metz said.

Huge magnets direct the beam of radiation the length of a football field into treatment rooms.

"Now we're leaving the cyclotron area and walking along the beam line," Metz said. "The beam will travel thru these magnets and that will steer the beam into the different rooms."

Radiation oncologist Dr. Richard Stock, of Mt. Sinai Hospital, says competitive pressure is driving the building boom.

"It's kind of a vicious cycle because if one center opens up, other centers and other hospitals surrounding it have to try to compete for patients," Stock said.

And while there's little disputing the value of proton beam for certain rare cancers, increasingly it is being used for more common cancers like prostate. At double the cost of standard treatments, many experts say it's being used without proof it's more effective.

"There is no good evidence, medical evidence that it is better than the current state of the art intensity modular radiation therapy," Stock said.

Is this a better treatment for adults than conventional?

"In my opinion it's a better treatment. the bigger issue though is, is the increased costs associated with protons worth it to society? in my opinion it's worth it if we can reduce the initial costs of building proton centers," Loeffler said.

But while the cost is extraordinary … so are the results for this family.

"This was my only option, thru unbreakable faith I'm here," Rianta said.

Glenda said: "She has unbreakable faith, I have unspeakable joy."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions other radiation treatments, such as intensity-modulator radiation therapy, as the alternative to proton beam therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - An experimental drug being developed to fight influenza may fight a common but little-known virus called parainfluenza virus, researchers and the company said on Friday.

Tests in rats showed Fludase, made by privately held NexBio, could stop parainfluenza viruses from replicating, the researchers reported in the Journal of Infectious Diseases.

Dr. Anne Moscona of Weill Cornell Medical Center in New York and colleagues tested varying doses of the drug, also known as DAS181, in lab dishes and on cotton rats, a species accepted by scientists for testing parainfluenza.

“Therapies for parainfluenza are urgently needed,” Moscona, an expert on parainfluenza viruses, said in a statement.

“Development of effective antiviral drugs and vaccines for human parainfluenza virus has lagged far behind influenza, despite the recognized impact of these diseases in children” and adults, “particularly the elderly, immunocompromised and patients with underlying airway disease.”

Parainfluenza viruses are not closely related to flu but belong to another family of viruses called paramyxoviruses. They cause most cases of croup and can cause pneumonia and bronchiolitis — an inflammation of the small air passages in the lungs.

There is no treatment or vaccine for parainfluenza.

Fludase is already in phase 2 clinical trials for use against influenza. Adding parainfluenza to its approved indications would provide a unique and potentially large market for San Diego-based NexBio.

Parainfluenza uses the same receptors — molecular doorways — to infect cells as flu does. Fludase inactivates these receptors.

The researchers said that means patients with flu-like symptoms could get the drug without the need for a test to show whether their infection was caused by influenza or parainfluenza.

There were some weaknesses in the study. The rats were pre-treated with the drug an hour before they were infected with parainfluenza. And infection in rats does not follow the same disease course as in humans.

Moscona said tests were needed that would show the drug actually helped reduce disease symptoms in animals.

A spokesman for NexBio, David Wurtman, said the company would seek Food and Drug Administration approval to test Fludase in people with parainfluenza.

Because Fludase affects the human cells that viruses infect, not the virus itself, it is less likely to cause the virus to develop resistance, the company believes.

Influenza viruses have already developed widespread resistance to three commonly used flu drugs — amantadine, rimantadine and Roche AG and Gilead Sciences Inc’s Tamiflu.

A fourth drug, GlaxoSmithKline’s and Biota Inc’s Relenza, works by the same mechanism as Tamiflu.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION:        
 
The story points out that there are no existing alternatives for preventing parainfluenza virus infections. In addition, the story briefly mentions other vaccines that have developed resistance to the flu virus.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ever since she was an infant, Reagan Roberts could not tolerate being anywhere near cow's milk. A mere sip would leave her vomiting and gasping for breath. If she were even touched by someone with milk on their hands, she would break out in hives and a bright red rash.

"We just had to keep her away from milk," said Reagan's mother, Lissa. "We couldn't have it around the house. At preschool she had to sit by herself. We brought her food to birthday parties. We couldn't go to restaurants. It was very hard."

Today, however, Reagan, 9, of Ellicott City, can drink as much milk as she wants and eat anything.

"She eats ice cream. She eats cheese. She eats yogurt. She drinks chocolate milk. She eats any food anybody else can," Lissa Roberts said. "It's a miracle."

Reagan is one of a small number of children who have undergone an experimental treatment that is showing promise for treating milk, peanut and other food allergies. The approach, known as oral immunotherapy, involves slowly desensitizing the immune system by painstakingly ingesting increasing amounts of whatever triggers the reaction.

"It's pretty encouraging," said Robert A. Wood, chief of pediatric allergy and immunology at Johns Hopkins, who led the study that Reagan participated in at the Hopkins Children's Center in Baltimore. "We've still got a long way to go, but I never thought we'd get this far."

Although the approach appears to be highly effective for some children with milk and peanut allergies, the researchers conducting the studies and others caution that much more research is needed to prove and perfect the approach and that it is far from ready for widespread use. No one should try the approach on his own, because the treatments themselves can trigger potentially life-threatening reactions.

"It's still very investigational," said Wesley Burks, chief of the division of pediatric allergy and immunology at Duke University, who has produced promising results in children with peanut allergies. "We're very hopeful. But there are lot of things we need to do to understand it better, make it more effective and make sure it's safe."

The strategy is being tested in a handful of small studies that are part of a surge of research in a field that for years showed little progress.

"There's been a substantial uptick in the amount of research," said Marshall Plaut of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which has more than doubled the funding for food-allergy research since 2007. "I think it's time to be cautiously optimistic."

In addition to the oral immunotherapy studies, scientists are in the early stages of testing an experimental suppository, a Chinese herbal remedy and variations of oral immunotherapy that might be safer and more effective.

"There's definitely been a spike in the amount of work going on," said Hugh A. Sampson, a professor of pediatrics, allergy and immunology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York who leads a federally funded consortium studying food allergies. "Five years ago there was almost nothing going on in people with respect to therapies, whereas now there are a variety of different therapies being looked at."

The spike in research has been driven by increasing evidence that food allergies are becoming more common, occurring earlier in life and lasting longer. About 12 million Americans are estimated to suffer from food allergies, including about 3 million children. Some evidence suggests that peanut allergies may have doubled in children in the past decade.

The reason for the trend is the subject of intense research and debate. There are several theories, including changes in how food is processed and children's not being exposed to certain foods early in life. Evidence has also been mounting for the "hygiene hypothesis," which blames growing up in increasingly sterile homes, making the immune system overreact to ordinarily harmless substances, including food.

Whatever the cause, researchers have long struggled to develop therapies. Food allergies can trigger symptoms ranging from rashes and hives to responses believed to cause perhaps 200 deaths each year in the United States. Currently, food-allergic people have only two options: to avoid the substance that causes their reaction or to try to stop a reaction with an injection of epinephrine.

That leaves parents of allergic children scouring food labels, avoiding restaurants, sending their children to school and parties with specially made food and snacks, and still worrying about inadvertent contact with peanuts, milk, eggs and other ubiquitous foods.

"It's hard to live," said Angie Duty of Durham, N.C., whose 9-year-old son, Sam, was intensely allergic to peanuts before undergoing the therapy as part of one Burks's studies. "Sam doesn't like to be different, but of course he is different and we have to explain that to him."

Although doctors have long used shots to desensitize people allergic to pollen and other substances, early attempts to do the same for food allergies ended in failure.

"The side effects were so great that they were as bad if not worse than the disease itself," Burks said.

But a small number of researchers in recent years have begun trying the approach again, this time by orally administering the protein in the food that triggers the allergic reaction.

With doctors standing by in case of a severe reaction, each study subject undergoes careful testing to determine the maximum dose he or she can safely tolerate. Once that is established, the participants are sent home to sprinkle that amount of purified protein on their food for a week or two; then they return to the research center in to see if the dose can be increased. The procedure is repeated for months or even years to slowly raise the amount they can safely consume.

"It's a way of sort of rerouting or tricking the immune system to no longer be allergic to that food," said Stacie Jones, chief of allergy and immunology at the Arkansas Children's Hospital, who has been working Burks to test the approach for peanut allergies.

In a study involving 19 children who were severely allergic to milk, Wood found that within four to six months most of the children significantly increased the amount of milk protein they could tolerate. After between about nine months and two years, about half of the children could safely consume as much milk or food containing milk as they wanted.

"These are children who could have died from a teaspoon of milk before," Wood said.

In March, Burks and Jones reported the results of a pilot study involving 33 children with peanut allergies. The children started by ingesting peanut protein powder equivalent to one one-thousandth of a peanut. Four of the children had to drop out because of allergic reactions, but six of nine children who underwent the treatment for 2 1/2 years have been able to stop the peanut powder and have now gone six to eight months without reacting to eating peanuts. "It's fabulous," said Janet Vande Berg of Durham, N.C., whose 9-year-old daughter, Caroline, can eat peanuts for the first time in her life. "It makes a huge, huge difference in the quality of life for both the kids and the families. It just takes the stress away."

The researchers are tracking the remaining children in the study to see if any others achieve similar results and have followed up with a more stringent study in which 13 children received a similar treatment and seven received a placebo.

After about 10 months, all seven children on the placebo were still allergic, whereas none of the 13 on the peanut powder had reactions when they were challenged. All the children are now receiving the treatment and are being followed to see if they remain desensitized and perhaps become "tolerant," meaning they no longer need to consume daily doses of peanuts or peanut protein to maintain their ability to eat peanuts freely.

"I think it's an important advance in the field," said the NIH's Plaut. "It's a small number of subjects, so it's hard to draw full-blown conclusions. But it's the first data that suggest you may be able to achieve something like this in food allergies."

It remains far from clear, however, what proportion of children will benefit, how long the benefit might last and what proportion will need to continue to consume at least some milk or peanuts every day to maintain their protection. While some children, such as Vande Berg, appear to completely lose their allergies, others seem to just be able to eat more of the milk or food before reacting. But even that can be helpful.

"We know this therapy at least protects them from accidental ingestion so they won't have a life-threatening reaction," said Jones, the Arkansas researcher. "At the very least it's providing some security for these families."

Burks and Jones are part of the federal consortium, which is studying the same approach for eggs at research institutions across the country, including Johns Hopkins, and conducting detailed immunological studies to try to get a better understanding of how the treatment works.

Meanwhile, researchers in London are studying 640 babies at high risk for food allergies to see if exposing them to peanuts early in life reduces their chances of developing the allergy in the first place.

"There are a lot of people putting ideas out there and producing some promising preliminary data," Plaut said. "That makes me think there will be some important developments in the future."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story touched on avoidance of allergens and the use of desensitization shots as two alternatives to the treatment under study as well as the use of rescue medication such as epinephrine after unintended exposure for the management of allergic reactions.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lung ultrasound has been shown to be highly effective and safe for diagnosing pneumonia in children and a potential substitute for chest X-ray, according to a study conducted at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Results are currently published in the medical journal Chest.

To watch study author discuss this research, click this link: https:/

Pneumonia is the leading cause of death in children worldwide, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Symptoms include fever, cough, and rapid breathing. Chest X-ray is considered the test of choice for diagnosing pneumonia in children, but the WHO estimates three-quarters of the world's population does not have access to radiography.

Investigators conducted a randomized controlled trial in the pediatric Emergency Department at The Mount Sinai Hospital comparing lung ultrasound to chest X-ray in 191 children from birth to 21 years of age. The patients were randomly assigned into an investigational arm (received a lung ultrasound and if the physician needed additional verification, a chest X-ray) and a control arm (received a chest X-ray followed by a lung ultrasound). Researchers found a 38.8 percent reduction in chest X-rays in the investigational arm compared to no reduction in the control arm, with no missed pneumonia cases and no increase in any other adverse events.

The research team was led by James Tsung, MD, MPH, Associate Professor in the Department of Emergency Medicine and Department of Pediatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and former clinical fellow Brittany Pardue Jones, MD, who's currently Assistant Professor in the Department of Pediatrics at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.

"Ultrasound is portable, cost-saving and safer for children than an X-ray because it does not expose them to radiation," says Dr. Tsung. "Our study could have a profound impact in the developing world where access to radiography is limited."

Furthermore, the reduction in chest X-rays in the investigational arm resulted in an overall cost savings of $9,200, and length of stay in the Emergency Department was decreased by 26 minutes.

"In the era of precision medicine, lung ultrasound may also be an ideal imaging option in children who are at higher risk for radiation-induced cancers or have received multiple radiographic or CT imaging studies," says Dr. Tsung.

As more and more handheld ultrasound machines come to market, these results suggest that lung ultrasound has the potential to become the preferred choice for the diagnosis of pneumonia in children. Further research is needed to investigate the impact of lung ultrasound on antibiotic use and stewardship.

The Mount Sinai Health System is an integrated health system committed to providing distinguished care, conducting transformative research, and advancing biomedical education. Structured around seven hospital campuses and a single medical school, the Health System has an extensive ambulatory network and a range of inpatient and outpatient services--from community-based facilities to tertiary and quaternary care.

The System includes approximately 6,100 primary and specialty care physicians; 12 joint-venture ambulatory surgery centers; more than 140 ambulatory practices throughout the five boroughs of New York City, Westchester, Long Island, and Florida; and 31 affiliated community health centers. Physicians are affiliated with the renowned Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, which is ranked among the highest in the nation in National Institutes of Health funding per investigator. The Mount Sinai Hospital is ranked as one of the nation's top 10 hospitals in Geriatrics, Cardiology/Heart Surgery, and Gastroenterology, and is in the top 25 in five other specialties in the 2014-2015 "Best Hospitals" issue of U.S. News & World Report. Mount Sinai's Kravis Children's Hospital also is ranked in seven out of ten pediatric specialties by U.S. News & World Report. The New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai is ranked 11th nationally for Ophthalmology, while Mount Sinai Beth Israel is ranked regionally.

For more information, visit http://www. , or find Mount Sinai on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release adequately explains that chest X-rays are the diagnostic method of choice for determining cases of pneumonia, according to the World Health Organization. The study’s primary goal was to determine if chest ultrasounds were an adequate alternative to chest X-rays. A non-imaging method used to diagnose pneumonia is a physical examination. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Sept. 27, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- In a head-to-head comparison of drug-coated stents -- the metal mesh tubes used to keep clogged arteries open -- the well-established model using the drug sirolimus came out on top, South Korean researchers report.

A newer version, one coated with zotarolimus, fell short, the study found.

Coating stents with time-released drugs can help prevent infection or clogging in stents, but researchers have questioned the safety and effectiveness of different coatings.

"Drug-coated stents have reduced re-stenosis rates compared to bare metal stents, but require prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy to prevent clotting of the drug-coated stent," said Dr. Gregg Fonarow, an American Heart Association spokesman. "There has been great interest in developing stents coated with alternative drugs and different polymers," he explained.

The study was released online Sept. 27 ahead of print publication in the Oct. 5 issue of the Journal of the American College of Cardiology.

In preventing major cardiac events, the researchers found that zotarolimus-coated stents, the new entry in the field, were less effective than the sirolimus-eluting stents, but better than stents coated with paclitaxel.

"Similar to other comparative stent trials, the sirolimus-eluting stent seemed to come out ahead in safety and efficacy," said Fonarow, who is also a cardiology professor at the University of California, Los Angeles.

For the study, a team led by Dr. Duk-Woo Park from the University of Ulsan College of Medicine and Asan Medical Center in Seoul randomly assigned 2,645 patients undergoing angioplasty, a procedure to restore blood flow through the artery, to one of the three stents.

After a year, Park's team tallied the number of adverse cardiac events the patients experienced, including death, heart attack and the need for a new angioplasty on the same artery in which the stent was placed.

The researchers found that 10.2 percent of the patients who received zotarolimus-coated stents suffered a major adverse cardiac event, compared with 8.3 percent of the patients who received sirolimus-coated stents and 14.1 percent of those with paclitaxel-coated stents.

The number of heart attacks and deaths was about the same in each group, but the rate of blood clots in the stents was significantly lower with sirolimus-eluting stents, Park's team also found.

"In this large-scale, practical randomized trial, the use of zotarolimus-eluting stents resulted in similar rates of major adverse cardiac events compared with sirolimus-eluting stents and in fewer major adverse cardiac events compared with paclitaxel-eluting stents at 12 months," the researchers concluded in their report.

However, they said a limitation of their study is the one-year follow-up period, and noted that a longer, ongoing study pitting zotarolimus-eluting stents against sirolimus-eluting stents will provide more safety information.

The trial was partially funded by Medtronic, maker of the zotarolimus-eluting stent.

Fonarow said the study results can help cardiologists arrive at treatment decisions. "These studies help to better inform interventional cardiologists in the optimal choice of drug-eluting stents for their patients being treated for coronary artery disease," Fonarow said.

For more information on stents, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Taking into account that the article implies availability of the 3 stent types, the study itself was comparing a newer approach with the “old standby.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Women who need breast surgery to remove an abnormality that cannot be felt, also known as a non-palpable breast lesion, now may benefit from the convenience and comfort provided by an advanced new tissue locating technology offered at Rush University Medical Center.

The SAVI SCOUT Radar Localization System helps to decrease the time a woman is in the operating room, increase the success rates of lesion removal and reduce the amount of healthy breast tissue that is removed during the procedure. Rush began offering SAVI SCOUT, which has been used in more than 50 lumpectomy surgeries, in July.

SAVI SCOUT allows a radiologist to insert a radar wave reflector the size of a grain of rice in the patient’s breast up to 30 days before surgery to mark the location of the lesion, as shown with ultrasound or X-ray mammography. The reflector replaces the widespread current practice of inserting a thin, hooked wire into the breast the same day as surgery.

“When there is an abnormality that we can’t feel and are unable to biopsy, we have to find that lesion in surgery,” said Dr. Andrea Madrigrano, assistant professor of surgery at Rush University Medical Center.

SAVI SCOUT replaces a more inconvenient technique used since '70s

Used since the 1970s, a hooked wire is placed in the breast through the skin to the abnormality using ultrasound or X-ray guidance with local anesthesia. The wire is placed into the breast to help guide the surgeon in removing the abnormality later that day.

“Until now, a patient would go to the imaging center to have the thin wire precisely placed in the breast. The woman would then be taken to the operating room area,” Madrigrano said.

Wire localization requires a high degree of coordination between radiology and surgical scheduling, which can lead to delays between placement of the wire and surgery, often requiring a woman to wait long periods of time with the wire in her breast.

“Before surgery, these patients are in a hospital gown and are walking around while this wire is in place, which obviously is less than ideal for the patient,” Madrigrano said.

“The radar reflector is a replacement for the wire and is essentially a little marker. After the patient receives a local anesthetic, it can be placed into the breast using an extremely thin needle under image guidance days or weeks prior to surgery. Because this important step is out of the way in advance, it completely changes the patient’s day of surgery experience.”

Radar can target abnormality within 1 mm, sparing more healthy tissue

Unlike mastectomy, which treats breast cancer by removing an entire breast, lumpectomy surgery — also known as breast-conserving surgery — is used to remove only the tumor and a small amount of tissue surrounding the tumor. Using the SAVI SCOUT system technology, which emits 50 million radar pulses per second, surgeons can target the affected tissue within 1 millimeter of the reflector.

“When Madrigrano told me about it, I thought it was an ingenious idea and I’m glad it was developed,” said Nancy Morrissey, who underwent lumpectomy surgery at Rush in July using the SAVI SCOUT technology. “It made surgery go smoothly, and I didn’t have any pain before or after.

“When the marker was inserted near the lump, it was similar to a biopsy. I was glad it was done a week before and not the same day as the lumpectomy surgery. I have been very impressed with the experience.” According to Cianna Medical, the company that created SAVI SCOUT, 70 percent of women return to work the next day after the SCOUT procedure.

In addition to enhancing the patient’s surgical experience, the more precise localization of the surgical site enable surgeons to plan the procedure better. That advantage may lead to less tissue needing to be removed and a better appearance of the breast after surgery.

“Ultimately, this wireless technology has the potential to reduce surgical delays, and more importantly will benefit patients by increasing comfort and satisfaction during a stressful time,” Madrigrano said.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release does provide comments on the current standard of care and places the Savi Scout in a positive light in comparison.  But since no clinical trials have been conducted comparing the two,  readers should be reminded that the advantages stated are theoretical.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Oct. 12, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death among women in the United States, and routine screenings remain the most reliable way to detect the disease early, a breast cancer expert says.

"Breast cancer can be treated more successfully if detected in its early phases, while it is small and has not yet spread," said Dr. Kathryn Evers, director of mammography at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia. "With today's state-of-the-art treatment options and less extensive surgery, patients are experiencing better outcomes."

Older age is a leading risk factor for breast cancer. Most women are diagnosed after the age of 50. Having certain mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes also predispose women to the disease. And there are some lifestyle-related risk factors that can be controlled, such as hormone therapy after menopause, obesity, alcohol intake and physical inactivity, Evers said.

"Having one risk factor or even several doesn't mean a woman will definitely develop breast cancer," she said in a Fox Chase news release. "Women need to become educated about the risk factors, especially those they can control, and then adjust their lifestyle accordingly."

Not all women with breast cancer experience the same warning signs of the disease. Symptoms of breast cancer may include:
• A lump in the breast or armpit.
• Swelling or thickening in part of the breast.
• Dimpling or irritation of the skin on the breast.
• Pain in the breast that doesn't go away.
• Redness or flaky skin on the breast or nipple.
• A change in the size or shape of the breast.

In some cases, women never develop any of these symptoms, Evers noted.

"All women should know how their breasts look and feel so they can recognize any changes in them. This is an important part of breast health," she said. "But just being familiar with your breasts should never take the place of regular screenings and mammograms. These tests can help find breast cancer in its early stages, even before symptoms appear."

There are three tests often used to look for breast cancer, Evers said.
• Mammogram: An X-ray of the breast used to examine breast changes. Its effectiveness depends on the size of a breast tumor and the density of breast tissue. Three-dimensional (3D) mammography involves X-ray machines that take pictures of thin slices of the breast from different angles, to build a 3D image.
• Breast ultrasound: This test is often used along with mammography to screen high-risk women and those with dense breast tissue.
• Breast MRI: This test may be used to screen high-risk women and more closely examine a suspicious area detected during a mammogram or an ultrasound.

"I advise women to speak with their physician to determine what is right for them," Evers said.

The American Cancer Society has more about breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll will give the story credit for noting that there are several screening methods, and for pointing out that not all women who have symptoms get breast cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, July 20, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A laser treatment can reduce spots in people's vision known as "floaters," a new study finds.

"Floaters often arise as the vitreous -- a gel-like substance that fills the eye -- contracts and pulls away from the back of the eye," explained ophthalmologist Dr. Naomi Goldberg, who reviewed the new research. She works at the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital in New York City.

Floaters become more common with age, and although some people simply get used to them, others are bothered by them or their vision is impaired.

The new research was led by Dr. Chirag Shah and Dr. Jeffrey Heier of Ophthalmic Consultants of Boston. They explained that, currently, there are three management options for floaters: patient education and observation; surgery; and a laser procedure known as YAG vitreolysis.

However, Shah and Heier said there are few published studies on the laser treatment's effectiveness in treating floaters.

The new study involved 52 patients with floaters who received one session of either the YAG laser treatment or a "sham" placebo laser treatment.

Six months after treatment, 54 percent of patients in the YAG group reported significantly greater improvement in floater-related visual disturbances, compared with only 9 percent of those in the placebo group.

Nineteen patients (53 percent) in the YAG group reported significantly or completely improved symptoms, compared with none of the patients in the placebo group, the researchers added.

The patients in the YAG group also had improvements in several other measures, including general vision and independence, compared with those in the placebo group, the findings showed.

There were no differences between the two groups in harmful side effects, according to the study, which was published July 20 in JAMA Ophthalmology.

A limitation of the study was its small size and short follow-up period, the researchers said. "Greater confidence in these outcomes may result from larger confirmatory studies of longer duration," the study authors wrote.

For her part, Goldberg said that although "there was significant improvement in patients' symptoms following treatment, and no significant complication was seen," these findings are early and "it is difficult to predict the long-term safety of this laser procedure."

The U.S. National Eye Institute has more on eye floaters.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story makes clear that there are alternatives to the YAG laser treatments:  “There are three management options for floaters: patient education and observation; surgery; and a laser procedure known as YAG vitreolysis.” Some discussion of the effectiveness of surgery and education would have been useful, however.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - In a small study, people who had chronic pain as a result of damage to the nervous system reported feeling less pain, as well as less depression and anxiety, when they smoked marijuana compared to when they smoked a drug-free placebo.

The pain reduction was “modest” - less than 1 point on an 11-point scale for the strongest marijuana - and patients reported no overall difference in their quality of life based on what they smoked.

The results support a limited number of trials that have suggested marijuana may be helpful for people suffering from chronic pain, but that it also has its limitations.

“This offers another potential tool in the tool box for treating chronic neuropathic pain,” Dr. Mark Ware, a neuroscientist at the McGill University Health Center in Montreal and the study’s lead author, told Reuters Health. But there are still questions about marijuana’s long-term safety as a pain reliever, he said.

Ware and his colleagues recruited 21 adults who were suffering from chronic neuropathic pain after an injury or surgery. Three times a day, for five days, participants took a 25 milligram hit of one of four treatments: marijuana that was 2.5 percent, 6 percent, or 9.4 percent tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or a 0 percent placebo. All patients rotated in random order through the four different treatments, with a nine-day break between each one.

During each treatment, participants were asked about their pain, sleep patterns, mood, and overall quality of life.

Patients smoking 9.4 percent THC marijuana reported lower pain scores than when smoking the placebo - on average, 5.4 versus 6.1 on a scale from 0 (“no pain”) to 10 (“worst possible pain”). They also reported that they slept better, and were less anxious and depressed than when they were on the placebo.

When smoking marijuana with moderate doses of THC, participants generally reported improved symptoms, but there was no significant difference in their relief from these doses compared to relief from the placebo treatment. There was also no difference in the quality of life or mood scores that participants reported when they were on any of the four treatments.

The highest dose of THC produced the most side effects, which included headaches, dry eyes, and a burning sensation in the regions where patients had pain.

In the second, third and fourth rounds of treatment, most - but not all - patients were able to tell when they had been on either the highest THC dose or the placebo. Most patients did not report feeling “high” at any point during the study.

About 1 to 2 percent of adults in the U.S. suffer from chronic neuropathic pain - pain that occurs when nerve fibers are damaged by injury or disease, and lingers even after the original wound has healed. The condition is treated with a range of different medications, including drugs usually intended for people with depression and epilepsy. But these don’t work for all patients, and some also have uncomfortable side effects.

“A lot of the treatments that are used for neuropathic pain ...might also be associated with disruptions in sleep,” Dr. Andrea Hohmann, who studies marijuana and pain at the University of Georgia and was not involved with the current study, told Reuters Health. For that reason, the finding that marijuana may actually help improve patients’ sleep, she said, is “particularly noteworthy.”

The cannabinoid family, which includes marijuana, is “emerging as an interesting new class of drugs for pain management,” Ware said. But, “we also know that treating chronic pain of any kind requires more than just (drugs),” he said. No matter what kind of medication they’re on, these patients should also be getting behavioral and physical therapy, he said.

The study’s five-day treatment sessions also leave questions about patients with chronic conditions who might need treatment for months or years. “The trial did not last long ... so the authors cannot really say whether any response would be sustained,” Dr. Henry McQuay, who studies pain and pain relief at the University of Oxford, wrote in an editorial accompanying the study.

Ware agreed that more research is needed. “What about long-term safety issues?” he asked. “These need to be considered before the drug becomes prescribable.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This story talks about a range of treatment options and even has the study’s lead author suggesting, that "these patients should also be getting behavioral and physical therapy."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Wrist replacement surgery is a last resort for some Delighted to be making her own bed once again

Wrist replacement surgery is a last resort for those who wish to save hand's range of motion

Making a bed may seem like a small task, but being able to do it means a lot to 79-year-old Ruby Chambers.

"That's one of the things I always liked to do myself, even though I had a cleaning lady," said Chambers, who lives with her daughter near the Texas Medical Center.

Arthritis has been Chambers' constant companion for years.

Her back hurts, and surgeons have replaced her left knee once and her right hip twice.

Pain and stiffness in her left wrist kept her from doing things she enjoys — like cooking and gardening — and other tasks that define independence, like folding bedsheets and buttoning her clothes.

After years of cortisone treatments and therapy, wrist replacement became a last resort.

"The last time I had an injection in my wrist, it was so painful, I thought I was going to have to pull over coming home and have someone else come and drive," she recalled. "I was hesitant at first (about surgery), but I said I might as well bite the bullet and see if this works."

Arthritis pain is caused by bones rubbing together after protective cartilage is damaged or worn away. Surgeons replace the raw bone ends with smooth, artificial surfaces that restore at least some of the joint's normal function. They anchor these prosthetics to the remaining bone with screws and cement.

Wrist replacement is much more complicated than hip and knee replacement. More than a dozen bones lie beneath the skin and muscles of the hand and wrist, compared with two or three for those larger joints. The wrist procedure replaces some of the small carpal bones altogether and sends as many as three screws into the hand.

"Our hand is our working instrument," said Dr. Evan D. Collins, an orthopedic surgeon with the Methodist Center for Sports Medicine. "It twists on all planes, it goes up, down, sideways and it rotates."

Some form of wrist replacement surgery has been available but seldom used for decades. More commonly, surgeons perform fusion procedures that relieve pain but immobilize the wrist. Replacement, by contrast, preserves some range of motion.

"The cost is that you don't have the ability to lift heavy objects," Collins said. "What you trade against that is range of motion."

After replacement surgery and months of physical therapy, patients can lift no more than 15 or 20 pounds, he said.

Older prosthetics used in wrist replacement required removing significant amounts of bone, which made later fusion problematic if the surgery failed, Collins explained.

"Some of the newer implant designs save a lot of the bone stock," said Collins, who performs about 10 wrist replacements a year. "If it does fail, revising it may not as difficult as it has been in the past."

Fusion may remain more appropriate for some people with very active lifestyles or jobs that require lifting heavy objects or using bone-jarring tools.

Under low-wear conditions, doctors expect joint prosthetics to last 10 to 15 years, another reason replacement might not be considered for younger people.

Potential patients must be evaluated for other causes of pain, Collins noted, because problems with thumbs or other hand parts can make the wrist hurt. Occasionally, other conditions must be addressed in addition to joint damage. Collins performed a carpal tunnel procedure while replacing Chambers' wrist joint, but he said such combination surgery isn't common.

Chambers spent two nights in the hospital after her operation in April.

She wore a cast for two months, a splint for another two and continued physical therapy through July.

She still can't lift more than 11 pounds, but the pain has greatly subsided.

"It's just about gone. I can turn my hand. I can make a fist," said Chambers, who prides herself on doing laundry and making that bed. "All those things I'm able to do for myself now."

For questions or comments on the Health & Medicine page, contact matthew.schwartz @chron.com.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article outlines some alternatives to wrist replacement surgery (e.g. medications, physical therapy, and fusion)—and briefly sketches their advantages and disadvantages. There are other surgical treatments for wrist arthritis as well, though the evidence to support them is also sparse.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 2, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new treatment might open the door for more patients with advanced kidney disease to get a transplant, a preliminary study suggests.

Of the 100,000-plus Americans waiting for a donor kidney, about one-third are "sensitized," said Dr. Robert Montgomery, director of the Transplant Institute at NYU Langone in New York City.

Those patients face a tough situation: They harbor immune system antibodies that are primed to attack a donor organ.

The antibodies can form when a person is exposed to foreign tissue, Montgomery explained. So a patient who's had a prior kidney transplant may be highly sensitized -- meaning they have a large number of the offending antibodies.

It can also happen to patients who've had blood transfusion or ever been pregnant, Montgomery said.

It's almost impossible to find a compatible donor for those patients. But they might be able to receive a kidney from an incompatible donor if they first undergo an extensive "desensitization" process.

That involves various treatments -- including IV drugs called immune globulin and rituximab -- that try to quash the antibodies that would attack the donor organ.

Now the new research suggests a simple approach -- an infusion of a particular enzyme hours before the transplant -- could offer a better alternative.

Researchers found that the treatment -- dubbed IdeS -- quickly wiped out the dangerous antibodies, allowing all but one of 25 patients to have a successful transplant.

The findings were published in the Aug. 2 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. Funding for the study came from the company developing IdeS -- Hansa Medical.

Montgomery, who was not involved in the study, said he's "never seen anything like it."

"When you give this, all of the antibodies are gone," Montgomery said. "I'm hopeful that this will turn out to be a game-changer."

However, he stressed, many questions remain.

Critically, the enzyme does not banish the antibodies forever. They come back, Montgomery said -- and the results of that comeback vary from patient to patient.

In the study, 10 patients had an episode of antibody-mediated rejection anywhere from two weeks to five months after their transplant. That means antibodies started to attack the new kidney.

Those patients were all successfully treated with standard anti-rejection drugs, according to the researchers.

Still, it's not yet clear how the patients will fare in the long term, said Dr. Julie Ingelfinger, a professor at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Ingelfinger, who wrote an editorial published with the study, echoed Montgomery's cautious optimism.

If larger, longer studies bolster the current findings, she said, "this could potentially be practice-changing."

"But," Ingelfinger stressed, "only time will tell."

Lead researcher Dr. Stanley Jordan agreed that more work is necessary.

But the findings mark another step forward for patients like these, according to Jordan, who is medical director of the kidney transplant program at Cedars-Sinai, in Los Angeles.

Traditionally, highly sensitized patients in need of a kidney have languished on waiting lists because it's so hard to find a compatible donor.

But in the past 15 years or so, desensitization has emerged as an alternative.

Last year, a landmark study proved that patients who receive transplants after desensitization live significantly longer than those who stay on dialysis.

"The outcomes have been good," Jordan said.

But, he added, there's clearly room for improvement.

Ingelfinger agreed. "The desensitization protocols now in use are time-consuming, and they don't always work," she said, noting that they can leave dangerous antibodies behind.

Desensitization adds about $20,000 to $30,000 to the cost of the transplant, according to the University of Wisconsin's transplant center.

The new approach is quite different, Ingelfinger said.

Patients receive one infusion of an enzyme called IdeS four to six hours before the transplant.

The enzyme is derived from a strain of Streptococcus bacteria, and it essentially chops up the antibodies that would attack the organ.

Jordan acknowledged that the source "sounds scary," but stressed that patients do not receive the bacteria itself -- but an engineered version of the enzyme.

In all, 25 U.S. and Swedish patients received an infusion of IdeS before their kidney transplant. All but one had a successful transplant, and none had detectable antibodies immediately afterward.

IdeS patients still received additional treatment -- including a week of immune globulin and rituximab infusions.

And as with all transplants, they needed standard anti-rejection drugs.

Because IdeS so readily banishes the offending antibodies, it might make transplants feasible for even the most highly sensitized patients, Montgomery said.

But the "$65,000 question" remains, he said: Can it extend the survival of the donor kidney and, ultimately, patients' lives?

IdeS is still experimental, and the only way patients could receive it is through a clinical trial. It will be "a few years" before it could be more widely available, Montgomery said.

The National Kidney Foundation has more on kidney transplantation.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions the existence of other desensitization efforts. But it could have done a much better job of comparing such efforts and their likely impact to programs designed to increase the supply of tissue matched organs and to suppress rejection of donor organs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Swedish Study Finds Surgery For Prostate Cancer Better Than Waiting

For men diagnosed with prostate cancer, uncertainty about what to do remains a big problem, despite years of research on the options.

Now, a Swedish study suggests that radical prostatectomy — complete removal of the prostate gland — is better than "watchful waiting" for the treatment of younger men with low-risk prostate cancer.

On the surface, this seems to contradict a U.S. trend toward holding off on surgery and monitoring men who have low-risk cancers with what's called "active surveillance."

But don't leap to any conclusions. Like every new study of prostate cancer, the results need to be carefully parsed.

First, the study results, which appear in this week's New England Journal of Medicine. It's actually an update of a 2008 report, with an additional three years of data on the nearly 700 men who volunteered for the trial up to 15 years ago. All of them had early-stage prostate cancer at the beginning.

The study found 38 percent fewer prostate cancer deaths among men randomly assigned to the surgery group versus those in what the Swedes called the watchful-waiting group. Men who had surgery had 41 percent lower risk of their cancer spreading throughout the body, and 66 percent less risk of growth within the prostate.

The survival benefits were restricted to men under 65. For this group, surgery saved one life for every seven men who had prostatectomies — considered a favorable ratio. And it applied to men with tumors considered low-risk, meaning they have a relatively low Gleason score, a marker of tumor aggressiveness.

"Our findings show that some tumors that are considered to be low-risk at diagnosis do pose a threat to life, especially if they are not surgically removed," the study authors write.

So is this a slam-dunk for radical prostatectomy? Game over?

Far from it. In an editorial accompanying the study, Dr. Dr. Matthew Smith of Massachusetts General Hospital makes some important points.

First, only about 1 in 20 men in the Swedish study had a prostate cancer diagnosis based on a high PSA level. Almost 90 percent had tumors their doctors could feel on digital rectal exams. But in the U.S., most prostate cancers are identified by PSA screening, and less than half have palpable tumors.

This is important, because experts believe many prostate tumors found by PSA are likely to be slow-growing — perhaps so slow they will never cause a problem before the man dies of something else.

So "low risk" in the Swedish study means higher-risk than the current "low risk" men diagnosed in the United States. By the way, 9 out of 10 prostate cancers in the U.S. these days is considered low risk.

Second, the Swedish study compared radical prostatectomy to watchful waiting. And Smith points out that "watchful waiting" does not mean the same thing as "active surveillance."

"Watchful waiting means we're not going to treat you now and if you progress clinically, we'll treat you with hormone therapy – not with curative intent," Smith tells Shots.

"Active surveillance means observing the patient in a proactive way, with regularly scheduled biopsies," he adds. If there's a sign the cancer is progressing, doctors currently would treat with intent to cure, using surgery, radiation or both.

Smith makes another point: Both surgical techniques and radiation therapy technology have improved since the Swedish study was done. So there's reason to think men followed with active surveillance and treated when necessary would fare better than the "watchful waiting" group in the newly published study.

Unfortunately, there haven't been any large studies in which prostatectomy and radiation therapy have been compared in patients with early-stage prostate cancer who have been randomly assigned to one or the other.

Two such studies are underway. Results are some years off. But Smith warns against assuming those results will settle the question of how men with early-stage prostate cancer should be treated.

"There will always be questions, and an ongoing need to individualize therapy," he says.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned the use of newer surgical techniques than those used to treat the men in the study who underwent prostatectomy. It also mentioned newer radiation therapies.   In addition, the story concluded:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Feb. 26, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug improves patients' blood sugar control without increasing the risk of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) in patients with type 2 diabetes, according to the results of a phase 2 clinical trial.

Type 2 diabetes is the more prevalent form of the disease, accounting for about 90 percent of cases. Often tied to obesity, type 2 diabetes involves a gradual decline in how insulin responds to changes in blood sugar (glucose).

The new drug, called TAK-875, is a pill designed to enhance the secretion of insulin in response to such changes, which means that it has no effect on insulin secretion when blood sugar levels are normal -- potentially reducing the risk for hypoglycemia.

The trial, led by Dr. Charles Burant of the University of Michigan Medical School, included 426 patients with type 2 diabetes who were not getting adequate blood sugar control through diet, exercise or treatment with the first-line diabetes drug metformin.

The patients were randomly assigned to receive either TAK-875 (303 patients), placebo (61 patients), or another diabetes drug called glimepiride (brand named Amaryl).

The study was funded by Takeda Pharmaceutical (which is developing the drug), and appears online Feb. 26 in The Lancet.

After 12 weeks, all the patients taking the different doses of TAK-875 had significant drops in their blood sugar levels, the researchers said. A similar reduction occurred in patients taking glimepiride.

However, the incidence of episodes of hypoglycemia was much lower among patients taking TAK-875 (2 percent) than among those taking glimepiride (19 percent) and the same as those taking the placebo (2 percent).

The incidence of treatment-related side effects was 49 percent among patients taking TAK-875, 48 percent among those in the placebo group, and 61 percent among those in the glimepiride group, according to the researchers. They write that they are "excited about the potential of TAK-875 and are eager to conduct larger trials to find out how well this drug works, how safe it is and what its place is in the treatment of diabetes."

In a journal commentary, Clifford Bailey of Aston University in Birmingham, England, cautioned that, "on the journey to approval of a new class of treatment for type 2 diabetes, many questions will be asked of [drugs such as TAK-875]," including questions of how long they might remain effective, as well as safety issues.

Other diabetes experts had mixed views on the new findings.

Dr. Loren Wissner Greene is clinical associate professor of endocrinology at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City. She noted that glitazones -- a separate class of newer drugs such as Rezulin, Avandia and Actos that also target insulin resistance -- have all shown initial promise in clinical trials before worrisome side effects began to surface in users (due to concerns around heart risks, Avandia remains on the U.S. market but under limited distribution).

As for TAK-875, it targets a separate mechanism "but again, until more is known about short-term and long-term cardiovascular effects, we need to proceed with moderated enthusiasm for each new drug and drug mechanism," Wissner Greene said.

Dr. Minisha Sood, endocrinologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City stressed that, "given the rising global incidence of type 2 diabetes, the medical community is eagerly awaiting the development of novel agents to add to our existing armamentarium of anti-diabetic agents."

She said that, "though this study includes a small sample size followed for a short period of time, the results are promising in that TAK-875 appears to be effective for glycemic [blood sugar] control without significant risk for hypoglycemia or weight gain. However, like Wissner-Greene, Sood said that "further investigation is warranted, especially including [heart disease] patients."

The U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases has more about diabetes medicines.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does not directly compare alternatives, but it puts the experimental drug in the right context through comments from Dr. Loren Wissner Greene. “She noted that glitazones — a separate class of newer drugs such as Rezulin, Avandia and Actos that also target insulin resistance — have all shown initial promise in clinical trials before worrisome side effects began to surface in users (Avandia was recently withdrawn from the U.S. market due to heart risks).”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug may help patients who can't tolerate statins lower their cholesterol, a new Australian study suggests.

The 12-week, phase 2 clinical trial was conducted at 33 international sites and included adults who suffered muscle problems when taking statins, a class of cholesterol-lowering drugs that includes Crestor and Lipitor. They received injections of a placebo or different doses of AMG145, which is a human monoclonal antibody.

Human monoclonal antibodies are naturally occurring human antibodies that are genetically altered in a laboratory, cloned in large numbers and introduced into the patient to target disease sites.

The patients who received AMG145 had 41 percent to 63 percent reductions in "bad" (LDL) cholesterol and did not experience significant muscle-related side effects, said study leader Dr. David Sullivan, of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Australia, and colleagues.

The reductions in LDL cholesterol seen in these patients were comparable to those that occur in patients taking the highest doses of the most effective statins, the researchers added.

"The most interesting aspect of this study is use of a novel approach using monoclonal antibodies -- a subtype of antibodies -- in the management of elevated LDL cholesterol," said Dr. Kenneth Ong, acting chief of cardiology at the Brooklyn Hospital Center.

"In this phase 2 study, the results are certainly impressive and warrant further investigation," Ong said. "Of note is the reduction in the number of myalgias (muscle pains) for patients compared to the number of myalgias experienced by people taking statins. If larger trials and longer durations of observation confirm these initial findings, many patients whose LDL cholesterol are otherwise untreated or under-treated could benefit."

"For those patients with elevated LDL who are intolerant to statins, this provides a viable option," said Dr. Suzanne Steinbaum, a preventive cardiologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. More trials need to be done of this unique treatment, she added.

The study was published online Nov. 5 in the Journal of the American Medical Association, to coincide with a planned presentation at the American Heart Association's annual meeting in Los Angeles.

The American Academy of Family Physicians has more about cholesterol-lowering drugs.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does make clear that this drug is intended to offer an alternative to patients who have problems with standard statin drug treatment. It also reports that reductions in LDL cholesterol levels were comparable to those seen with statin treatment. However, as noted above, the story fails to point out that while statin treatment has been shown to reduce health risks for patients with heart disease neither this trial nor any others have yet shown meaningful health benefits for these patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Bernat added that brain imaging promised to improve the diagnosis of unconscious states in certain patients, but that the prospect of imaging could also raise false hopes in cases like that of Terri Schiavo, the Florida woman who was removed from life support and died last year after a bitter national debate over patients’ rights.

Ms. Schiavo suffered far more profound brain damage than the woman in the study and was unresponsive for some 15 years, according to neurologists who examined her.

The journal that published the new paper, Science, promoted the finding in a news release, but added a “special note” citing the Schiavo case and warning that the finding “should not be used to generalize about all other patients in a vegetative state, particularly since each case may involve a different type of injury.”

The brain researchers, led by Adrian Owen at the Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit in Cambridge, England, performed scans on the patient’s brain five months after her accident. The imaging technique, called functional M.R.I., reveals changes in activity in specific brain regions. When the researchers spoke sentences to the patient, language areas in her brain spiked in the same way healthy volunteers’ did.

When presented with sentences containing ambiguous words, like “The creak came from a beam in the ceiling,” additional language processing areas also became active, as in normal brains. And when the researchers asked the woman to imagine playing tennis or walking through her house, they saw peaks of activity in the premotor cortex and other areas of her brain that mimicked those of healthy volunteers.

“If you put her scans together with the other 12 volunteers tested, you cannot tell which is the patient’s,” Dr. Owen said in an interview. Doctors from the University of Cambridge and the University of Liège in Belgium collaborated on the research.

Dr. Nicholas Schiff, a neuroscientist at Weill Cornell Medical College in New York, said that the study provided “knock-down, drag-out” evidence for mental awareness, but that it was not clear “whether we’ll see this in one out of 100 vegetative patients, or one out of 1,000, or ever again.”

In a more recent exam, more than 11 months after her injury, the patient exhibited a sign of responsiveness: she tracked with her eyes a small mirror, as it was moved slowly to her right, and could fixate on objects for more than five seconds, said Dr. Steven Laureys, a neurologist at the University of Liège and an author of the study. This means by definition that the young woman has transitioned from an unresponsive, vegetative state to a sometimes responsive condition known as a minimally conscious state, Dr. Laureys said in an interview. An estimated 100,000 Americans exist in this state of partial consciousness, and some of them eventually regain full awareness.

The chances that an unresponsive, brain-damaged patient will eventually emerge depend on the type of injury suffered, and on the length of time he or she has been unresponsive. Traumatic injuries to the head, often from car accidents, tend to sever brain cell connections and leave many neurons intact. About 50 percent of people with such injuries recover some awareness in the first year after the injury, studies find; very few do so afterward. By contrast, brains starved of oxygen — like that of Ms. Schiavo, whose heart stopped temporarily — often suffer a massive loss of neurons, leaving virtually nothing unharmed. Only 15 percent of people who suffer brain damage from oxygen deprivation recover some awareness within the first three months. Very few do after that, and a 1994 review of more than 700 vegetative patients found that none had done so after two years.

The imaging techniques used in the new study could help identify which patients are most likely to emerge — once the tests are studied in larger numbers of unconscious people, said Dr. Joseph Fins, chief of the medical ethics division of New York Presbyterian Hospital-Weill Cornell Medical Center.

Without this context, Dr. Fins said, the imaging tests could create some confusion, because like any medical tests they may occasionally go wrong, misidentifying patients as exhibiting consciousness or lacking it. “For now I think what this study does is to create another shade of gray in the understanding of gray matter,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention standard bedside methods of diagnosis, but does not mention other imaging techniques such as PET. The story could have also provided more detail about the pros and cons of the different methods.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The financial bonanza for the first company to market a successful nicotine vaccine would be enormous. Although smoking rates in the United States have declined in recent decades, tens of millions of adults continue to smoke, and the habit causes more than 440,000 deaths a year, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

An effective vaccine could play a major role in reducing smoking around the world, said Dr. Vocci, who estimated that current rates of smoking would lead to one billion deaths in the 21st century.

Surveys show that about 7 in 10 smokers say they would like to quit, but a vast majority of those who try end up relapsing. While the market for smoking cessation therapies is estimated to be more than $1 billion annually, many smokers continue to fail in their efforts to quit even while using the available products, with long-term success rates generally peaking at about 20 percent.

"It's the period between four-week abstinence and one-year abstinence that's the critical period," said Dr. Victor I. Reus, a professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco, and a lead investigator on the NicVax study.

If the vaccine helps smokers quit, Dr. Reus said, a central question will be whether booster shots could help prevent relapse.

The classic nicotine buzz occurs when the molecule travels in the bloodstream across the "blood-brain barrier" to reach specific receptors in the brain. Nicotine itself does not cause the body to create antibodies as part of an immunological response, the way disease-causing viruses and bacteria do.

The anti-nicotine antibodies generated by NicVax are proteins that bind to the nicotine molecule. Because the compound is too big to cross the blood-brain barrier, the vaccine is expected to diminish or eliminate the pleasure associated with puffing a cigarette. This lack of positive physiological reinforcement for smoking is believed to reduce the nicotine craving that causes smokers to fail in their efforts to quit.

The most widespread therapies currently available are nicotine-replacement products, like nicotine patches and gum, which are designed to wean the smoker by administering trickles of nicotine to the body, replacing the surges delivered by cigarettes.

Zyban, a repackaging of the antidepressant Wellbutrin, was approved by the F.D.A. a decade ago for smoking cessation. Most recently, the F.D.A. approved Chantix, which works by binding to the nicotine receptors in the brain.

The current study will test vaccine dosages and sequences of four or five shots; some subjects will get a placebo. The total number of subjects in the trial is expected to be about 300. Other participating centers include the University of Minnesota; the University of California, Los Angeles; and Massachusetts General Hospital.

The antibodies produced by a single NicVax injection last about a month, said Dr. Reus, the San Francisco scientist. The multishot sequences being tested are designed to extend the antibody response for many months, although eventually the body will stop producing the anti-nicotine antibodies, he said.

Previous NicVax trials were intended to assess vaccine safety and dosing levels rather than efficacy, but researchers reported high short-term rates of quitting.

Thomas E. Rathjen, a spokesman for Nabi Biopharmaceuticals, said the results of the study should be available sometime next year.

Even if they are promising, however, the company will have to conduct a final trial before it can apply for F.D.A. approval.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article does a good job covering existing drug therapies, but misses behavioral therapies (of proven benefit) entirely.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
No Cure For Morning Sickness Just Yet

Expectant moms in search of help with morning sickness will have to keep looking.

There's still no reliable treatment to relieve vomiting and feelings of nausea in early-term pregnant women, according to a review of 27 clinical trials published by the Cochrane Library.

Dublin City University's Anne Matthews, the review's lead researcher, says it was disappointing not to find more studies that were consistent in testing the same approaches. Without enough data that could be pooled together, it wasn't possible for the Cochrane folks to figure out if anything really works reliably and safely.

Morning sickness is quite common, with most pregnant women getting nauseous early on and around a third throwing up.

Unfortunately, medicines to relieve morning sickness have a checkered history. Remember thalidomide? In the late '50s the drug was billed as a way to ameliorate morning sickness. The medicine, though never approved for use in the United States, led to birth defects in some 10,000 kids in Europe and Canada.

In the latest look at various treatments, the Cochrane group evaluated studies that examined both pharmaceutical and alternative techniques, including acupuncture, acupressure (a noninvasive variation of acupuncture), ginger, vitamin B-6 and conventional anti-vomiting drugs.

The studies in the review comprised more than 4,000 women who were up to 20 weeks pregnant.

Sounds impressive, right? But Matthews says reviewers found few high-quality studies about any treatment. Also, inconsistencies in methodology from study to study made it difficult to pool the results and draw firm conclusions.

Take ginger. Matthews says different studies used different forms of ginger -- some tried ginger syrup and others used capsules -- at different doses. The comparison groups in the experiments varied as well.

What's more, "people tended to measure the outcomes very differently," Matthews says. Most focused on the symptoms of nausea and vomiting, but they measured the symptoms at different times, she says.

And here's a biggie: There wasn't much information about adverse effects on women and babies, something everyone would certainly want to know. And there wasn't much hard data on psychological, social or economic outcomes, according to the report.

Authors of the review found some evidence that ginger, vitamin B-6 and anti-vomiting drugs relieved nausea. But Matthews says the evidence isn't strong enough to make a recommendation.

All too often, Matthews says, researchers in the field seem to forge ahead without paying enough attention to what's been done before. "The onus is back to researchers to carry out studies that would stand up" to rigorous review and that would build on what's already been tested.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses many different treatments for morning sickness and reports that they all lack good-quality evidence to support their use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Most doctors opt for screening women for cervical cancer more often than guidelines suggest, according to a new study.

Researchers based at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found that many primary care doctors would bring women back for cancer screening annually — while recommendations generally call for a three-year wait after normal tests.

That means more costs to women and the healthcare system, as well as a risk of unnecessary treatment for false-positive test results — with very little additional cancer-catching benefit.

“There’s really no advantage to annual screening compared to screening every two or three years,” lead author Katherine Roland told Reuters Health.

Guidelines from the American Cancer Society and other organizations recommend that women age 30 and older are screened using Pap smears and tests for the human papillomavirus, or HPV.

If both tests are normal, those guidelines call for a three-year wait before the next screening. That’s because HPV — which causes changes in the cervix that can lead to cancer — may take a decade to progress to that point.

“No test is perfect,” said Philip Castle, an HPV expert at the American Society for Clinical Pathology in Chicago. But, he added, “a single negative HPV test is very good at ruling out disease.”

Even when doctors use just a Pap test, Roland said, a woman who has had a few normal tests in a row can go two or three years before her next screening.

For the current study, she and her colleagues sent out questionnaires to a representative sample of about 600 office-based doctors and hospital departments around the country. They asked doctors and staff what tests they used for cervical cancer screening and presented them with three patient scenarios.

In those scenarios, a woman age 30 to 60 has had two consecutive normal Pap tests but no HPV tests; two normal Paps and a negative HPV test; or a negative HPV test but no recent Pap tests.

In all of those cases, guidelines recommend waiting three years before screening the patient again, the authors explain in the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. But for each scenario, between 67 percent and 85 percent of doctors said they would bring the woman back in a year.

Roland pointed to the extra costs women may incur to get childcare and make it to the doctor’s office — plus the costs to a strained healthcare system of ordering more tests.

And any extra screening increases the chance of getting a “false positive” result on a test — meaning the test finds something that doesn’t turn out to be cancer. In that case, women would need more invasive tests to rule out disease, Roland said, and risk “undue harm” from those procedures.

“Some of it is, don’t go looking before you need to go looking because you’ll find stuff that you’d rather not find,” said Castle, who was not involved in the new study.

Results from a survey of the same doctors have shown that many also give the HPV test alongside Pap smears to women under 30 — which is not recommended, because HPV is common in young women and often goes away on its own (see Reuters Health story of July 4, 2011.)

Castle said there could be a few reasons that doctors opt to screen women more often than is recommended. First, they might not know about the guidelines. But women may also be used to annual testing and ask for it themselves.

In addition, Roland added, some doctors might be afraid of missing very early cervical cancer and getting sued if they screen less frequently.

But if doctors and hospitals want to rein in spending and limit unnecessary risks, that attitude has to change, researchers agreed.

“We need to shift toward the wellness visit as opposed to, ‘You have to come in here every year for a Pap,’” Castle said.

Women should talk to their doctors about screening, especially if they think they are being screened too often, researchers added.

“A woman should know what test is being used,” said Dr. Mona Saraiya, a co-author on the new study. “Often a provider just does the HPV test” without telling the patient. “A woman should say, ‘What screening tests are you doing on me?’”

And if doctors want women to come back again next year, women should ask them why, Saraiya said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Comparison of screening intervals was at the heart of the story: “There’s really no advantage to annual screening compared to screening every two or three years,” lead author Katherine Roland told Reuters Health.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - An infusion of the anesthetic ketamine can lift mood within minutes in patients suffering from severe bipolar depression, according to a small study out this month in the Archives of General Psychiatry.

The 18 patients in the study had tried an average of seven different drugs for treating their bipolar illness, and were still severely depressed; 55 percent had failed electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), or shock treatment. But within 40 minutes of receiving a ketamine injection, their depressive symptoms improved; the effect persisted for at least three days.

Right now, medications available for treating either major depression or bipolar illness can take weeks, or even months, to work, notes Dr. Carlos A. Zarate Jr. of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, one of the researchers on the study.

And as a person waits for their medications to kick in, he added, they will continue to have difficulty working and coping with social and family life; they may even be having thoughts of suicide. “We want to alleviate the suffering and get them back to their life,” he said.

Zarate and his colleagues had previously demonstrated that ketamine shots helped some patients with treatment-resistant unipolar depression, meaning they did not cycle through manic episodes. In the new study, they gave patients with bipolar illness ketamine or a placebo on two test days two weeks apart.

All of the patients were on lithium or valproate - two drugs commonly used for bipolar illness - but had not responded to treatment. Nearly all were unemployed, Zarate and his team note, and two-thirds were on psychiatric disability.

Compared to placebo, patients showed significant improvement in mood within 40 minutes of receiving the ketamine infusion, using a common depression rating scale. Symptom improvement peaked two days after the injection, but remained significantly greater than for placebo for three days.

Seventy-one percent of the patients responded to ketamine, meaning they had at least a 50 percent improvement in their depressive symptoms. Six percent responded to placebo.

Side effects included anxiety, “feeling woozy or loopy,” headache, and dissociative symptoms, meaning a temporary sense of disconnection from reality, although there were no serious adverse events. By developing more specifically targeted drugs, Zarate noted, it may be possible to treat patients effectively while avoiding these symptoms.

Ketamine appears to work by “resetting” the way nerve cells process glutamate, a brain chemical key for learning, memory, and other functions, according to Zarate. The problem in bipolar illness and depression, he explains, doesn’t appear to be that a person has too much or too little glutamate; instead, it’s likely that the way their neurons release and take up the chemical is out of whack.

First introduced in 1962, ketamine is used legally in both human and veterinary medicine as an anesthetic. It’s also a drug of abuse, at much higher doses than those used in Zarate’s research; while patients in the current study received about 50 milligrams during a 40-minute period, a dose too low to induce anesthesia, recreational users of ketamine, known as “Special K,” may take hundreds of milligrams per week.

In 1999, US regulators classified ketamine as a Schedule III controlled substance, meaning it has the potential for abuse but is also useful medically.

Ketamine could improve treatment of bipolar illness and depression in a variety of ways, Zarate said; for example, as a means to jump-start standard drug treatment, or as an anesthetic before ECT. “It’s opened the floodgate of many different directions of research, and all of them are quite encouraging,” said Zarate, who along with a co-author has filed for a patent on the use of ketamine in depression. Those rights would be assigned to his employer, the National Institutes of Health.

Efforts are already underway in Europe to develop guidelines for how ketamine should be used and prescribed to treat bipolar illness and depression, the researcher said.

In the US, research is continuing on the drug, he added, and some physicians are likely trying the drug in their patients with bipolar illness or depression who aren’t helped by standard treatments. But, according to Zarate, more research is needed on how to use the drug in the safest and most effective way.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly conveys that these patients had tried many treatments. What is unclear is at least 2 things: 1) although these patients had tried many treatments over their lifetime history of bipolar disease, to enter this study they need to fail 1 adequate course of an antidepressant and 1 trial of a mood stabilizer – so while they appear to have recently failed on average 7 drugs, this is not true and the story is misleading in this respect. 
Nonetheless because of the mention that was made of alternative approaches, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO - A minimally invasive procedure in which pulses of energy from a probe are applied directly to nerve roots near the spine is safe and effective in people with acute lower back pain that has not responded to conservative treatment, according to a study being presented today at the annual meeting of the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA).

Lumbar disk herniation is a common, often debilitating, condition that affects the disks that act as cushions between the vertebrae of the lower spine. Herniation occurs where the jelly-like material in the center of the disk bulges through a tear in the disk's tough exterior layer and puts pressure on the roots of the nerves. Herniated disks are often the source of sciatica, or pain that radiates downward from the lower back into the leg.

Conservative treatment options for herniated disks range from over-the-counter pain medications to injections of corticosteroids directly into the affected area of the spine. Those who don't respond may require surgery. In some cases, the entire disk must be removed and the vertebra fused together for stability.

An alternative technique, CT-guided pulsed radiofrequency (pRF), applies energy through an electrode under CT guidance to the portion of the nerve responsible for sending pain signals.

"Pulsed radiofrequency creates a nerve modulation, significantly reducing inflammation and its associated symptoms," said study senior author Alessandro Napoli, M.D., Ph.D., professor of interventional radiology at Sapienza University of Rome in Italy.

Dr. Napoli and colleagues studied the approach in patients with back pain from lumbar disk herniation that had not responded to prolonged conservative treatment. In 128 patients, the pRF treatment was delivered directly under CT guidance to the root of the nerve. The treatment was applied for 10 minutes.

For comparison, a group of 120 patients received one to three sessions of CT-guided steroid injection on the same anatomical target with no pRF.

The one-year outcomes demonstrated that CT-guided pRF was superior to the injection-only strategy. Patients who received pRF saw greater overall improvement in pain and disability scores during the first year. Relief of leg pain was faster in patients assigned to pRF, and they also reported a faster rate of perceived recovery. The probability of perceived recovery after one year of follow-up was 95 percent in the pRF group, compared with 61 percent in the injection only group.

"Given our study results, we offer pulsed radiofrequency to patients with herniated disk and sciatic nerve compression whose symptoms do not benefit from conservative therapy," Dr. Napoli said.

The results of the study are superior to those typically reported for usual care strategies and injections and may help a substantial number of patients with sciatic disk compression to avoid surgery, Dr. Napoli added.

The use of pRF also could improve outcomes for patients set to receive corticosteroid injections.

"We learned that when pulsed radiofrequency is followed by steroid injection, the result is longer lasting and more efficacious than injection only," Dr. Napoli said. "The effect of pulsed radiofrequency is fast and without adverse events."

Today, therapy for spine disorders allows for definitive treatment of symptoms and conditions using different techniques and technologies.

"Of the different therapies available, pulsed radiofrequency is among the least invasive," Dr. Napoli said. "Treatment lasts 10 minutes, and one session was enough in a large number of treated patients."

Note: Copies of RSNA 2018 news releases and electronic images will be available online at RSNA.org/press18 beginning Monday, Nov. 26.

RSNA is an association of over 54,000 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists, promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)

Editor's note: The data in these releases may differ from those in the published abstract and those actually presented at the meeting, as researchers continue to update their data right up until the meeting. To ensure you are using the most up-to-date information, please contact us.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release defines what alternatives are available for acute back pain with sciatica, including pain medications, cortisteroids and surgery. It details outcomes in patients treated with steroid injections compared with pRF.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Eric Rowe turned 50, the question was not whether the Washington lawyer would be screened for colon cancer, but how. His wife had undergone a colonoscopy, the gold-standard exam that costs about $1,500, but Rowe's internist recommended an alternative that was less invasive and expensive: a virtual colonoscopy, which uses three-dimensional images from a CT scan to detect benign polyps or cancers.

"It sounded good to me," said Rowe, pleased that he could schedule the $800 procedure for 7:45 a.m. at a downtown medical building. Unlike standard colonoscopy, generally performed under anesthesia, in which a long, flexible scope is inserted into the rectum and snaked through the large intestine to find and snip out polyps, the new procedure doesn't require a ride home or a day off. Rowe planned to be at his desk an hour or so later.

Invented 16 years ago by a radiologist who got the idea while playing video games on a flight simulator during advanced training at Johns Hopkins, virtual colonoscopy has become an increasingly popular alternative to standard, or optical, colonoscopy, which is typically performed by a gastroenterologist. Initially regarded as a high-tech novelty, the new procedure has in recent months received key endorsements as a first-line screening test from influential medical groups, notably the American Cancer Society, after several large studies found it to be effective at finding large polyps.

Like other mass screening tests including mammography, the overarching question is whether the benefits of virtual colonoscopy outweigh the risks.

Its supporters, many of them radiologists who read CT scans, tout virtual colonoscopy as a more palatable alternative that has the potential to boost low rates of screening. One of the most common and deadliest malignancies, colon cancer can be prevented -- or even cured -- if detected early. Currently about half of Americans over 50 are screened for the disease; some shun traditional colonoscopy, which is the only way to remove polyps, because of its invasive nature.

"This is a really good test that's going to find way more cancer than optical colonoscopy," said Mark Klein of Washington Radiology Associates, who has performed more than 1,200 virtual colonoscopies since 2002, Rowe's among them. "Is it perfect? No. But no test is."

The prospects for significant expansion of the procedure, which is covered by a growing number of insurance companies, have collided with a large and unexpected roadblock. In February, officials at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced a preliminary decision not to cover the procedure as a mass screening test for Medicare recipients.

CMS officials, who are scheduled to issue their final ruling May 12, cited reservations expressed by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of health experts, and concluded that there is insufficient evidence that virtual colonoscopy would benefit Medicare recipients. CMS cited concerns about radiation exposure and the number of patients who would require follow-up colonoscopies to remove polyps, as well as the inability of CT scans to reliably detect small or flat growths.

Medicare's decision has sparked a furious lobbying campaign. More than 40 members of Congress have signed letters urging federal officials to reconsider, and the dispute has split doctors in the same specialty: the American Gastroenterological Association favors Medicare coverage, while the American College of Gastroenterology does not.

In many ways, the debate mirrors some of the complexities inherent in overhauling health care, a top priority of the Obama administration. At issue is whether virtual colonoscopy will enhance quality or whether it is, in the words of one physician blogger, "a proxy for high-tech excesses."

"CMS made the right decision," said John Petrini, a Santa Barbara, Calif., gastroenterologist who heads the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. Why, he asks, should patients undergo two tests when one is sufficient?

Klein disagrees. "They got it completely wrong," he said. "Some people will die from that decision, completely unnecessarily," because they won't get a standard colonoscopy.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions standard colonoscopy as the alternative to virtual colonoscopy. The story could have also mentioned some of the other screening tests that are available, such as stool tests, sigmoidoscopy or barium enema.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (March 19, 2018)--A nonsurgical treatment could improve quality of life for patients with knee pain due to osteoarthritis, according to new research presented today at the Society of Interventional Radiology's 2018 Annual Scientific Meeting.

In the first U.S. clinical trial on geniculate artery embolization (GAE), a minimally invasive, image-guided treatment that blocks key arteries in the knee to reduce inflammation and pain, resulted in a majority of study participants achieving significant pain reduction and improvements in range of motion, avoiding more invasive measures.

"A majority of our patients with osteoarthritis of the knee saw significant pain reduction, not only just a few days after the procedure, but a month after as well, making this an accessible treatment for patients looking to improve their quality of life without surgery," said Sandeep Bagla, M.D., director of interventional radiology at the Vascular Institute of Virginia and lead author of the study. "We are very encouraged by the results and the implications for the millions suffering from this common, yet debilitating condition."

Interventional radiologists perform GAE for knee pain by inserting catheters through a pinhole-sized incision, blocking the very small arteries or capillaries within the lining of the knee, reducing the inflammation caused by osteoarthritis. As an outpatient treatment, GAE does not require open surgery or physical therapy, and takes 45-90 minutes to perform.

This prospective, multicenter clinical trial evaluated 13 patients with severe osteoarthritis pain. Each patient's pain and disability were measured along two scales, with evaluations before and after the treatment. The treatment was successfully completed in all 13 patients, with no adverse events. One month later, researchers followed the progress of eight patients and found that GAE significantly decreased pain (-58 mm on the Visual Analog Scale), reduced stiffness and increased physical function (-36.3 on the Western Ontario and McMaster University Osteoarthritis Index). Together the scales represent an 80 percent improvement in function compared with pre-procedure conditions.

"This procedure could have a significant impact in the treatment of osteoarthritis pain as a whole," said Bagla. "The current mainstay of treatment in patients who have arthritis are pain medications, which come with significant side effects and risks. But GAE provides another option for patients struggling with pain and may even allow patients to avoid the painful recovery of knee surgery and the need for the kind of opioid pain medications associated with the dangerous epidemic in the United States."

This study builds on the growing international research around GAE and osteoarthritis. While preliminary data shows that the treatment does work and is feasible, it has only been used in a clinical trial setting. The study has completed enrollment of 20 patients and final results are expected in summer 2018. A second randomized controlled clinical trial began in February 2018 and will provide further data on what types of patients are the best candidates for this treatment and how it could move toward clinical practice.

Abstract 210: Geniculate Artery Embolization (GAE) for Osteoarthritis (OA)-related Knee Pain: Interim Results from a Multicenter US Trial. S. Bagla; R. Piechowiak; T. Hartman; J. Orlando; A. Isaacson; Vascular Institute of Virginia, Woodbridge, VA; UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. SIR Annual Scientific Meeting, March 17-22, 2018. This abstract can be found at sirmeeting.org.

The Society of Interventional Radiology is a nonprofit, professional medical society representing more than 7,500 practicing interventional radiology physicians, trainees, students, scientists and clinical associates, dedicated to improving patient care through the limitless potential of image-guided therapies. SIR's members work in a variety of settings and at different professional levels--from medical students and residents to university faculty and private practice physicians. Visit sirweb.org.

The Society of Interventional Radiology is holding its Annual Scientific Meeting March 17-22, 2018 at the Los Angeles Convention Center in Los Angeles, Calif. Visit sirmeeting.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions medications and specifically opioids as one treatment for knee OA. According to the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, alternatives also include exercise, over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen and naproxen sodium, and corticosteroid injections.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A brain tumor appears as a malformed blob on a brain scan, shining white among the surrounding gray tissue—a certain and devastating diagnosis. Doctors can begin treatment immediately, trying to save the most important organ in the body. The brain, however, is also vulnerable to many more, much less visible ailments.

Consider the case of Allie Orlando, a 23-year-old social service coordinator, who has received a plethora of diagnoses since she first saw a psychologist at 14. First, it was generalized anxiety disorder. Next, she was told she had depression. Then, when she was 17, it was settled: She suffered from borderline personality disorder. But when Orlando traveled out of state for college, she began seeing a new psychologist who strongly disagreed with her borderline diagnosis. Meanwhile, she continued to struggle and entered the hospital for suicidal ideation her sophomore year. The doctors there agreed: Borderline wasn’t the right diagnosis, and maybe she should stop taking the meds she had been prescribed.

“I was just frustrated because the stigma attached to borderline is very strong,” Orlando says. She had been open about her diagnosis in high school, but felt the “borderline” label may have scared some people off. She recalled her boyfriend at the time searching the web for her diagnosis and saying: “Oh God, no.” After that, she kept quiet about her diagnosis, worried it would drive friends away. “I’m sure it also affected what meds I was prescribed. It took a few years to find the right ‘formula’ of meds.” While the doctors recommended some medication that helped, it was a matter of trial and error, since Orlando still doesn’t have a concrete diagnosis today.

The problem is that mental health diagnosis has essentially remained unchanged for 100 years, relying on symptoms and clinical interviews. Mental disorders lack what most other health diagnoses rely on: biological markers. A tumor seen on a scan, bacteria identified by a throat culture, a fracture captured on an X-ray: They’re all clear signs something is wrong. Mental health disorders are difficult to diagnose even by the most well-trained, well-meaning psychiatrists, because all they have to go on are questions and, sometimes, answers. “Diagnosis is really asking lots and lots of questions about their [patients’] experience, looking at patients’ answers both from what they say and how they say it,” says Dr. Michael Dulchin, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the New York University Medical Center. The uncertainty can lead to dangerous misdiagnoses.

Without such signs to confirm their diagnosis, patients with mental illnesses are often burdened by the perception that they somehow have something less “real” than most other ailments. For years, researchers searched, in vain, for concrete signs in the brain that could tell them the difference between, for example, bipolar and depression. Now some believe the key may be realizing that mental illnesses are not necessarily contained in the brain: Biomarkers may be found throughout the entire body.

Dr. Sabine Bahn, a professor of neurotechnology at Cambridge University, leads a team researching this premise. As a Ph.D. student, she investigated the postmortem brains of psychiatric patients and was surprised to find differences in glucose regulation processes and certain parts of cell production in the brains of schizophrenia patients.

Bahn’s team then looked at the cerebrospinal fluid of early-stage schizophrenia patients who had not yet taken any medication and again saw abnormalities in glucose handling. Bahn says it was a revelation that such changes could be spotted in the blood of patients in such early stages of the disease. What if, her team began to think, it could come up with a blood test for schizophrenia? Having this kind of tool would be invaluable—with the current interview-based methods of diagnosis, subtle symptoms of schizophrenia are missed until too late, delaying treatment by months, or even years.

Armed with her previous research, Bahn and her team detailed a panel of blood biomarkers in individuals who have an increased risk of schizophrenia but have no visible symptoms yet. The test, says Bahn, can accurately predict whether someone will “develop schizophrenia over the next two years.”

Bahn’s finding is one of several recent advancements toward a comprehensive system of biological mental health diagnostic tools. One group of researchers, for example, recently worked backward to take on the problematic overlap between depression and bipolar disorder—many bipolar patients are initially and incorrectly diagnosed with depression. The team took urine samples from patients who had been diagnosed with one of the two disorders and looked for differences between the two groups. The results, published in the Journal of Proteome Research, showed that 20 different metabolites differentiated the two groups. Another team of scientists identified differences in the throat bacteria of schizophrenic and healthy people. Previous research had suggested tentative links between immune disorders, which are influenced in part by microbes in the body, and schizophrenia; the new study, published in PeerJ, furthered the possibility that differences in oral bacteria could be associated with the disorder.

Despite these exciting preliminary findings, there aren’t yet any biological tests for mental illness widely used in medical practice. In some cases, the reason is primarily financial. “The problem with schizophrenia is that although about 1 percent of the population suffers from schizophrenia, the number of new patients per year is quite low, at 0.02 percent,” says Bahn. “As the development costs of a test are very high, there is a risk that the test will not be commercially viable.” For severe mental illnesses like schizophrenia, it’s also the case that even if a test made it through development and hit the market, it may not be successfully integrated into psychiatric practice. That’s because, Dulchin says, if a patient comes in with schizophrenia symptoms that a doctor knows can be alleviated with drugs, the doctor is not likely to deny that patient treatment—no matter what a biological test says.

Those working on these sorts of tests see them being implemented in a different setting entirely: when a patient comes into their internist seeking treatment for other conditions. “Psychiatric disorders often present with other diseases such as diabetes and some immune disorders,” says Bahn. If there was a blood test for depression, it could just become part of a standard panel—and thus help achieve earlier diagnoses, and in turn earlier treatment, across the board.

But, if biological tests for mental illness do come to fruition, even those already living with a condition could benefit. “I think if this biological aspect was attached to it, then people would see that stigmatizing someone for their depression is as ridiculous as stigmatizing someone for their diabetes,” Orlando says. “People often need concrete, tangible facts, and that’s what scares them about mental illness and what causes the stigmatization—they just don’t understand it.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does not perform any head-to-head comparisons between traditional diagnostic methods and biological testing, but we feel the framing of the story gets the point across that there are traditional ways of diagnosing these disorders and a promising wave of new biological tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A small U.S. study suggests daily hormone injections may boost mental agility in older people with and without mild cognitive problems.

People who got growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), as opposed to inactive injections, improved on tests of attention and concentration skills - what psychologists call executive function.

And participants who got the hormone shots also felt the effects in their daily life, said Laura Baker, a memory researcher at the University of Washington & VA Puget Sound Health Care System in Seattle.

“On self-report, many of the folks in the active group reported they felt better,” Baker, who led the study, told Reuters Health. “They wanted to know where they could get (the hormone) after the study was over.”

But that’s jumping the gun, she warned, because the treatment is still experimental and GHRH is not approved to treat mental decline. What’s more, the hormone, which was provided free by the manufacturer in the study, today costs $700 for a single shot, Baker said.

An expert who wasn’t involved in the research echoed the cautions.

“I think it’s potentially good news, but I don’t think it’s to the point where people should go out and start using it,” said Dr. Ronald C. Petersen, who heads the Mayo Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center in Rochester, Minnesota.

The new study, published Monday in the Archives of Neurology, included 152 people aged 55 to 87. Sixty-six had “mild cognitive impairment,” which falls somewhere between normal forgetfulness and dementia.

Baker said researchers have failed so far to come up with effective drugs to treat mild cognitive impairment, just as there is no known treatment to stave off the normal memory decline that comes with age.

But recent work by one of Baker’s co-authors hints that nasal sprays with the hormone insulin may have a positive impact on memory in people with Alzheimer’s disease - although that’s far from conclusive yet.

GHRH, a hormone produced by the hypothalamus in the brain, is linked to the insulin system, but also has a host of other effects. It dwindles naturally with aging, which has been linked to declines in memory and executive function.

“All you have to do is supplement that hormone and it then will result in a whole cascade of effects that then restore an aging system to a younger system,” said Baker.

In her study, people injected a synthetic version of GHRH or a placebo daily for five months. At the end, those who got the drug did better on psychological tests of executive function - whether or not they had mild cognitive impairment.

It’s unclear how the test differences will translate into real life, said Baker. One test, for instance, asked participants to name the color of a font - say, green - used to write the name of a different color - say, “red”. But Baker said people who got the hormone were more likely to report improvements in their ability to focus during the day.

The researchers found no serious side effects in the study, although people who got the hormone more often complained of symptoms like skin reactions and joint pain.

Still, both Baker and Petersen said more work is needed to gauge the long-term consequences of GHRH injections. It’s possible health problems could show up down the road, and the mental boost may be short-lived.

“Is it going to work in the long run and is it going to be safe? That is still unknown,” said Petersen.

Baker added that it’s too early to say whether the hormone could play a role in thwarting the development of Alzheimer’s, which may affect as many as five million Americans.

Still, she said, “There are things we can all do to postpone (mental) decline.” Keeping medical conditions such as diabetes under control and getting regular exercise are two examples.

“We recommend commonly that people start exercising when they are having mild cognitive impairment,” Baker said. “Our work and others’ has shown that exercise really does make a difference.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Here’s the relevant adequate section of the story:
“Baker said researchers have failed so far to come up with effective drugs to treat mild cognitive impairment, just as there is no known treatment to stave off the normal memory decline that comes with age.
But recent work by one of Baker’s co-authors hints that nasal sprays with the hormone insulin may have a positive impact on memory in people with Alzheimer’s disease – although that’s far from conclusive yet.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Welcome to Dear Julia, a weekly column where readers can submit everyday health questions on anything from the science of hangovers to the mysteries of back pain. Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.

Is running really a better form of exercise than walking, given that running can lead to more injuries?

At Vox, I sit near health reporter Sarah Kliff, who trains for half-marathons and triathlons with a casualness most people reserve for grocery shopping. But Sarah’s also suffered with plantar fasciitis and a stress fracture. At times, she's hobbled around in running shoes for months because everything else hurt too much, and even sported a big blue brace on her left leg to help cushion the tiny cracks in the bones of her foot brought on from too much wear and tear.

In many ways, Sarah is a perfect case study in how to think about the benefits and risks of running versus walking. Running has greater health benefits than walking (Sarah is super fit), but it also carries a much bigger risk of injury (see Sarah’s foot brace).



So which effect dominates? To find out, I first searched for "randomized control trials" and "systematic reviews" on running, walking, and exercise at PubMed health (a free search engine for health research) and in Google Scholar. I wanted to see what the highest-quality evidence — trials and reviews are the gold standard — said about the relative risks and benefits of these two forms of exercise.

It was immediately apparent that running can lead to more injuries, and the risk goes up as running programs get more intense. Studies have found that runners have significantly higher injury rates than walkers (one study found that young men who run or jog had a 25 percent higher risk of injuries than walkers), and that ultramarathoners are at an even greater risk. The main running-related injuries include tibia stress syndrome, Achilles tendon injuries, and plantar fasciitis.

Overall, more than half of people who run will experience some sort of injury from doing so, while the percentage of walkers who will get hurt is around 1 percent. Interestingly, it seems you can walk pretty much endlessly without any increased risk of hurting yourself.

That running hurts people shouldn't be surprising. As this study described, "Running produces ground reaction forces that are approximately 2.5 times body weight, while the ground reaction force during walking is in the range of 1.2 times body weight." You're also more likely to trip and fall while running than you are during a walk.

Jogging even 5 to 10 minutes per day can reduce the risk of death from all causes I also learned about some of the incredible health benefits of going fast: Even five to 10 minutes per day of jogging at around 6 miles per hour can reduce the risk of death from cardiovascular disease and other causes. Joggers have been found to live longer than non-joggers even after adjusting for other factors — a difference of 3.8 years for men and 4.7 years for women.

That said, research has found that walking carries significant health benefits, as well. Some studies suggest that you can extend your life and stave off disease by simply walking — and the more, the better.

All this research, while illuminating, didn’t offer up any clear conclusions on whether running or walking was better for you overall. So I asked some of the world’s leading researchers in this area. Their conclusion? You need to consider the trade-offs.

"Running moderately prolongs life more than walking does," said Peter Schnohr, a clinical cardiologist who has researched many aspects of exercise and health. The key word there is "moderately." Schnohr warned of the emerging research that doing a lot of endurance exercise over the long term (like triathlon training) can lead to heart problems. Overall, there's a U-shaped association between running and mortality, he said. Too little isn't helpful for health, but too much might be harmful.



 "The most favorable regimen is two to three running days per week, at a slow or average pace"

"The most favorable [regimen] is two to three running days per week, at a slow or average pace," Schnohr advised. "Running every day, at a fast speed, more than 4 hours per week is not as favorable." And for those who don't like running, he noted, "Fast walking, not slow, also prolongs life. I can’t tell how much."

Dutch researcher Luiz Carlos Hespanhol pointed out that in general, running simply delivers health benefits more efficiently than walking does. This study, for example, found that five minutes of running per day is as beneficial as 15 minutes of walking. Hespanhol also said that after one year of training just two hours a week, runners lose weight, reduce their body fat, lower their resting heart rates, and drive down their blood serum triglycerides (fat in the blood). There's even evidence that running can have positive effects on tension, depression, and anger.

Even so, Hespanhol wasn't a total cheerleader for running. A good walking regimen can have similar benefits, he noted. So on running versus walking, it really depends on your values and preferences: "One could choose walking instead of running as a mode of physical activity based on injury risks, since walking is less risky than running," he explained. Or alternatively: "One could choose running because the health benefits are larger and come faster, in a shorter period of time."

To recap: Running improves your health more efficiently than walking does and has greater health benefits per time invested. But even a small amount of running carries more injury risk than walking. And a lot of running (i.e., ultramarathon training) can well be harmful, while the same is never true for walking.

Where does this leave us? All the exercise researchers seemed to agree on one thing: that the best exercise routine is the one you'll actually do. So the answer to the running versus walking question will probably vary from person to person. If you prefer one over the other, stick with that. And if you still can't decide, Hespanhol suggested this: "Why not do both — running and walking — in order to get the best of each?"

Send your questions to Julia via the submission form or @juliaoftoronto on Twitter. Read more about Dear Julia here. 



When running was for weirdos
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The point of the story is to compare the health benefits and risks of walking versus running, and it does that effectively.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Post-operative cognitive dysfunction (POCD), a condition mostly observed in older patients following surgery under general anesthesia, is characterized by impaired memory and concentration. The impairment may be temporary or permanent and incapacitating.

The problem has become more frequent as the population ages and also as a growing number of older adults undergo surgical procedures made possible by more advanced medical technology. Data from the scientific literature suggest a rise in mortality from POCD in the first year after surgery under general anesthesia.

The good news, according to a Brazilian study published by the journal PLoS One, is that two relatively simple measures can help to reduce the incidence of POCD: administering a small dose of the anti-inflammatory drug dexamethasone immediately before an operation and avoiding profound anesthesia during the operation.

Opinions on the adequate depth of anesthesia and the risks of very profound anesthesia currently diverge. Excessively superficial anesthesia is known to incur a risk of patient recall of the procedure, which is undesirable.

"Our findings confirm recent evidence that the deeper the anesthesia-induced hypnosis, the higher the incidence of POCD. The literature points to a link with the systemic inflammatory response induced by surgical trauma, damaging the central nervous system. If so, the use of an anti-inflammatory drug may have a protective effect," said Maria José Carvalho Carmona, a professor of anesthesiology at the University of São Paulo's Medical School (FM-USP) and principal investigator for the study.

The researchers evaluated 140 patients aged between 60 and 87 who underwent surgery under propofol-induced general anesthesia at the Central Institute of Hospital das Clínicas, FM-USP's teaching hospital, in most cases for removal of gallstones.

Pre-operative assessment included a battery of tests to measure mental and cognitive status. Patients who failed to achieve a cutoff score were excluded. The remaining subjects were divided randomly into four groups. In the operating room, deep anesthesia typical of major surgical procedures was induced in the first and third groups, and more superficial anesthesia in the second and fourth. Only the third and fourth groups received dexamethasone.

The depth of anesthesia was monitored using bispectral index (BIS) technology, which processes electroencephalogram signals to measure drug-induced unconsciousness. The researchers classified a BIS of 35-45 as deep anesthesia and a BIS of 46-55 as superficial anesthesia.

In the fourth group (superficial anesthesia with dexamethasone), the incidence of POCD was 15.3% immediately after surgery, but after six months the pre-operative cognitive status was restored in all patients.

"The results reinforce recent evidence of the importance of avoiding deep anesthesia," Carmona said. "With regard to the use of dexamethasone, more research is needed to confirm our finding, preferably in multicenter trials, but there are strong indications that it can be beneficial in many cases."

The earliest trials with patients who developed POCD were performed after the 1950s. Before that, older patients were rarely subjected to major surgery, and significant research in this field has only been conducted for approximately 15-20 years.

"The causes of and risk factors for POCD are still being discussed," she said. "Little is said about rehabilitation or ways of helping patients recover pre-operative cognitive function."

One of the obstacles to reliable diagnosis and rehabilitation is a lack of practical and secure instruments for pre- and post-operative cognitive assessment. "The tests available today are either too time consuming or quick but unreliable," Carmona said. "This makes it hard to follow up on patients."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Frankly, there’s not a lot of research out there on steps to pro-actively reduce rates of cognitive dysfunction after anesthesia, and we’re not aware of alternative interventions designed to do so.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
That, said Dr. Leon of Columbia, who was the trial’s principal investigator, was remarkable. “If we treat five patients, we would save a life in the first year,” he said. “There are very few treatments in all of cardiovascular medicine that could claim that — I can think of heart transplant, and that’s it.”

The results were even more notable, he said, because the early versions of the devices were clunky, stiff and difficult to use.

The F.D.A. approved the method with the Edwards device for patients at extremely high risk in 2011.

That year, Dr. Mack, who was then the president of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and other leaders met with the F.D.A. and Medicare to devise a plan to restrict the device’s spread to places where doctors had sufficient skill to implant them safely. The result was a requirement that a hospital should be doing at least 50 surgical aortic valve replacements a year to have access to the technology. It was written into the Medicare coverage decision, a first for a medical device.

“This technology is expensive and high risk,” Dr. Mack said. The consensus of the group, he said, was that “not every one of the 1,150 cardiac surgery programs or the 1,600 cath labs in the U.S. should be able to do it.”

In June 2014, after another company, Medtronic, did similar studies, its device was approved, too, for high-risk patients.

Former skeptics like Dr. Cohn now recommend the procedure for high-risk patients.

More recent 2015 data from Medtronic indicates that its valve is better than surgery for high-risk patients, resulting in fewer deaths, at least in the first two years. And new data from another large study by Edwards found that patients at intermediate risk did better with the newest version of its valve than would be expected with surgery in the first 30 days, when most deaths occur. “Truly phenomenal early results,” Dr. Herrmann said.

Last Wednesday, the F.D.A. approved the new Edwards valve for high-risk patients; it had been available only in clinical trials. Medtronic also has a new version of its valve that cardiologists expect will soon be approved.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article does explain that surgery is the alternative, but it would have been helpful to provide more concrete numbers (outcomes, cost) to show how patients fare with surgery vs TAVR. The story would have been better if also told readers about drug treatment for milder cases and that some valves can be repaired, rather than replaced.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The stunning results found that angioplasty did not save lives or prevent heart attacks in non-emergency heart patients.

An even bigger surprise: Angioplasty gave only slight and temporary relief from chest pain, the main reason it is done.

"By five years, there was really no significant difference" in symptoms, said Dr. William Boden of Buffalo General Hospital in New York. "Few would have expected such results."

He led the study and gave results Monday at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology. They also were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and will be in the April 12 issue.

Researchers from Canada and the United States followed more than 2,200 patients who had symptoms of heart disease but were considered stable, reports CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook. Half of these low-risk patients received stents and medication. The other half were given only medication: drugs to lower cholesterol, control blood pressure and prevent clotting.

To the surprise of the researchers, both groups fared about the same: approximately 19 percent had a heart attack or died within seven years, adds LaPook.

Angioplasty remains the top treatment for people having a heart attack or hospitalized with worsening symptoms. But most angioplasties are done on a non-emergency basis, to relieve chest pain caused by clogged arteries crimping the heart's blood supply.

Those patients now should try drugs first, experts say. If that does not help, they can consider angioplasty or bypass surgery, which unlike angioplasty, does save lives, prevents heart attacks and gives lasting relief of chest pain.

In the study, only one-third of the people treated with drugs ultimately needed angioplasty or a bypass.

"You are not putting yourself at risk of death or heart attack if you defer," and considering the safety worries about heart stents used to keep arteries open after angioplasty, it may be wise to wait, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic heart specialist and president of the College of Cardiology.

Why did angioplasty not help more?

It fixes only one blockage at a time whereas drugs affect all the arteries, experts said. Also, the clogs treated with angioplasty are not the really dangerous kind.

"Even though it goes against intuition, the blockages that are severe that cause chest pain are less likely to be the source of a heart attack than segments in the artery that are not severely blocked," said Dr. David Maron, a Vanderbilt University cardiologist who helped lead the new study.

About 1.2 million angioplasties are done in the United States each year. Through a blood vessel in the groin, doctors snake a tube to a blocked heart artery. A tiny balloon is inflated to flatten the clog and a mesh scaffold stent is usually placed.

The procedure already has lost some popularity because of emerging evidence that popular drug-coated stents can raise the risk of blood clots months later. The new study shifts the argument from which type of stent to use to whether to do the procedure at all.

About 40 percent of patients in the study had a prior heart attack more than three months previously.

"We deliberately chose to enroll a sicker, more symptomatic group" to give angioplasty a good chance to prove itself, Boden said.

All were treated with medicines that improve chest pain and heart and artery health such as aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins, nitrates, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers. All also were counseled on healthy lifestyles — diet, exercise and smoking cessation.

Half of the participants also were assigned to get angioplasty.

After an average of 4½ years, the groups had similar rates of death and heart attack: 211 in the angioplasty group and 202 in the medication group.

Neither treatment proved better for any subgroups like smokers, diabetics, or older or sicker people.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention medication as the alternative to stenting.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
How To Beat Sleep Apnea? Cut It Out (Surgically)

At 32, it just didn't make sense that Daniel Sheiner was exhausted literally from the moment he woke up. "It didn't get any better over the course of the day, and I knew that was not normal," Sheiner says.

Sheiner is a software designer and programmer. His job suffered as a result of his fatigue.

"I would miss conversations," Sheiner says. "I would ask a question that had already been answered."

Sheiner suspected he had sleep apnea because it ran in his family. But he was not overweight, which is the biggest risk factor for the disorder — some 60 percent to 90 percent of patients diagnosed with apnea have a body mass index, or BMI, over 28.

A sleep study confirmed Sheiner had one of the worst cases of apnea his doctors had ever seen. After trying a number of different treatments, his doctors finally tried a surgery using robots to treat his stubborn apnea — with positive results.

According to Erica Thaler, an ear, nose and throat surgeon at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Sheiner's sleep study found that he woke up about 112 times every hour. That meant Sheiner stopped breathing for at least 10 seconds about two times every minute.

Sleep apnea is a chronic and common sleep disorder. People with this condition stop breathing while sleeping.

Like Sheiner, they often find themselves suddenly and repeatedly gasping for breath during the night. Their airway is clogged, sometimes because their tonsils and tonsilar tissue in the back of their throat are enlarged.

This was exactly the case for Sheiner.

"Daniel's obstruction was both at the level of the soft palate and at the back of the tongue," Thaler says. "He had very large tonsils, but his tonsil tissue was also enlarged in the palate area and also at the back of his tongue."

Sheiner was put on a nighttime breathing machine. In bed he wore a face mask, which was connected to a tube that was connected to a device that pumped air into his nose and mouth.

The Continuous Positive Airway Pressure machine, or CPAP, as it is often referred to, works for about half of all patients who try it. It can be cumbersome, Thaler says.

But Sheiner was extremely committed to trying it. In fact, he tried a number of different types of machines, but none of them worked.

So Thaler suggested a type of robotic surgery currently used to remove cancerous tumors at the back of the throat. Thaler was starting to perform it on sleep apnea patients, to remove tonsils and excess tissue.

"What the robot allows you to do is get into a small, confined space without using hands," Thaler says. "Human hands are huge, and robot hands are tiny, and yet they can do exactly the same thing if you control them remotely."

So, about a year ago, Thaler performed surgery on Sheiner, removing both his tonsils and excess tissue. Sheiner is one of only about a half-dozen patients to have this robotic surgery for apnea.

After surgery, Sheiner says, "it was a whole new life." He had energy, an ability to focus and get things done. "I find myself solving problems much more quickly and more confidently."

He's exercising at the gym three times a week, lifting weights. He is also starting to experiment with recipes and cooking, something he had absolutely no energy or interest in doing before the surgery.

Surgery Not For Everyone

The surgery Sheiner had isn't right for everyone. Rashmi N. Aurora is a sleep specialist at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York. She is also chairwoman of the Standards of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine.

"I wouldn't send a middle-age obese man for surgery as their first option," Aurora says. "I would say let's lose the weight; let's use CPAP and see a nutritionist; let's avoid the alcohol and let's see how you do." The apnea can probably be taken care of with these noninvasive techniques, she says, and invasive surgery can be avoided.

But when she sees a young, thin person with severe apnea, Aurora says, surgery might be the answer.

"The upper airway starts with the nose and mouth and runs down to the vocal chords, so there's a lot of room for obstruction to occur," Aurora says. Some patients may require surgery to remove the uvula or the tonsils or excess tissue, or all of them, she says. Then, there's surgery to remove blockage in the nasal passage.

Oftentimes, Aurora says, patients need a series of surgeries to completely treat apnea. And even then, success rates aren't high; they're effective only 20 to 30 percent of the time.

The only surgery proved effective more than 90 percent of the time is a significant and highly invasive surgery. Maxillomandibular advancement, or MMA, involves literally slicing the jaw in half and moving it forward in order to widen the patient's airway.

For patients with recessed chins, small jaws and airways narrowed by facial structure, this might be the surgery for them. But it can take nearly a year to recover, and many patients opt not to have it.

The "new" CPAP machines are more sophisticated, Aurora says. They're less cumbersome, less noisy and can actually "sense" the magnitude of blockage and adjust air pressure being blown into the nose or mouth, she says. Noninvasive measures are always the first lines of defense, she says.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Gold stars for NPR finding someone to talk knowledgeably about the alternatives and risks.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About 3 million people in the US are diagnosed every year with bipolar disorder, a psychiatric condition characterized by dramatic shifts in mood from depression to mania. Currently, the standard treatment includes a combination of psychotherapy and prescription medications such as mood stabilizers and antipsychotics.

However, an emerging field of research is exploring the use of probiotics--often thought of as "good bacteria"--as a potential new avenue for treatment of bipolar and other psychiatric mood disorders. And a new study from Baltimore's Sheppard Pratt Health System, conducted by a research team led by Faith Dickerson, finds that a probiotic supplement may reduce inflammation of the gut, which is known to exacerbate bipolar disorder. Probiotic organisms are non-pathogenic bacteria that, when present in the gut flora, are known to improve the overall health of the host.

In recent years, research has demonstrated a strong link between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system. This connection, named the "gut-brain axis" (GBA), allows for crosstalk between the endocrine, immune, and autonomic nervous systems. The GI tract is also home to the intestinal microbiome, a complex population of roughly 100 trillion microorganisms (more than ten times the number of cells that make up the human body) that interacts with the mucosal lining of the GI tract. Studies have shown that the intimate association between the gut microbiome and GI tissue has a significant effect on the GBA.

There is also mounting evidence linking imbalances in the microbial species that make up the gut microbiome to a number of health problems including allergies, autoimmune disorders, and psychiatric mood disorders.

In the case of bipolar disorder and the GBA, previous studies have shown that inflammation, or overstimulation of the body's immune system, is a contributing factor in the disease. With this in mind, researchers developed a probiotic supplement aimed at reducing inflammation caused by microbial imbalances in the gut.

A group of patients recently hospitalized for mania participated in a 6-month study to track the effects of probiotic treatment on both their mood and the status of their immune system.

The patients were randomly selected to receive either the probiotic supplement or a placebo in addition to their usual medications. The results showed that the group receiving the probiotic supplement, on average, didn't return to the hospital as quickly and required less in-patient treatment time compared to the placebo group. The beneficial effects were most pronounced in those patients who exhibited abnormally high levels of inflammation at the beginning of the study.

Overall, these results indicate that changes in intestinal inflammation can alter the trajectory of psychiatric mood disorders and that modulating the intestinal microbiota may be a new avenue of treatment for patients suffering from these diseases.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions the standard treatments for bipolar disorder:
“Currently, the standard treatment (of bipolar illness) includes a combination of psychotherapy and prescription medications such as mood stabilizers and antipsychotics.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, an immune checkpoint inhibitor has been proven to increase survival among patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC), a patient population for whom treatment options are currently limited.

Researchers at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center demonstrated a median overall survival benefit of 25 months with nivolumab, a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved immunotherapy agent, compared with 19.6 months for everolimus, a current standard of care for patients with metastatic kidney cancer.

Published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and being presented this week at a Presidential session of the European Cancer Congress (ECC), the findings of CheckMate-025 provide definitive evidence that an immune checkpoint inhibitor is a valid treatment strategy for patients with advanced RCC, and supports a paradigm change in the standard of care treatment, according to the authors.

Nivolumab, marketed as Opdivo, is currently used to treat metastatic melanoma and advanced non-small cell lung cancer. CheckMate-025 is an example of how investigators are examining approved immunotherapy drugs to determine potential impact on other tumor types.

"Immunotherapy has long been believed to have the potential to make an impact in kidney cancer, but until now we had not been able to demonstrate such a significant survival benefit. We have a real opportunity to change clinical practice for patients when other therapies have failed," said principal investigator Padmanee Sharma, MD, PhD, professor, Departments of Genitourinary Medical Oncology and Immunology and scientific director of the Immunotherapy Platform, part of MD Anderson's Moon Shots Program.

"Through studies such as CheckMate-025, we are learning to target the patients' immune systems to fight cancer rather than targeting the tumor itself. This is a new way forward."

In the randomized phase III clinical trial, patients whose disease progressed on antiangiogenic therapies were treated with either nivolumab or everolimus. Median overall survival was 5.4 months longer with nivolumab (25 months) compared with everolimus (19.6 months).

The study included 821 patients with advanced RCC across 151 sites in 24 countries in North America, Europe, Australia, South America and Asia. All had previously been treated with one or two antiangiogenic therapies, drugs that inhibit the growth of new blood vessels, a critical component of cancer development. The median duration of treatment was 5.5 months with nivolumab and 3.7 months with everolimus.

In addition to demonstrating increased overall survival, the researchers showed a higher objective response rate - the number of patients who respond to the treatment - with nivolumab. Of the 821 patients enrolled, 25% responded to nivolumab versus 5% of those treated with everolimus.

Among these patients, partial responses were observed in 24% of those treated with nivolumab and 5% of patients treated with everolimus; complete responses were observed in 1% (four patients) treated with nivolumab and fewer than 1% (two patients) treated with everolimus.

Further, among patients who showed a response, the impact was "durable," according to Sharma. While median progression-free survival appeared similar between treatments (4.6 months and 4.4 months with nivolumab and everolimus, respectively), when researchers explored a delayed progression-free survival benefit at six months, they reported 15.6 months with nivolumab and 11.7 months with everolimus. This ongoing response was observed among 44% of those treated with nivolumab and 36% of those treated with everolimus. More than 12 months later, 31% and 27% of patients treated with nivolumab and everolimus, respectively, continued to show a response.

For some patients, even after treatment with nivolumab ended, response to the drug continued. "The immune system has a memory, so even when treatment has stopped, the body continues to exhibit a long-term response - meaning these patients can live normal lives without progressive disease."

Finally, the investigators observed fewer treatment-related adverse events, including fatigue and nausea, and improved quality of life with nivolumab.

These results led the trial to be halted early in July 2015 when an assessment conducted by the independent Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) concluded that the study met its primary endpoint, demonstrating superior overall survival in patients receiving nivolumab.

Nivolumab blocks a T cell inhibitory signaling pathway known as PD-1 that controls the immune response and can prevent the immune system from attacking cancerous cells. The drug is approved for metastatic melanoma patients who show no response to other treatments and for advanced squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with progression on or after chemotherapy. Based on the CheckMate-025 findings, earlier this month (September 16) the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation to nivolumab for the potential indication of metastatic RCC. The Breakthrough Therapy designation is intended to expedite the development and review of medicines with early signals of clinical benefit in serious diseases to help ensure patients have access to new therapies as soon as possible.

"The next questions are, 'how do we increase the number of patients who respond?' and 'how do we move immune checkpoint agents into the frontline setting?' - not just using them when other therapies have failed but intervening earlier," said Sharma. "We're studying combination therapies to answer these questions and believe these studies will change the way we treat many cancers."

Each year, there are 338,000 new cases of RCC diagnosed worldwide; it is the most common type of kidney cancer among adults and approximately 30% of patients present with metastatic disease at diagnosis, according to the scientific literature. A number of targeted therapies have been approved in recent years for the treatment of advanced RCC, with five antiangiogenic and two mTOR inhibitors (including everolimus; these drugs block a protein that regulates cell growth, proliferation, survival, etc.), showing benefits in pivotal phase III trials.

"While these treatments have changed the therapeutic landscape for RCC, they are associated with limited survival following emerging resistance to therapy," said Sharma. "The overall survival benefit shown in this study sets a new benchmark for therapeutic strategies for advanced RCC patients in need of a second-line therapy."

Sharma is scientific director of MD Anderson's immunotherapy platform, which provides immune monitoring expertise to MD Anderson's 85 clinical trials of immunotherapy drugs as single agents or in combinations. Platform investigators conduct research to understand which patients will benefit from immunotherapy, to evaluate effective drug combinations and to identify new molecules that block or stimulate immune response.

The platform is part of MD Anderson's Moon Shots Program, which is designed to harness scientific knowledge and develop new technologies that will dramatically reduce cancer deaths through prevention, early detection and treatment.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Although not named specifically, other therapies are mentioned: ” A number of targeted therapies have been approved in recent years for the treatment of advanced RCC, with five antiangiogenic and two mTOR inhibitors (including everolimus; these drugs block a protein that regulates cell growth, proliferation, survival, etc.), showing benefits in pivotal phase III trials”
To be sure, this is not really a true comparison of options, just a listing. But since the main alternative is the treatment used in the trial, this may be a moot point. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt on the rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have found a marker that can indicate your likelihood of suffering from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) even sixteen years before the condition takes effect. A team from the Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology at Oxford University found that a blood test that looks for antibodies that recognize the protein tenascin-C could reliably show those who will contract the condition.

When inflammation occurs in the body, some proteins are altered in a process called citrullination. These altered forms can prompt an immune response from the body, which can see it turning antibodies on itself - causing rheumatoid arthritis. For that reason, tests that spot antibodies to citrullinated proteins are already used to diagnose the disease. While tests for individual proteins usually have a relatively low diagnostic sensitivity, a more general test called CCP, that detects synthetic citrullinated peptides, identifies a lot more RA cases.

Lead researcher Dr Anja Schwenzer said: 'We knew that tenascin-C is found at high levels in the joints of people with RA. We decided to see if it could be citrullinated and, if so, whether it was a target for the autoantibodies that attack the body in RA. That might also indicate whether it could be used in tests to indicate the disease.

'When we looked at results from more than 2000 patients we found that testing for antibodies that target citrullinated tenascin-C (cTNC) could diagnose RA in around 50% of cases, including some cases not identified by CCP. It also has a very low rate of false positives - it is 98% accurate at ruling out RA.'

The Kennedy Institute's Professor Kim Midwood said: 'What is particularly exciting is that when we looked at samples taken from people before their arthritis began, we could see these antibodies to cTNC up to 16 years before the disease occurred - on average the antibodies could be found seven years before the disease appeared.

'This discovery therefore gives us an additional test that can be used to increase the accuracy of the CCP assay and that can predict RA, enabling us to monitor people and spot the disease early. This early detection is key because early treatment is more effective.'

Stephen Simpson, Research Director, for Arthritis Research UK said: 'When it comes to rheumatoid arthritis, early diagnosis is key with research showing that there is often a narrow 'window of opportunity' following the onset of symptoms for effective diagnosis and control of disease through treatment. Furthermore, current tests for rheumatoid arthritis are limited in their ability to diagnose disease in different patients. This latest research provides the basis of tests that could improve diagnosis and, importantly, detect disease at a very early stage, with the promise even that people at risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis can be followed before the disease begins. This could have great potential to help patients with rheumatoid arthritis get the right treatment early to keep this painful and debilitating condition under control.'
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release provides some information about the cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) test, the standard test used, and states that the new blood test appears to be more accurate and reliable in comparison. The true alternative is actually to wait until symptoms develop.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Standard guidelines for stroke treatment currently recommend clot removal only within six hours of stroke onset. But a milestone study with results published today in the New England Journal of Medicine shows that clot removal up to 24 hours after stroke led to significantly reduced disability for properly selected patients.

The international multi-center clinical study, known as the DAWN trial, randomly assigned 206 stroke victims who arrived at the hospital within six to 24 hours to either endovascular clot removal therapy, known as thrombectomy, or to standard medical therapy.

Thrombectomy involves a catheter placed in the femoral artery and snaked up the aorta and into the cerebral arteries where the clot that is blocking the artery, and causing the neurological symptoms, is retrieved.

Almost half of the patients (48.6 percent) who had clot removal showed a considerable decrease in disability, meaning they were independent in activities of daily living 90 days after treatment. Only 13.1 percent of the medication group had a similar decrease. There was no difference in mortality or other safety end-points between the two groups.

"These findings could impact countless stroke patients all over the world who often arrive at the hospital after the current six-hour treatment window has closed," says co-principal investigator Raul Nogueira, MD, professor of neurology, neurosurgery and radiology at Emory University School of Medicine and director of neuroendovascular service at the Marcus Stroke & Neuroscience Center at Grady Memorial Hospital.

"When the irreversibly damaged brain area affected by the stroke is small, we see that clot removal can make a significant positive difference, even if performed outside the six-hour window," says co-principal investigator Tudor Jovin, MD, director of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Stroke Institute. "However, this does not diminish urgency with which patients must be rushed to the ER in the event of a stroke. The mantra 'time is brain' still holds true."

To select patients for the trial, the researchers used a new approach which used brain imaging and clinical criteria as opposed to just time alone.

"Looking at the physiological state of the brain and evaluating the extent of tissue damage and other clinical factors seems to be a better way to decide if thrombectomy will benefit patients as opposed to adhering to a rigid time window," says Nogueira.

The researchers planned to enroll a maximum of 500 patients over the course of the study period. However, a pre-planned interim review of the treatment effectiveness after 200 patients were enrolled in the trial led the independent Data Safety Monitoring Board overseeing the study to recommend early termination of the trial, based on pre-defined criteria demonstrating that clot removal provided significant clinical benefit in the studied patients.

"Our research and clinical teams are immensely proud of these breakthrough findings, which are so profound they will likely result in a paradigm shift that will not be seen again for many years in the field of stroke therapeutics," says Michael Frankel, MD, professor of neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, chief of neurology and director of the Marcus Stroke and Neuroscience Center for the Grady Health System.

According to Frankel, the Emory neuroscience team was a major contributor to the DAWN trial, working at Grady Memorial Hospital, the second leading site of the trial's enrollment.

The DAWN trial included trial locations in the United States, Spain, France, Australia and Canada. The trial was sponsored by Stryker Corporation, a medical technology company that manufactures the clot removal devices used in the study.

The DAWN trial results were presented at the European Stroke Organization Conference in May.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Readers of the release will get a general and adequate idea of the relative lack of options open to stroke victims who arrive at a hospital after the six-hour window considered optimal for mechanical clot removal. The alternative is not doing the procedure for late arrivals which is fairly clear from the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many women with early-stage breast cancer can skip chemotherapy without hurting their odds of beating the disease — good news from a major study that shows the value of a gene-activity test to gauge each patient’s risk.

The test accurately identified a group of women whose cancers are so likely to respond to hormone-blocking drugs that adding chemo would do little if any good while exposing them to side effects and other health risks. In the study, women who skipped chemo based on the test had less than a 1 percent chance of cancer recurring far away, such as the liver or lungs, within the next five years.

‘‘You can’t do better than that,’’ said the study leader, Dr. Joseph Sparano of Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

An independent expert, Dr. Clifford Hudis of New York’s Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, agreed.

‘‘There is really no chance that chemotherapy could make that number better,’’ he said. Using the gene test ‘‘lets us focus our chemotherapy more on the higher risk patients who do benefit’’ and spare others the ordeal.

The study was sponsored by the National Cancer Institute. Results were published online Monday by the New England Journal of Medicine and discussed at the European Cancer Congress in Vienna.

The study involved the most common type of breast cancer — early stage, without spread to lymph nodes; hormone-positive, meaning the tumor’s growth is fueled by estrogen or progesterone; and not the type that the drug Herceptin targets. Each year, more than 100,000 women in the United States alone are diagnosed with this.

The usual treatment is surgery followed by years of a hormone-blocking drug. But many women also are urged to have chemo, to help kill any stray cancer cells that may have spread beyond the breast and could seed a new cancer later. Doctors know that most of these women don’t need chemo but there are no great ways to tell who can safely skip it.

A California company, Genomic Health Inc., has sold a test called Oncotype DX since 2004 to help gauge this risk. The test measures the activity of genes that control cell growth, and others that indicate a likely response to hormone therapy treatment.

Past studies have looked at how women classified as low, intermediate or high risk by the test have fared. The new study is the first to assign women treatments based on their scores and track recurrence rates.

Of the 10,253 women in the study, 16 percent were classified as low risk, 67 percent as intermediate and 17 percent as high risk for recurrence by the test. The high-risk group was given chemotherapy and hormone-blocking drugs. Women in the middle group were randomly assigned to get hormone therapy alone or to add chemo. Results on these groups are not yet ready — the study is continuing.

But independent monitors recommended the results on the low-risk group be released, because it was clear that adding chemo would not improve their fate.

After five years, about 99 percent had not relapsed, and 98 percent were alive. About 94 percent were free of any invasive cancer, including new cancers at other sites or in the opposite breast.

‘‘These patients who had low risk scores by Oncotype did extraordinarily well at five years,’’ said Dr. Hope Rugo, a breast cancer specialist at the University of California, San Francisco, with no role in the study. ‘‘There is no chance that for these patients, that chemotherapy would have any benefit.’’

Dr. Karen Beckerman, a New York City obstetrician diagnosed with breast cancer in 2011, said she was advised to have chemo but feared complications. A doctor suggested the gene test and she scored very low for recurrence risk.

‘‘I was convinced that there was no indication for chemotherapy. I was thrilled not to have to have it,’’ and has been fine since then, she said.

Mary Lou Smith, a breast cancer survivor and advocate who helped design the trial for ECOG, the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, which ran it, said she thought women ‘‘would be thrilled’’ to skip chemo.

‘‘Patients love the idea of a test’’ to help reduce uncertainty about treatment, she said. ‘‘I’ve had chemotherapy. It’s not pretty.’’

The test costs $4,175, which Medicare and many insurers cover. Others besides Oncotype DX also are on the market, and Hudis said he hopes the new study will encourage more, to compete on price and accuracy.

‘‘The future is bright’’ for gene tests to more precisely guide treatment, he said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story describes the usual course of treatment, which is surgery followed by years of a hormone-blocking drug, as well as chemotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Antidepressant drugs really do work, a major new international study has proven. Pooling data from 522 trials including nearly 120,000 patients, researchers found all drugs analysed were more effective than placebos in the treatment of adults with acute depression.

Authors of the study—published yesterday in the Lancet—believe many more people could benefit from antidepressant medication.

The study results represent the most comprehensive evidence currently available, they wrote.

More than 300 million people worldwide have depression, according to the World Health Organization, of which less than half recieve effective treatments. In many countries, the rate drops to less than 10 percent.

Read more: Trump Health Exam: President Still Taking Hair Loss Drug Even After Research Revealed Link to Erectile Dysfunction and Depression

In the U.S., the National Institute of Mental Health estimates 16.2 million adults experienced at least one major depressive episode in 2016. Approximately 37 percent of these people received no treatment.

In the U.K, where a number of the study authors are based, at least one million more people could benefit from drugs or psychotherapy, senior author John Geddes said.

Some drugs more effective than others

The researchers analyzed existing studies of 21 different drugs, and found some were much more effective than others.

Drugs ranged from more than one third more effective than a placebo to more than twice as effective. The best performers included amitriptyline and escitalopram, while the worst included fluoxetine—commonly sold under the trade name Prozac—and reboxetine, which is not approved for sale in the U.S.

The results add up to a complex treatment picture for what authors called “one of the most common, burdensome, and costly psychiatric disorders worldwide in adults.”

Antidepressants do not improve symptoms in about 40 percent of people, study author Andrea Cipriani of Oxford University told a press briefing.

While these results should reassure many people with depression that antidepressants can be effective, “this does not necessarily mean antidepressants should always be the first line of treatment,” he said.

Read more: By 2020, We’ll Have Flying Cars and Robot Bellboys—along With Crippling Depression and Unemployment

Talking therapies are thought to be about as effective as antidepressant medication, but these are often much more expensive.

Experts not involved in the research agreed the results were significant.

Helen Stokes-Lampard, chair of the U.K.’s Royal College of GPs, expressed concern about the stigma surrounding antidepressant use.

She said in a statement: “Taking antidepressants is frequently portrayed as a negative thing or something done only when other therapies are not available or have failed, but this in itself can add to the unfortunate stigma that sometimes exists around people with mental health conditions.”

But she also urged caution. “Although antidepressants are of proven benefit—as this study shows,” she said, “no doctor wants their patients to become reliant on medication.”

Carmine Pariante, a professor at the UK’s Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience and spokesperson for the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said the study "finally puts to bed the controversy on antidepressants."

James Warner, an Imperial College London psychiatrist, added: “Depression causes misery to countless thousands every year and this study adds to the existing evidence that effective treatments are available.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses the other major treatment approach for people with depression — talk therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alzheimer's: New test aids early diagnosis, but worth it to know?

Until recently, the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease could be made only after a patient's death, when a pathologist could find physical evidence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. A brain biopsy now can be used to detect Alzheimer's plaques but is highly invasive and may miss parts of the brain where the plaques and tangles of Alzheimer's are densest. While diagnosis by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy is under study for early detection , accurate early detection by such noninvasive means is a ways away.

And on Monday, the American Academy of Neurology released a new study showing that an agent called florbetaben also allowed detection of amyloid plaques when used with a PET scan. The florbetaben study is to be presented at the academy's "Emerging Science" program next week in New Orleans. Both Florbetapir F 18 and florbetaben help diagnose Alzheimer's by sticking to beta amyloid clumps and emitting radioactivity, which can then be picked up by a PET scan.

Those questions are no longer hypothetical. Last week, the FDA approved an agent called Florbetapir F 18 injection (to be marketed as Amyvid), which will allow physicians using a positron emissions tomography (PET) scan to detect the presence and extent of amyloid plaques in patients concerned about declining mental function.

No one wants to hear that he or she has Alzheimer's disease. But if the beta-amyloid plaques that are the disorder's key physical hallmark could be detected before memory loss and cognitive troubles were evident to all, would you want to know? And since no treatment currently works to stem the inexorable progress ofAlzheimer's, who would pay for a costly test to detect it early -- and why?

The FDA says that Amyvid "is not a test to predict the development of AD-associated dementia" in those who have no problematic symptoms. It's an early test for those who already have cognitive concerns and who wonder whether Alzheimer's disease may be the cause. Among patients diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment, about 60% have amyloid plaques and will go on to develop dementia that is likely Alzheimer's disease, said Dr. Michael W. Weiner of the Department of Veterans Affairs' Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases.

Weiner is the leading researcher on the largest and most comprehensive Alzheimer's research initiative of its kind, the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. ADNI, a nationwide consortium that is still enrolling subjects, is a five-year, $60-million project that will track 800 participants to compare how mental and daily-life skills, and the brain's structure and function, change in those aging normally, those with mild cognitive impairment and those with dementia. Weiner conducted much of the research leading to Amyvid's approval.

For now, says Weiner, there is "no consensus" on which patients should get the costly new PET scans that use Amyvid, and large insurers such as Medicare and Medicaid have not made decisions about coverage for such tests. And some patients may question whether they would want to know that the source of their mental troubles is Alzheimer's disease, said Weiner.

"But for many, when you take a person to the doctor, you usually want an answer, whether it leads to a treatment or not. This is a way of getting closer to an answer," said Weiner. Many patients experiencing cognitive lapses may also be reassured if the test fails to reveal amyloid plaques, he added.

With growing understanding that the changes of Alzheimer's disease may be decades in the making, the value of early detection is gaining adherents, said Weiner. The "real game-changer," he says, will be when one of the many experimental therapies under study for Alzheimer's disease succeeds in blocking or reversing its progress. Once that happens, physicians, researchers and insurers will need to figure out who should get the test and at what cost, and who will pay.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions the existence of at least one similar agent that is being tested as a diagnostic aid. Other approaches, such as testing for biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease in spinal fluid, are also in the works.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Jane Adrian, 61, a landscape architect in Glendale, Calif., saw her parents and two co-workers suffer from the painful, blistering condition known as shingles, so when the vaccine became available, she got it.

Even though the vaccine is only about 55 percent effective, "it's better than nothing," she said. "Now I feel relieved."

A study of a cross-section of adults enrolled with a health-management organization in southern California shows that the vaccine provides protection for many older adults without many side effects.

The findings are published in the Jan. 12 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Shingles is caused by the herpes zoster virus and only strikes people who have had chicken pox. It usually starts as a rash on one side of the face or body, often causing pain, itching and tingling. About a million cases occur in the United States each year, and attacks can last two to four weeks.

"Even after the rash has healed, the pain can last for months or even years," said lead study author HungFu Tseng, a research scientist at the Kaiser Permanente Division of Research and Evaluation in Pasadena, Calif.

Zostavax, as the vaccine is called, was approved in 2006, based on the results of clinical trials. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends the shot for eligible people aged 60 and older.

Tseng's team wanted to test the vaccine's real-world performance, so they compared 75,761 vaccinated members of the Kaiser Permanente health plan to 227,283 members who elected not to have the shot. Kaiser funded the study.

In vaccinated individuals, the rate of shingles was 6.4 cases per 1,000 people in a year while it was twice that -- 13 per 1,000 -- in the unvaccinated population, the investigators found.

The vaccine also reduced the risk of ophthalmic herpes zoster (infection that affects the eye) by 63 percent and hospitalization by 65 percent.

Those who had been vaccinated were more likely to be white, female and in better overall health than the unvaccinated people, the researchers noted. Lack of awareness, concerns about effectiveness or safety, and cost may have kept some people from getting the shot, Tseng said.

"People 60 and over can consider talking to their physician about the possibility of receiving the vaccine to reduce their risk, and the doctor can evaluate if they are eligible," said Tseng.

Patients with leukemia, lymphoma, HIV or an allergy to any ingredients in the vaccine are ineligible for the shot.

"It does bolster our confidence that it's effective in the real world," said Dr. Bruce Hirsch, an attending physician in infectious diseases at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., who was not involved with the study.

But the vaccine can cost a couple of hundred dollars, he said, perhaps making it out of reach for those with limited resources.

Because shingles is not contagious and doesn't present a risk of death, Hirsch said he would recommend the flu vaccine and the pneumococcal vaccine over this one for uninsured patients who would have to pay out-of-pocket.

"This study helps me in terms of advising patients and prioritizing," Hirsch added.

While less reliable than some childhood vaccines, which are usually 90 percent effective in preventing certain illnesses, the shingles vaccination is still worthwhile, said Dr. Ciro Sumaya, professor of health policy and management at Texas A&M Health Science Center School of Rural Public Health.

"I think it's a very good vaccine, and it's a safe vaccine, but obviously there needs to be continuing surveillance of usage of the vaccine to make sure there are no adverse effects that are seen in one in a 100 million cases versus one in five or 10,000 people," said Sumaya, also a member of CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.

For now, he advises getting it. "It's protecting against a severe disease, particularly in elderly adults," he said, "so the benefit, I think, is overwhelming that we should be using this because it's recommended."

The CDC has more on the shingles vaccine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 



While it may seem that the decision to vaccinate is a simple yes or no matter, this story does a nice job of expanding the question to include other vaccination priorities. It includes comments that point out that shingles, while terribly painful, is not contagious or life-threatening… and that considering the high cost of the shingles vaccine, it may be reasonable to place a higher priority on other vaccinations. The story does readers a service by addressing some of the real world choices people face, rather than merely considering a single intervention in a vacuum.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - Pembrolizumab, an antibody drug already used to treat other forms of cancer, can be effective in the treatment of the most common form of mesothelioma, according to a new study led by investigators from the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. The study, published this month in The Lancet Oncology, is the first to show a positive impact from checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy drugs on this disease.

Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a rare and aggressive cancer that represents about 90 percent of all malignant mesothelioma cases. It's primarily caused by the inhalation of asbestos, a fiber commonly found in some forms of insulation, vinyl floor tiles, and other material. Tumors form in the pleura, a thin membrane of cells that line the lungs and chest wall. Most patients survive less than a year. This poor prognosis is partially due to the fact that most patients are not diagnosed until they are already at a late stage of the disease. The standard first-line therapy treatment involves chemotherapy, and currently there is no approved second-line therapy.

"There have been a lot of studies looking at different drugs, but researchers have not seen positive results," said the study's lead author Evan Alley, MD, PhD, chief of Hematology and Medical Oncology at Penn Presbyterian Hospital. "But we've found this new class of drugs, checkpoint inhibitors, seems to be more effective than what's been available in the past."

Checkpoint inhibitors are a class of drugs designed to free the body's immune system to fight back against cancer. Pembrolizumab, in particular, has been used to treat melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, and in some cases, head and neck cancers.

Alley and his team presented data from KEYNOTE-028, an ongoing trial involving 13 different research sites in six different countries all looking at the effect of pembrolizumab on patients with advanced malignancies, including malignant pleural mesothelioma. The study evaluated 25 patients with pleural mesothelioma, all of whom were over the age of 18 and had either already been treated with chemotherapy or were unable to receive it. Patients who had already received another checkpoint inhibitor were not included in the study.

Beginning with the first enrollees two years ago, doctors gave each patient a dose of pembrolizumab every two weeks. The tumor reduced in size in 14 of those patients. On average, patients went about six months without their disease progressing, and overall survival was about 18 months. Fourteen patients passed away during the study, while four were still undergoing treatment as of the study's writing.

"Most patients who receive a second-line therapy have a life expectancy of about six or seven months, so to have four patients still ongoing at two years is very encouraging," Alley said.

The most common side-effects reported were fatigue, nausea, loss of appetite, and dry mouth.

"One great sign in this study is that none of the patients had to stop treatment because of side-effects," Alley said. "Some had temporary stoppages, but they were able to continue. The drug appears to be well-tolerated."

There are multiple studies going on right now to confirm these findings, which the authors note is a necessary step before the drug can become a standard second-line therapy. "This study provides evidence that some patients can have long-term disease control with this drug, which we haven't seen before," Alley said. "We need to better understand what we can do next to make immunotherapy more effective for more patients."

Alley said there are already plans for trials that will test combination therapies, which will utilize pembrolizumab in conjunction with other treatments. Those studies are expected to launch later this year, including two at Penn.

The study was funded by Merck, which manufactures pembrolizumab. Alley has no personal financial relationship with Merck.

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania (founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $5.3 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 18 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $373 million awarded in the 2015 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2015, Penn Medicine provided $253.3 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that chemotherapy is a first-line treatment for these types of mesotheliomas and it alludes to other standard therapies without naming them. We are not told of the potential of other therapies to treat this disease and the prognosis of those patients, nor the effectiveness or safety of competing therapies. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt but that additional information would have been helpful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Microcapsules loaded with stem cell-derived insulin-producing cells retrieved after they had been transplanted into a mouse.

Kendall Squared brings you dispatches from the world’s epicenter for biotechnology and drug discovery.

Scientists on Monday showed they had overcome some of the major hurdles standing in the way of a long-sought therapeutic fix for patients with type 1 diabetes, outlining an approach that the body’s immune system could tolerate and providing a possible pathway toward clinical trials in the next few years.

In people with type 1 diabetes, formerly known as juvenile-onset diabetes, the immune system dismantles the pancreatic cells that normally produce insulin. So researchers have long sought a way to put back healthy insulin-producing cells, known as beta cells, into patients.

“We’re trying to figure out a way to replace nature’s solution,” said Douglas Melton, co-director of the Harvard Stem Cell Institute.

For years, physicians have been using beta cells from dead donors. But because the immune system of the recipient recognizes the donor cells as foreign, patients who receive a transplant have to take immune-suppressing drugs for the rest of their lives.

Those drugs are not ideal, because they carry a risk of infection or cancer. Plus, donors are in short supply and can’t yield enough cells to treat the millions of people with type 1 diabetes around the world.

The researchers behind two studies published Monday demonstrated they had made progress on both fronts, encapsulating the cells in a protective bubble to shield them from the body’s immune response, and creating beta cells from stem cells, which are potentially limitless.

For the capsules, the scientists homed in on alginate — a seaweed extract — as the starting material. Alginate allows sugar and insulin to flow between the cells and the body, but blocks immune cells from reaching the beta cells.

The problem with existing alginates is that the body eventually catches on to the material as a foreign substance, suffocating the implant in a layer of scar tissue. So, Daniel Anderson, a bioengineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, went in search of a better kind of alginate.

In one of two related studies published Monday, Anderson and his colleagues described in the journal Nature Biotechnology how they had tested 774 variations of alginate in rodents and monkeys and identified a handful that elicited a greatly reduced foreign body response.

For the other paper, published in Nature Medicine, the group embedded tiny capsules made from that durable alginate with beta cells derived from human embryonic stem cells. They then transplanted them into mice with a disease akin to type 1 diabetes.

The beta cells performed “every bit as good as the body’s own cells,” said Melton, a co-author on the Nature Medicine paper.

The transplanted cells controlled glucose levels in the mice without immune-suppressing drugs, the researchers reported. And when the scientists removed the capsules after almost six months, the cells were still cranking out insulin and there was little sign of an immune response to the capsules.

“From very early on, we were getting great success,” said Arturo Vegas, a lead author of the papers who worked in Anderson’s lab before moving to Boston University, where he is now an assistant chemistry professor.

“Everything kind of fell into place,” Vegas continued. “You saw less foreign body response. The human beta cells survived exquisitely well.”

The studies show “you can take stem cells and make a limitless supply of [human beta cells] and put them in a device and cure an entirely different species of animal,” Anderson said.

Just because the system produced strong results in mice does not mean people will respond the same way. But experts say the findings provide hope for future treatments for people.

“This is really the first demonstration of the ability of these novel materials in combination with a stem-cell derived beta cell to reverse diabetes in an animal model,” said Julia Greenstein, vice president of discovery research at JDRF, an organization trying to end type 1 diabetes that provided some funding for the studies. “Our goal is to bring that kind of biological cure across the spectrum of type 1 diabetes.”

The potential of the approach has attracted interest from both small startups and large biopharmaceutical companies that are looking at stem cell-based therapies for diabetes.

One company, San Diego-based ViaCyte, launched the first cell replacement clinical trial in 2014. Melton also recently helped start Semma Therapeutics, based in Cambridge’s Kendall Square neighborhood. Semma has not begun any human clinical trials yet, but the goal is to develop a device that once implanted could control someone’s blood sugar for a year or more, saving them from insulin injections and needing to check their blood sugar every few hours.

“The individuals would not have to worry about that,” Semma CEO Robert Millman said.

Other companies pursuing stem cells treatments for diabetes include Novo Nordisk and BetaLogics, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson.

Most of these other companies are taking a different approach from the work done in the studies published Monday.

The MIT team has developed tiny capsules for the cells, but ViaCyte, for example, has created a larger device outfitted with the cells that gets inserted under the skin. And whereas the Massachusetts researchers examined beta cells exclusively for their study, the ViaCyte team is exploring using less mature cells that, once implanted, differentiate into both insulin-producing beta cells and those that secrete another hormone called glucagon that’s deficient in the disease.

“The main issue with type 1 diabetes is a loss of beta cells,” said ViaCyte CEO Paul Laikind, “but there’s also good data out there to suggest dysfunction in other regulatory cell types.”

The team behind the studies published Monday, meanwhile, is working on tests now in monkey models. Vegas said that if the primate studies are successful, the next step will be developing a therapy to be used in people.

“I think we’ve advanced the ball pretty far, almost as far you could get in an academic environment,” he said. “The talk is shifting toward doing something clinically.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does contrast this research with other research into treating diabetes. The story might have provided a bit of context about other work on developing an artificial pancreas for Type 1 Diabetes patients (there’s a lot on this).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 22, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Breast cancers in women aged 40 to 49 that are diagnosed by mammograms have a better prognosis than those detected by doctors or the women themselves, a new study indicates.

"They have an earlier diagnosis, earlier stage, better prognosis," said study author Judith Malmgren, an affiliated professor of epidemiology at the University of Washington School of Public Health and Community Medicine. She is also president of HealthStat Consulting Inc. in Seattle.

The new study, like previous ones, re-ignites the ongoing debate about the best age to start routine mammograms and the best screening interval. It appears in the March issue of the journal Radiology.

In 2009, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force issued mammogram recommendations. It recommends women aged 50 to 74 who are at average risk for breast cancer have a mammogram done every two years. It also suggests that women aged 40 to 49 at average risk discuss the pros and cons with their doctors and decide on an individual basis if and when to start screening.

Meanwhile, other organizations, including the American Cancer Society, recommend women begin mammograms at age 40 and continue to have them annually.

Malmgren and her colleagues evaluated nearly 2,000 women who had breast cancer. All were aged 40 to 49 when they were treated between 1990 and 2008.

The researchers looked at the method of diagnosis, whether by mammogram or if the cancer was found by the doctor or the woman. They also took these into account: the cancer's stage at diagnosis; type of treatment; annual follow-up; recurrence; and survival.

Over the 18-year period, the number of breast cancers diagnosed at very early stages increased 66 percent, while the number of more advanced cancers (stage 3) decreased by 66 percent.

Those whose cancers were detected by mammogram rose from 28 percent in 1990 to 58 percent in 2008. The number of cancers detected by doctor or patients declined from 73 percent in 1990 to 42 percent in 2008.

Women whose cancers were detected by mammograms were more likely than the doctor- or patient-detected cancers to have lumpectomy or other breast-conserving surgery: 67 percent vs. 48 percent. The women whose cancers were detected by mammograms were less likely to be given chemotherapy.

While 4 percent of women whose cancer was found on mammogram died during a follow-up period that ranged from one to 20 years, 11 percent of those whose cancers were found by the doctor or the women died.

When the researchers looked only at invasive cancers, 92 percent of the women whose cancer was found on mammogram survived without recurrence at five years; 88 percent of the other group did.

"I don't think the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force is looking at the whole picture," Malmgren said. "They are concentrating on the harms."

Among them, according to the 2009 guidelines, are false-positives, which can lead to anxiety and unnecessary biopsies.

Malmgren, a breast cancer survivor, says more focus should be placed on the benefit of early diagnosis, because it often means less treatment is needed.

There was a decrease found in cancers being diagnosed at later stages in those whose cancers were found on mammograms. "That's where the money is," Malmgren said.

Dr. Virginia Moyer, chair of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and a professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine, reviewed the study. "The findings make sense," she said.

They found that cancers can be detected earlier by mammogram. "A screening test, if it can't find something earlier than [by] clinical presentation, is a poor test," she said.

However, she said, the study does not provide support for all women aged 40 to 49 to have routine mammograms.

When considering its recommendation, the task force took all available evidence into account, including published studies, Moyer noted. "The data from randomized trials and modeling show there is a very modest improvement in mortality with mammograms from 40 to 49," she said.

"Because it is so modest and there are risks, people need to make their own decision," Moyer said.

To learn more about mammograms, go to the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: In allowing Dr. Virginia Moyer of the USPSTF to talk about the need for women “to make their own decision,” the story at least implies that declining screening is a choice.  It could have been far more overt, but we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt that the alternative choice was at least implied.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
University of Pennsylvania researchers have identified what may be a more effective way to help people quit smoking. About 70 percent of smokers give up the daunting effort during the first week of trying.

The researchers, led by Caryn Lerman, a professort of psychiatry, divided 1,246 subjects into slow metabolizers of nicotine and normal metabolizers of the addictive chemical, based on the length of time it took for them to rid their bodies of the drug. The ratio of two metabolites, or byproducts, of the body's processing of nicotine allows easy identification of the two groups. The metabolite is found in blood and saliva.

The results of the comparison showed that slow metabolizers did just as well on a nicotine patch or the drug varenicline (marketed as Chantix), a drug that works on the nicotine receptors in the brain. But the patch costs less and has fewer side-effects than varenicline (including nausea, difficulty sleeping and abnormal dreams), so the researchers concluded that slow metabolizers should be put on the patch.

Normal metabolizers of nicotine, meanwhile, had more success with varenicline because they tend to rid their systems of nicotine faster, limiting the effectiveness of the patch. Varenicline contains no nicotine.

"The slower metabolizers, they do very well with the patch. And they get no incremental benefit from varenicline," Lerman said in an interview. "Why spend the money? Why have the side-effects?"

This may seem like common sense, but no one had ever tested it before, she said. And given how difficult it is to kick the habit, smokers need all the help they can get to succeed the first time they try, Lerman said.

"Each time somebody fails, it affects their self confidence," Lerman said. "The trial and error approach is not optimal."

Researchers did not test nicotine gum because it delivers a less consistent flow of nicotine to the user, she said. The patch, worn on the skin, delivers a steady flow of the drug, she said.

In some of the test groups, overall success rates were fairly low, Lerman noted, but the study was conducted during the Great Recession, a time when financial stress may have depressed the chances of succeeding for everyone, regardless of which approach was used.

This post has been updated.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study being reported on was a comparison of two popular smoking cessation aids, and the story also mentions nicotine gum. We’ll award a satisfactory, but wish that the story had mentioned counseling as an approach that’s also supported by strong evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
heart assocIation Mouth-to-mouth not necessary and seen as deterrent

In a break from decades-old first aid guidelines, the American Heart Association on Monday endorsed "hands only" cardio-pulmonary resuscitation - rapid chest compression without mouth-to-mouth resuscitation - to improve the odds for victims of cardiac arrest.

The new guidelines, published in the journal Circulation, recognize that recent research has shown no real advantage to conventional mouth-to-mouth CPR in outside-the-hospital cardiac arrest cases. In addition, studies show that bystanders are often reluctant to perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on strangers, but are more likely to try rapid chest compression.

"We think that if we can double the number of bystanders who attempt CPR, we can save tens of thousands of lives every year," said Mary Fran Hazinski, a nurse at Vanderbilt University Medical Center and spokeswoman for the American Heart Association.

Sudden cardiac arrest is a leading cause of death in the United States. Every day, it claims 900 American lives. Only about 6 percent of victims whose hearts stop outside of a hospital survive.

Studies show that either mouth-to-mouth or hands-only CPR may double the survival rate from cardiac arrest, but bystanders typically step in to provide the potentially life-saving intervention in only about one-third of cases. That hesitation is rooted not only in reluctance to lock lips with a stranger, but by anxiety over how to perform conventional CPR, in which the rescuer breathes into the victim twice after every 30 chest compressions.

"Many times people nearby don't help because they're afraid that they will hurt the victim and aren't real confident in what they're doing," said Michael Sayre, chairman of the Heart Association committee that rewrote the guidelines.

In fact, effective chest compression can break the victim's ribs about one-third of the time. That's a risk well worth taking when the odds of survival without CPR are so slim.

The Heart Association also stressed that three-quarters of sudden cardiac arrest cases outside the hospital occur in the home. The bystander who needs to provide those chest compressions is often a loved one of the victim.

Conventional CPR that combines both chest compression and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation has been taught in first aid classes since the 1960s. That method has been under review since 1997. Two years ago, after considering multiple studies, the Heart Association recommended hands-only CPR only in cases where people were unwilling or unable to provide the rescue breaths as well.

The latest revision stems from three major studies published last year that showed no advantage in using mouth-to-mouth resuscitation in cardiac cases.

Dr. Chris Barton, acting chief of the Emergency Department at San Francisco General Hospital, supports the new guidelines. He said the latest research on CPR supports the notion that in the critical minutes before an ambulance or defibrillation device arrives, it is very important to provide uninterrupted, deep chest compressions.

"You want the chest to go down about 2 inches. I weigh 160 pounds, and when I do this I put about half my weight into it," he said. The pressure should be applied to the center of the chest, between the two nipples of the victim.

The compressions also have to come in rapid succession - about 100 per minute. According to Hazinski, one easy way to remember the rhythm is that it is roughly equivalent to the beat of the 1977 Bee Gees' disco hit "Stayin' Alive."

"If you are untrained, just remember to push hard and push fast," Hazinski said. "Doing something is better than doing nothing."

These new guidelines are aimed at untrained bystanders, or to those who have been trained in CPR but are unsure they can perform it adequately. The message is, if there is any doubt, provide "hands only" CPR.

Although survival rates for cardiac arrest hover around 10 percent with CPR, Hazinski noted that rates have been pushed as high as 30 percent in cities, such as Seattle, that combine high bystander participation with a strong system of professional emergency medical response.

At best, CPR is a desperate measure. Survival rates are highly dependent on prompt arrival of a defibrillator - the kind carried by ambulance crews and increasingly available in public venues such as airports and sports stadiums.

"If you have access to an AED (Automated External Defibrillator), you want to apply that as early as possible," advised San Francisco General's Barton. "Early defibrillation is the most successful intervention you can do."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article discusses hands-only and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, and explains that these are used while bystanders await other options—usually treatment by emergency medical personnel and/or automated external defibrillator and, ultimately, hospital medical staff.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Pathway Genomics, a company known for pushing the boundaries of direct-to-consumer genetic testing, on Thursday will launch a cancer screening test designed to detect bits of cancer DNA in the blood of otherwise healthy people.

The test represents a first in the rapidly developing field of “liquid biopsies,” which use gene sequencing technology to screen blood samples for trace amounts of DNA associated with different cancers.

Several cancer diagnostic companies have been working on the tests, a field that has recently been joined by makers of DNA blood screening tests for fetal abnormalities after the tests detected early cancers in expectant mothers. Cowen & Co estimates that use of DNA blood tests for cancer screening will exceed $10 billion a year by the end of the decade.

But the move by Pathway, a privately owned maker of genetic tests ranging from cancer risk and heart health to drug response, underscores a growing debate over how much genetic information should be made available to healthy people if it is not yet clear how it can improve their health.

The company has already run into trouble on a similar issue. In 2010, Walgreens pulled Pathway’s genetic testing kits from its pharmacies after U.S. health regulators warned patients might take action without understanding the results.

Several oncology experts said liquid biopsy tests like Pathway’s, while exciting, still require large clinical studies proving they help people beat cancer through early detection. Doctors will also need a clear assessment of their accuracy.

“For any given test, the rate of false positives causing unnecessary alarm and false negatives that provide false security should be known,” said Dr. Keith Stewart, an oncologist who heads Mayo Clinic’s Center for Individualized Medicine.

Pathway’s screening test looks at 96 genetic markers associated with major cancer types such as breast, ovarian, lung, colon and melanoma. The company is focusing on mutations that are relatively well-understood, and for which there are specific treatments, said Chief Executive Jim Plante.

The cost to consumers begins at $299 to periodically check for DNA in their blood that could act as an early warning sign of cancer. The tests must be ordered by a doctor, based on a patient’s risk profile. A positive test will require additional checks to find where the cancer is growing.

Pathway also launched a blood test for patients already diagnosed with cancer to help determine whether a treatment is working, or whether the disease is likely to return.

Scientists have long known that cancers shed bits of genetic material into the blood. Privately held Guardant Health and Personal Genome Diagnostics Inc already offer blood tests for cancer patients. Roche-backed Foundation Medicine Inc, Genomic Health Inc, Illumina Inc and Sequenom Inc say they have similar tests in the works.

But cancer experts say there are major differences between using such tests to screen for cancer and monitoring patients who are already known to have it.

For example, some early cancers may not secrete DNA fragments into the bloodstream and require other types of detection. A colonoscopy can find and remove polyps before they pose a threat as colon cancer.

“If we are relying on a test that can only detect cancer after it has formed, we miss a huge opportunity to intervene,” said Dr. Scott Kopetz of the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

Patients might be attracted to a less-invasive test for colon cancer, but if it is less effective, it might result in more cases of colon cancer, not fewer.

Another concern is that the tests may pick up on markers that are never destined to be cancer, something already known to occur in blood tests for prostate cancer, Kopetz said.

Pathway says its test is more than 99 percent accurate in detecting mutations in blood samples that contain at least nine copies of a tested mutation.

“We do expect to detect cancer DNA when the tumors are small - much sooner than stage three or four,” Plante said.

Dr. Bert Vogelstein, a cancer geneticist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, said Pathway’s figure represents the test’s technical ability to detect DNA in the blood.

Doctors, however, need an indication of how many patients will get a false positive result, something that can only be determined in a very large clinical trial, said Vogelstein. He is advising two companies developing liquid biopsy tests for cancer screening: Sysmex and Personal Genome Diagnostics.

Plante said the company has started two clinical trials involving patients but has yet to publish any results on how the tests perform in people.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The true alternative to these tests is routine cancer screening using proven screening methods recommended by the US Preventive Services Task Force. In fact, the whole name “liquid biopsies” is wrong. These are not biopsies at all, they are screening tests for healthy people that look for biomarkers of cancer in the blood. But we don’t know what kind of clinical significance they have or if they will lead to better outcomes. Neither story gave a full explanation of the alternative screening approaches, although this story did mention colonoscopies (which are one such screening method) as well as screening tests for prostate cancer. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new, non-invasive knee procedure could bring some relief for patients suffering from debilitating chronic pain, for whom surgery is not an option.

The treatment, recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration, is called “cooled radio frequency ablation” and is a less drastic option for people with moderate to severe osteoarthritis pain who are not ready to have knee replacement surgery, or who have health conditions that don’t make them a good candidate for surgery.

Marketed as "Coolief", the procedure uses radio frequency to target and mute the nerves responsible for sending pain signals from the arthritic knee to the brain. Coolief doesn’t repair arthritis in the knee, but eases the pain, helping patients go back to activities without discomfort and fewer medications.

“What we're changing is the wiring of the knee — so we're taking away the pain signal and interrupting it," Dr. Amin Sandeep, a pain specialist at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago who performs the procedure, told NBC News.

One 2016 study compared Coolief to popular cortisone injections, with patients reporting greater, longer-lasting pain relief with the new treatment than injections. Coolief reduces pain for about to 6 to 12 months, depending on how fast the nerves in the knee regenerate.

Related: Common Knee Surgery May Not Help You

Osteoarthritis can affect any joint when the cartilage wears off over time, often striking big joints like the knee, causing pain, swelling and stiffness. According to the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, nearly 10 million Americans had osteoarthritis of the knee in 2010.

The three current recommended approaches for knee arthritis pain are physical therapy, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen, or the opioid painkiller tramadol.

But those didn't help Felicia McCloden, a 65-year-old grandmother from outside of Chicago. The excruciating pain in her right knee made simple tasks like grocery shopping impossible.

“I had inflammation, swelling, and my knee was like the size of a golf ball, McCloden told NBC News. "The arthritis was so bad that I could barely step down without severe pain.”

Because she wasn’t eligible for a knee replacement she tried cortisone injections, physical therapy, medications — nothing relieved her pain.

"I thought I was going to limp for the rest of my life," she said.

Related: What Really Helps Knee Pain? The Answer May Surprise You

In May, McCloden underwent the Coolief treatment and the result was instant.

“I couldn't even imagine first of all, not having the pain," she said. "It erased all of that.”

The outpatient procedure typically takes about 40 minutes, is performed with local anesthesia and doesn’t require an incision. Instead, doctors use specialized needles that emit radio frequencywaves into the knee. The cost of the treatment is between $2,000 and $4,000. Because it was just approved by the FDA in April, the treatment is not widely available yet, but pain centers across the country are beginning to offer it.

Some of the reported risks from the procedure include bleeding and infection. "Though patients have a risk of the physician hitting the wrong nerve, that is extremely rare in the hands of an experienced professional”, Amin said.

Recovery time is minimal, with most patients walking immediately after the procedure and resuming normal activities in a day or two.

For some patients with structural problems of the knee, the procedure won't help, said pain specialist Dr. Edgar Ross, associate professor of anesthesia at Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

"But let’s say a patient is younger, instead of going for a total knee replacement early, which might have to be repeated later on, Coolief can postpone the need for the total knee replacement," Ross told NBC News.

Coolief can be repeated if necessary, but it's not a permanent solution. While it reduces pain, it can't stop the progression of osteoarthritis.

"While it can delay total knee replacement, knee replacement may still eventually be necessary in a big number of patients," said Dr. Dennis Cardone, associate professor of orthopedic surgery at NYU Langone Medical Center.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The text mentions treatment options and compares the radio frequency procedure with one of them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - U.S. health regulators said on Tuesday they approved a stent by Abbott Laboratories that is the first designed to be absorbed into the bloodstream after it is implanted.

The stent, called Absorb, is made of a plastic similar to dissolving sutures and offers patients an alternative to metal stents currently used to prop open arteries cleared of blockages.

Unlike traditional stents that remain in place after implantation, Absorb is designed to disappear fully within three years of the procedure.

Absorb’s appeal is that it allows the blood vessel to return to a natural state, free from a permanent metal implant. The approach holds particular promise for patients whose coronary artery disease could require multiple implants over the course of several decades, said Mitchell Krucoff, a professor at Duke University Medical Center who has advised Abbott on Absorb.

“This is a game changer,” he said in an interview. “There are no longer going to be permanent metal implants in the artery.”

Absorb releases the drug everolimus to combat the growth of scar tissue that can form within a stent and cause the artery to narrow again, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which approved the stent, said.

“No metal means the treated artery can pulse and flex naturally as demands on the heart change with everyday activities,” said Gregg Stone of Columbia University Medical Center, who led clinical trials for Absorb. “No metal may also reduce the potential of future blockages that occur with permanent metallic stents.”

Data released in October concluded Absorb was comparable to Abbott’s own Xience drug-coated metal stent in safety and effectiveness but showed a higher risk of heart attacks and blood clots. Abbott said it expects the risks to lessen as surgeons gain experience with it.

Absorb also will compete with Medtronic Plc’s traditional drug-coated Resolute stent and Boston Scientific Corp’s Synergy and Promus stents. Synergy’s polymer coating disappears over time after delivering a drug that helps prevent the artery from re-clogging, leaving a metal stent in place.

Abbott plans to roll out the device to about 100 hospitals in the next several months as it trains surgeons on the implant procedure before ramping up sales, said spokesman Jonathon Hamilton. Absorb will be priced at a “modest” premium to Xience, he said. Analysts have predicted Absorb will gain a market niche but not surpass drug-dispensing metal stents such as Xience in share until longer-term data show more favorable clinical results.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The clinical trial summarized in the story compared the dissolvable stent with a metal stent coated with a drug to minimize future blood clots.
The story would have been stronger if it also had mentioned traditional metal stents (with no drug coating) and the use of drugs to manage heart disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Over the past few decades, as breast cancer has increasingly been treated as a systemic disease, the number of surgeries performed on the most serious cases has plummeted. With better drugs and radiation techniques available, the proportion of women with Stage 4 breast cancer who had surgery dropped from 67.8 percent in 1988 to 25.1 percent in 2011, according to a study published Wednesday in the journal JAMA Surgery.

But the study raises an intriguing question about that approach. It shows that women who had surgery survived longer than those who didn't: a median of 28 months vs. 19 months. When the researchers examined a small subset of the group — those who survived 10 years — they found that 9.6 percent had chosen to have surgery while 2.9 percent had not.

"Maybe we need to revisit this question of surgery," said Mary C. Schroeder, an assistant professor in the College of Pharmacy at the University of Iowa and one of the authors of the study. "It may not be right for all women, but it may be better for some women than it was in 1995."

[He had a 3.5-pound tumor and months to live. Here's how he survived]

Previous research has reached the same conclusion, but a significant problem with this study and others like it is that they rely on retrospective data, looking back over any number of years, said Michael S. Sabel, the chief of surgical oncology at the University of Michigan, who was not involved in the newly published study. In retrospective research, it's impossible to filter out the countless reasons that a woman and her doctor might have made the decision to treat the cancer with or without surgery, leaving the conclusions unreliable for clinical decision-making, he said.

"It's premature to suggest, and it’s a difficult conversation to have with patients, that removing the breast will help them live longer in the face of Stage 4 disease," Sabel said.

Two small prospective studies have suggested no survival difference among women with Stage 4 breast cancer who have surgery and those who don't, he said. A large, randomized, prospective study currently being conducted by the Eastern Clinical Oncology Group should produce the most reliable data on the subject to date, he said.

In a Stage 4 case, cancer cells have left the breast, metastizing to bones or other organs, which presents a more dire and immediate threat to a woman's survival than the presence of the original tumor. Still there may be reasons to remove the cancer in the breast. Some evidence suggests that it may be influencing the woman's immunological response to her cancer. Or it could be continuously "seeding" the spread of cancer to other parts of the body.

In their study, Schroeder; Alexandra Thomas, a professor at Iowa's Carver College of Medicine, and others looked at 21,372 women from 1988 to 2011 who had Stage 4 breast cancer at the time of their original diagnosis and did not receive radiation as part of their first course of therapy. Their median age was 63.

[Cancer trials are changing. That could mean faster access to better drugs]

The researchers found that median survival for all of the women improved from 20 to 26 months as more sophisticated treatments and better imaging techniques developed over that time. As other research has shown, African American women were over-represented among women who have Stage 4 breast cancer at the time they are first diagnosed.

In interviews, Schroeder and Thomas stressed that each decision about whether to have surgery is based on many factors that only a woman and her doctors can assess, in particular how far the cancer has spread and how sick she is.

But with better therapies to control the cancer systemically and improved imaging that finds ever-smaller deposits of cancer in other parts of the body, it may be time to see whether surgery also can help increase the length of survival times, they said.

"Aggressive local therapy may benefit select women, such as those with an already established potential for durable remission," they wrote in their paper. That would include younger women whose cancers have not spread in great volume to other organs and who have certain kinds of cancers that respond better to drugs, Lisa Newman, medical director of the Henry Ford Health System's International Center for the Study of Breast Cancer Subtypes, said in an e-mail. Newman was not involved in the study.

"Theoretically...patients with metastatic breast cancer might benefit from surgery to remove the cancerous breast tumor in combination with medical therapies as a more complete reduction of their total body cancer burden," she added.

With $45 billion pledge to charity, Mark Zuckerberg and wife imagine ‘a world without suffering from disease’

The myth of sugar-free drinks, candy: Study shows they can wreak havoc on teeth, too

Modern men tend to overeat like cavemen as a way of showing off to women

For more health news, you can sign up for our weekly newsletter here.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article hints at “more sophisticated treatments and better imaging techniques” that have developed over time, but it doesn’t explicit state what those are. We would have liked to have seen a sentence or two describing some existing breast cancer treatments, in the case the patient chooses not to opt for surgery.
However, since the story mentions radiation as a possible therapy, we give it a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hormone therapy is the only FDA-approved treatment for hot flashes related to menopause, but many women are reluctant to undergo hormone therapy because its long-term use has been linked to an increased risk for breast cancer and stroke .

The study was presented in Chicago at the annual meeting of the North American Menopause Society (NAMS).

In a manufacturer-funded study, the drug Serada proved to be more effective than placebo for preventing hot flashes and reducing their severity.

Oct. 6, 2010 -- An extended-release version of the seizure and pain drug gabapentin may be one step closer to becoming the first approved nonhormonal treatment for menopause -related hot flashes .

In earlier studies, immediate-release gabapentin was shown to be an effective treatment for hot flashes. But side effects, including dizziness and daytime sleepiness, were commonly reported by users.

Michael Sweeney, MD, who is vice president of research and development for Serada manufacturer Depomed Inc., says the company’s slow-release gabapentin formulation avoids many of these side effects.

About 60% of women who took the experimental drug in one study reported side effects, compared to about 50% of women taking placebo pills. About 8% and 18% of Serada users reported daytime sleepiness and dizziness, respectively, compared to about 3% and 8% of women who took a placebo.

“These side effects, when they did occur, tended to occur early in treatment and disappear within a few weeks,” Sweeney says.

Researchers presented findings from two studies of Serada at the NAMS meeting.

In one study, the number of daily hot flashes experienced by postmenopausal women taking 1,800 milligrams of the drug per day declined from around 10 to around 2. But a similar reduction in hot flashes was seen in women who took placebo pills instead of the slow-release gabapentin.

In the second study, about 65% of women taking Serada reported significant improvement in hot flash symptoms after 12 weeks of treatment, compared to 45% of women taking placebo.

NAMS founder and former executive director Wulf Utian, MD, says Serada does not appear to be as effective as hormonal therapy, but it may be a useful alternative treatment for women who can’t take hormones or don’t want to.

Utian is now an independent consultant and was a co-author of one of the studies.

“Estrogen and estrogen-progestin drugs are about 95% effective for treating hot flashes,” he tells WebMD. “This drug was about 60% to 65% effective, which is about the same efficacy that has been reported with antidepressants [for treatment of hot flashes].”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions low-dose hormone replacement therapy, which is one option for particularly bothersome hot flashes. It could have also mentioned lifestyle changes such as keeping cool and avoiding dietary triggers, which are useful approaches for some women. The story also notes that almost half the women in the placebo arm of one of the trials reported improvement. It would have been helpful to readers to highlight that fact and put the drug results in context with the fact that women feel better after a few weeks even without any treatment. On balance, the story does enough to fulfill the criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An analysis of two influential studies of prostate cancer screening concludes that the much-debated test “significantly” reduces deaths from the disease, suggesting that current recommendations against routine PSA screening might be steering men away from a lifesaving procedure.

The analysis, published Monday in Annals of Internal Medicine, drew wildly different reactions, as is often the case with research on PSA screenings. Some experts in cancer screening and statistics said its novel approach was “on shaky ground” and used a “completely unverifiable” methodology that they had “never seen before,” but others praised its “intriguing and innovative approach.” There was one area of agreement, however: “I imagine it’s going to generate some buzz,” said biostatistician Ted Karrison of the University of Chicago.

If the new analysis is correct, one of the influential PSA studies, called PLCO, reduced deaths from prostate cancer by 27 percent to 32 percent, not the zero percent that PLCO researchers themselves found. For a man in the U.S., the risk of dying of prostate cancer is about 2.5 percent. A mortality reduction of 30 percent would lower the death rate to 1.75 percent, said epidemiologist Ruth Etzioni of Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, the study’s senior author.

“If a screening test reduces cancer mortality by 20 percent, it’s considered a successful test,” Etzioni said. “I think the [prostate-cancer] mortality reduction we calculate is a significant benefit. This is a screening test that saves lives.”

Those gains come at some cost to health, though: For every life saved, she estimated, five men will be told they have cancer when in fact their abnormal cells would never grow, spread, or harm them. In other estimates, such “overdiagnoses” outnumber lives saved by 50-to-1.

The new study lands amid another shift in how experts view PSA screening, which measures blood levels of a molecule sometimes associated with prostate cancer. In 2012 the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, whose recommendations help determine that procedures insurance should cover, recommended against routine PSA tests because of their many risks and tiny benefits. Among other drawbacks, the tests lead to overdiagnosis (meaning a biopsy finds malignant cells but they are so innocuous they would never harm, let alone kill, the man) as well as incontinence and impotence from treatment (including of harmless cancers).

In April, however, the task force proposed instead that men aged 55 to 69 discuss PSA’s pros and cons with their doctor and then decide what to do, factoring in that if 1,000 men get regular PSA screening for a decade it will save about one life. (Older and younger men are still advised not to have routine screening.)

The rationale for the re-analysis led by Etzioni is that the PLCO study was a bit of a mess. It assigned half of its nearly 77,000 participants, men ages 55 to 74, to have yearly PSA tests and the other half to not do so. But 46 percent of the men in the no-PSA group had yearly PSAs anyway. As a result, when researchers counted deaths in each group, it wasn’t a clean comparison: Rather than comparing screened to unscreened men, they were comparing assigned-to-screening men to not-assigned-to-screening men.

The finding that assigned-to-screening men were no more likely to avoid death from prostate cancer might therefore have been because their screening behavior wasn’t different enough from the “unscreened” (but in fact partly screened) men’s, not because PSA screening doesn’t save lives.

In an effort to untangle that possibility, Etzioni and 21 co-authors from 10 countries created multiple mathematical models. They all rely on estimates of “lead time,” or how much sooner a cancer is detected because of PSA instead of because symptoms are detected. The models incorporated the records of all the PLCO men and ignored which group they’d been assigned to.

Bottom line: Screened men’s cancers were detected earlier than unscreened men’s, and more frequent screening advanced detection more. That moved some prostate cancers from too-advanced-to-treat to treatable, reducing prostate cancer mortality by 27 percent to 32 percent over 11 years, Etzioni and her colleagues conclude.

Researchers not involved in the study weren’t convinced. “The concern is that men in the no-screening group but who chose to get screened anyway might differ in important ways from men who stayed with no-screening,” Karrison said. They might be more health conscious or conscientious, or have other traits associated with longevity. If so, then those traits, not screening, might be responsible for their lower risk of dying from prostate cancer. Two prominent experts in cancer prevention and statistics agreed, but said they did not want to be publicly identified as criticizing the new analysis because some of its authors are colleagues of theirs.

Dr. Kenneth Lin of Georgetown University Medical Center, a former staffer at the USPSTF, said crediting PSA tests with reducing prostate cancer mortality by around 30 percent was probably an overstatement, especially since mathematical models are only models. An earlier one for the PLCO study concluded that more men died in its screening group than in the don’t-get-screened group. “Models are models,” Lin said. “No matter how sophisticated, they shouldn’t trump data from real people who participated in the randomized trials” — which in PLCO found zero lives saved from PSA screening.

A researcher associated with the Preventive Services Task Force, but who was not permitted to speak to reporters while the group is finalizing its PSA recommendation, said the panel would incorporate the new paper in its analysis. “But honestly,” he said, “I don’t know that this adds a great deal to our understanding.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This research is specifically about comparing the value of screening for prostate cancer vs not screening. New biomarkers and variations on the PSA test itself, along with other screening modalities, such as digital rectal exam, are not mentioned and were not addressed in the studies that are described.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Melanoma survivors may want to enlist partners to help search their bodies for suspicious looking moles, according to new research.

The researchers previously found that skin cancer survivors and their partners could be trained to spot potentially cancerous moles by doing skin exams. The new report shows that during the two years, those same people had increasing confidence in their skills, with no increase in embarrassment or discomfort.

“There was concern that they might be embarrassed by examining areas of the body that aren’t normally seen close up,” said lead author Dr. June Robinson, of Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago.

Melanoma survivors were previously told to use mirrors to check inaccessible areas of their bodies, she told Reuters Health.

“For example, men can’t see the top of their bald heads or the back of their necks or ears,” Robinson said.

The new study focused on 395 pairs of melanoma survivors who had received training in skin exams in the original study. The participants attended “booster” training sessions and completed surveys every four months for the next two years.

Overall, the trained group found 51 early melanomas during the study, compared to 18 melanomas found by a comparison group of patients and partners who didn’t receive training.

Among people who received the skin exam training, the researchers found a steep increase in their confidence at performing skin exams between the start of the study and four months later.

“Their confidence level goes up and plateaus at eight to 12 months, and it doesn’t go down,” said Robinson.

The exams didn’t become more embarrassing or less comfortable, either.

The new results show people can ask friends or relatives to help examine their bodies for suspicious moles, said Robinson.

“That’s a simple enough statement, and people are not put off by that,” she said.

Bringing this program into the mainstream presents some challenges, however. Each person in the study was trained on how to find melanoma and attended booster sessions every four months.

“We are now trying to see if people can learn, perform and have continuing confidence without the physician reinforcement,” said Robinson.

For now, she said people can go to the American Academy of Dermatology's website to learn the steps - known as the ABCDEs - of finding melanoma (bit.ly/2h9zl0Y).
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Early on in the news story, the writer mentions that without a partner to assist in skin examinations, patients are told to use mirrors to check out hard-to-reach body parts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New Orleans, LA - Research led by Frank Lau, MD, Assistant Professor of Clinical Surgery at LSU Health New Orleans School of Medicine, has found that long-term breast reduction outcomes can be improved by using techniques that minimally disrupt the lower breast suspensory ligaments. The paper, The Sternum-Nipple Distance is Double the Nipple-Inframammary Fold Distance in Macromastia, is published Ahead-of-Print online in the Annals of Plastic Surgery.

"Breast reduction is one of the most commonly performed plastic surgery procedures. The long-term appearance after reduction is not optimized 50% of the time using standard reduction techniques," notes lead author Dr. Frank Lau. "At LSU Health New Orleans, we offer an improved technique that preserves more of the critical breast anatomy. This study provides an anatomical foundation for why our technique may yield better, longer-lasting results."

About 50% of patients who undergo the most commonly used breast reduction technique experience pseudoptosis or "bottoming out" as a long-term complication. This occurs when breast tissue drops to the lower portion of the breast independent of nipple position.

"We want our patients to have a long-lasting, aesthetically pleasing breast shape," says Lau.

Believing that disruption of the lower suspensory ligaments may be a critical factor because they are stronger than the upper sensory ligaments, the researchers conducted a retrospective review of 208 patients who underwent breast reduction surgery from 2008-2015, studying the results in 400 individual breasts. In all patients, only one reduction technique was performed per patient. Ninety-two percent of the 174 reductions performed with the inferior pedicle technique used a Wise pattern incision, which disrupts the lower suspensory ligaments, and 7.5% used a Boston modification of Robertson technique, which preserves the lower suspensory ligaments. Of the 33 superomedial pedicle reductions, 25 (75.8%) used a Wise pattern incision and 8 (24.2%) used a vertical pattern incision.

By measuring the sternal notch-nipple distance and the nipple-inframammary fold distance ( proxies for upper and lower sensory ligament strength, respectively), the study found a differential rate of stretch - for every 1 cm in upper sensory ligament stretch, the lower sensory ligament length increases by 0.45 cm. This relationship strengthens the researchers' hypothesis that the lower pole ligaments stretch at a significantly slower rate than the upper pole ligaments. An anatomic basis for this differential may exist. A horizontal membrane of dense connective tissue originating at the level of the fifth rib that divides the breast into segments at the level of the nipple has been described. This division may signify a transition point in sensory ligament strength. On that basis, the authors recommend that techniques such as the Boston modification of Robertson technique should be preferred by surgeons seeking to avoid pseudoptosis. Other advantages of the Boston modification of Robertson technique include decreased operative time and elimination of the "triple point," the most common site of postoperative incision rupture.

"This study is one of the largest breast anthropometry (measurement) studies ever performed," says Lau. "These results help us provide the best breast reduction outcomes to our patients."

Co-authors include Thomas Steele, a 4th-year medical student at LSU Health New Orleans School of Medicine, and Julian Pribaz, MD, of Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School.

LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans educates Louisiana's health care professionals. The state's most comprehensive health sciences university, LSU Health New Orleans includes a School of Medicine, the state's only School of Dentistry, Louisiana's only public School of Public Health, and Schools of Allied Health Professions, Nursing, and Graduate Studies. LSU Health New Orleans faculty take care of patients in public and private hospitals and clinics throughout the region. In the vanguard of biosciences research in a number of areas in a worldwide arena, the LSU Health New Orleans research enterprise generates jobs and enormous economic impact. LSU Health New Orleans faculty have made lifesaving discoveries and continue to work to prevent, advance treatment, or cure disease. To learn more, visit http://www. , http://www. or http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The research compared specific anatomic differences seen with two recognized surgical approaches to reduction mammaplasty.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Achillion Pharmaceuticals Inc’s experimental hepatitis C drug, when used with Gilead Sciences Inc’s Sovaldi, eradicated signs of the virus in six weeks, the shortest duration and highest response achieved by any two-drug treatment.

Achillion’s shares rose as much as 19 percent to $12.85 on Monday on investor’s hopes that an all-Achillion combination could be as effective as Gilead’s and AbbVie Inc’s current therapies.

The estimated $20 billion market for hepatitis C drugs has developed at a lightning pace in recent years, with several companies including Gilead, AbbVie and Merck & Co Inc working on faster, more potent ways to cure the liver-destroying virus, which affects more than 170 million globally.

The new-generation hepatitis C regimens use a two- to three-drug combination – a nucleotide analog inhibitor or “nuke” and a NS5A inhibitor in Gilead’s case – to achieves a cure in about eight to 12 weeks, making them faster and more effective than older treatment options.

Gilead’s regimen Harvoni, with its own NS5A inhibitor and Sovaldi as the “nuke”, needs to be taken for at least eight weeks. Launched in October, its sales touched $2.11 billion in the quarter ended Dec. 31.

AbbVie’s three-drug cocktail Viekira Pak, which won U.S. approval in December, must be taken for at least 12 weeks.

Achillion’s ongoing mid-stage study tests its NS5A inhibitor, ACH-3102, with Sovaldi in previously untreated genotype 1 hepatitis C patients over six and eight weeks of therapy.

The main goal is to achieve a cure, or sustained virological response, 12 weeks after the completion of therapy.

Monday’s data shows Achillion’s NS5A inhibitor, ACH-3102, looks best-in-class, which could make up for its nuke, ACH-3422, being perhaps less effective than Sovaldi, analysts said.

The question then becomes whether ACH-3422 plus ACH-3102 - a weaker nuke and a stronger NS5A inhibitor - could be a good enough doublet as Harvoni, William Blair’s Katherine Xu said.

Achillion, one of the few companies developing hepatitis C therapies independently, plans to begin a mid-stage study this year to evaluate its proprietary doublet.

The all-Achillion regimen could hit the U.S. market by 2020 in a conservative scenario, Deutsche Bank’s Alethia Young estimated. She expects the treatment to cost about $35,000 per patient per year, assuming a 55 percent discount.

Harvoni’s list price is $93,400 and Viekira Pak is estimated to cost $83,319.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention several drug regimens that are available for treatment of hepatitis C and notes that they appear to take longer to achieve a response than the new drug. We’ll call this good enough for a satisfactory, but we’d note that there are other treatments for hepatitis C that have a long and detailed history in the medical literature. A good hepatitis C expert could have provided a nice summary for readers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 15, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- People who take drugs called bisphosphonates to prevent bone loss may also reduce their risk of developing colorectal cancer by almost 60 percent compared to those not on the drugs, a new study suggests.

Bisphosphonates include such common drugs as Fosamax (alendronate), Boniva (ibandronate), Actonel (risedronate) and Reclast (zoledronic acid). These drugs work by increasing bone thickness, thereby reducing the risk of fractures, the researchers said.

In prior studies, bisphosphonates have already been shown to be associated with a reduced odds for breast cancer.

"These [new] findings are meaningful because they point to a possible protective effect of this class of drugs being relevant to prevention of many different cancers," said lead researcher Dr. Gad Rennert, from the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Faculty of Medicine and chairman of the department of community medicine and epidemiology at the Carmel Medical Center of Clalit Health Services in Haifa, Israel.

"This is [similar] to the effect that we and others have shown for [cholesterol-lowering] statins," he said, noting that "bisphosphonates and statins share the same metabolic pathway."

The results of the U.S. National Cancer Institute-supported study are published in the Feb. 14 issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

For the study, Rennert's team collected data on almost 1,900 postmenopausal women who took part in the Molecular Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer study, which is a population-based trial in northern Israel.

The researchers found that taking bisphosphonates, mostly Fosamax, for at least a year was associated with a significant 59 percent reduction in relative risk for colorectal cancer.

"The magnitude of the reduced risk is less important because this is an association study; however, it is very significant after controlling for a dozen other known risk factors," Rennert said.

They took into account factors such as family history, ethnic background, diet, physical activity, weight, vitamin D consumption and the use of other drugs such as aspirin, statins and hormone replacement therapy.

The findings in this study show that bisphosphonates are associated with a reduced risk of developing colorectal cancer, but they cannot confirm a causal effect -- that is, the study doesn't prove that the use of bisphosphonates is responsible for the lower risk of colorectal cancer.

However, the lowered risk of colorectal cancer seen with bisphosphonates may be due to the way the drug acts in the body, which is similar to how cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins work, according to Rennert. These same researchers also found in another study that statin use also reduced the risk of colorectal cancer, he noted.

"We also found a similar effect last year with risk of breast cancer, which has already been replicated by three other groups," Rennert added.

A randomized trial is need to prove that bisphosphonates are protective against colorectal cancer, Rennert said. "It should be relatively easy, as it seems that all that is needed is a year of treatment to see the effect," he said.

The researchers noted, however, that the risks of using bisphosphonates include the possibility, in rare cases, of osteonecrosis of the jaw (destruction of the jawbone or jaw tissue). Bisphosphonates used for osteoporosis have also been linked to a rare fracture of the thigh, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

"The adverse effects profile is of major importance if bisphosphonates are going to be recommended for cancer prevention in healthy people," the study authors cautioned.

Commenting on the study, Eric Jacobs, Strategic Director of Pharmacoepidemiology at the American Cancer Society, said that "the lower risk of colorectal cancer risk seen among bisphosphonate users in this study is intriguing."

However, these results should be interpreted with caution and require confirmation by additional studies, he said. "Results from the only other study of bisphosphonate use and colorectal cancer, a recent large study from the United Kingdom, do not support an important protective effect," Jacobs noted.

Fortunately, there are other proven ways to help lower risk of colorectal cancer, he said. "In particular, all Americans, 50 or older, should get a screening test so that precancerous polyps can be detected and removed before they turn into cancer."

For more information on colon cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Both stories relied on Jacobs from the American Cancer Society for the same bit of context. “Fortunately, there are other proven ways to help lower risk of colorectal cancer, he said. “In particular, all Americans, 50 or older, should get a screening test so that precancerous polyps can be detected and removed before they turn into cancer.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Mediterranean diet includes lots of fish, plenty of fruits and vegetables, portions of whole grains, and very little meat. This classic diet does not exclude a dinnertime glass of wine, however, sugary drinks, fried food, and sweets are not on the menu. Scientists believe this style of eating offers some protection against mental aging, and, above all else, it is heart healthy.

A new study of over 15,000 people in 39 countries explored the benefits of this diet for one special group: those already diagnosed with heart disease. Surprisingly, the results suggest it might be possible they can have their cake and eat it, too.

Participants eating a Mediterranean diet showed a lower risk of heart attack and stroke, the researchers discovered; yet, eating healthy food appeared to be more important than avoiding unhealthy foods identified as typical of a so-called Western diet, such as French fries, fatty red meats, and, yes, even cake. (Though diet names refer to regions, they are not precise.)

Led by Professor Ralph Stewart from the University of Auckland, New Zealand, a team of researchers asked 15,482 older adults with stable coronary artery disease to complete a lifestyle questionnaire. With an average age of 67, each was a participant in GlaxoSmithKline’s STABILITY drug trial, created to learn whether the drug reduced the risk of heart attacks, strokes, and deaths. Participants lived in Western and Eastern Europe, North and South America, and the Asia Pacific region.

They answered questions about their diet and reported how many times a week they consumed servings from separate food groups. Looking at their answers, researchers gave them points in either the Mediterranean diet or Western diet category.

Over nearly four years, 1,588 (about 10 percent) of the study participants suffered either a heart attack or stroke, or died. Those who ate more foods in the Mediterranean diet category were 3.5 times less likely to experience one of these three events than people whose diets more closely resembled the Western standard.

In fact, every one-point increase in a participant’s Mediterranean diet score was linked with a 7 percent reduction in risk of heart attack, stroke, or death. Look at it this way: if 100 people ate the highest proportion of Mediterranean foods and 100 ate the least, there would be three fewer heart attacks, strokes, or deaths among those who ate more foods from the Mediterranean diet. These findings held for every geographical region.

Now here’s the interesting part: eating more foods thought to be less healthy — those typical of Western diets —did not link to an increase in heart attacks, strokes, or deaths. Eating more healthy foods was the key, even if some unhealthy foods were also consumed along the way.

According to Stewart, the meaning behind the numbers is clear. Instead of avoiding unhealthy foods, people with weak hearts might focus more on consuming healthy foods. That said, Stewart notes his study has limitations, including a lack of strict guidelines about portion size and no measure of total calories.

Long-standing American Heart Association guidelines recommend a diet primarily consisting of fruits, vegetables, fish, and other whole foods, with limited amounts of sodium, sugar, saturated fats, and refined carbohydrates. Eat as you dare.

Source: Stewart RAH, Wallentin L, Benatar J, et al. Dietary patterns and the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events in a global study of high-risk patients with stable coronary heart disease. European Heart Journal. 2016.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story did an adequate job of explaining the two diets, and it mentioned medication, which is another approach to preventing heart disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a long-term study of the latest treatment for peanut allergy, scientists in Australia report that an immune-based therapy helped children allergic to peanuts eat them without reactions for four years.

The study, published in the journal , follows up on children enrolled in an earlier study of an immunotherapy treatment, which combined probiotics with small doses of peanuts that were designed to gradually train the children’s immune systems to accept the peanut allergen rather than treat it as something foreign. Previous studies have suggested that methods like these could be effective in reducing youngsters’ allergic, sometimes dangerous anaphylactic shock reactions to peanuts. The Australian team added probiotics to further enhance the gut’s ability to accept the peanuts and not trigger an immune reaction. Compared to 4% of children who didn’t get any treatment, 82% of those receiving the combination therapy significantly reduced their allergic reactions to peanuts.

MORE: Babies Should Eat Eggs and Peanuts Early to Avoid Food Allergies

In the follow-up, which tracked the children for four years after they were treated with the combination therapy, 67% of those who got the combination probiotic and peanut therapy were comfortable eating peanuts, compared to only 4% of those who did not get the treatment. Fewer children in the treated group had an allergic reaction to the peanuts, and they also showed smaller reactions to skin prick tests with peanut allergen.

The results are encouraging, allowing the children who were treated to eat peanuts without fear of an allergic reaction. But it may be too early to call this a cure. The researchers believe that adding probiotics to the peanut allergens may be important in improving the children’s tolerance to the food, but Dr. Anna Nowak-Wegrzyn, an associate professor of pediatrics at Icahn School of Medicine at Mt. Sinai Hospital who was not involved in the study, notes that the researchers didn’t compare the effect of the probiotics themselves; they only compared children who received the probiotics along with immune therapy to those who didn’t get any treatment at all.

It makes sense that the probiotics may enhance the immunotherapy’s effect, since probiotics are beneficial bacteria in the gut, where food allergens are processed. “I think there is certainly a suggestion, but not hard proof, that the probiotics make a difference,” says Nowak-Wegrzyn. “The question for me would be if there is a difference between patients who were treated with [both] immunotherapy [in the form of low doses of peanuts] and probiotics, and those who were treated with just immunotherapy.”

That may have to wait for another study. But the new findings provide even more evidence that using peanuts to treat peanut allergy, and to re-train the immune system to be less allergic, can be effective.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: As noted above, the story notes that it is not clear whether the combination therapy works better than treatment that uses only immunotherapy. And the story does refer, briefly, to earlier immunotherapy studies. That’s enough to earn a satisfactory rating here. However, a little more information on standard treatments and up-and-coming immunotherapy research would have made the story much stronger.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Eli Lilly and Co’s new Jardiance pill slashed deaths by 32 percent in patients with type 2 diabetes at risk of heart attack and stroke, a finding that could make it a mainstay diabetes treatment and triple its use, according to researchers and analysts.

Lilly shares jumped as much as 9 percent after data from the trial was released Thursday at a medical meeting in Stockholm.

“This is the first diabetes therapy to show robust effect in reducing cardiovascular death. It really is big news,” said Dr. Bernard Zinman, director of the Diabetes Centre at Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto, who led the three-year study of 7,000 people.

Because about one-half of the deaths in people with type 2 diabetes are caused by cardiovascular disease, reducing cardiovascular risk is considered essential to diabetes care. Type 2 diabetes is the most common form of the disease and is linked to obesity.

Jardiance, a once-a-day pill which won U.S. approval last year, belongs to a new family of treatments called SGLT2 inhibitors that include Johnson & Johnson’s Invokana and AstraZeneca Plc’s Farxiga. They lower blood sugar by inhibiting reabsorption of glucose in the kidneys.

Zinman, in an interview, predicted the new study would prompt medical societies to recommend that Jardiance be used by type 2 diabetics who have a history of heart disease or who are at risk of cardiovascular events.

About 26 million Americans have type 2 diabetes, according to federal data for 2014. The vast majority of those patients could be candidates for Jardiance, which costs over $4,000 per year, Morningstar analyst Damien Conover said.

“The big news here is that the drug reduced cardiovascular stuff. That has not been the case with all things in diabetes,” said David Marrero, president of health care and education at the American Diabetes Association. “It is probably going to be a more popular drug because of that.”

Sanford Bernstein analyst Tim Anderson more than tripled his annual sales forecast for Jardiance and combination drugs containing it to $2.7 billion by 2020. He cut his 2020 sales forecast for Merck & Co Inc’s Januvia, the leading member of a competing class of oral diabetes drugs called DPP-4 inhibitors, to $6 billion from $7.8 billion.

Anderson estimates Jardiance could boost Lilly’s earnings per share by 8 percent on average across 2016 to 2020.

In the study, patients taking Jardiance had a 38 percent reduction in cardiovascular death, including from heart attacks and strokes. There was no significant difference in non-fatal heart attacks or non-fatal strokes.

Those taking Jardiance had a 32 percent lower risk of dying from any cause, and a 35 percent lower rate of hospitalizations from heart failure.

The benefits were especially impressive because they added to protection that patients received from taking cholesterol fighters and other life-saving heart drugs, Zinman said.

“This is a wonderful thing,” said Dr. Jerome Tolbert of Mount Sinai Beth Israel Hospital in New York. He has not prescribed Jardiance and similar drugs as frequently as treatments like Januvia, but expects that may change based on the new data.

Zinman noted that Jardiance, like other SGLT2 drugs, causes weight loss and reduced blood pressure, besides lowering both blood sugar levels and body fat, and also reduces swelling, which all help the cardiovascular system.

Lilly and Boehringer last month disclosed that Jardiance met its primary study goal, becoming the first diabetes drug to show heart-protective results in a large cardiovascular trial. But they did not unveil detailed data until Thursday at the medical meeting.

Shares of Lily closed up 6.5 percent at $89.98 on Thursday, after rising as high as $92.83.

In calculating the combined number of cardiac deaths, non-fatal heart attacks and non-fatal strokes, 14 percent fewer events were seen in patients taking Jardiance in combination with standard treatments, compared with patients who took standard treatments alone, meeting the study’s main goal.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This is a novel preventative therapy and designated as an add-on, not a replacement, to standard therapy which include statins to lower cholesterol, and blood pressure drugs. The story mentions Invokana, another drug in the same class as empagliflozin, and it talks about cholesterol-lowering drugs and blood pressure medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new form of cataract surgery using a patient's stem cells has restored vision in babies for the first time, and someday the technique may hold promise for millions of older Americans who undergo traditional cataract eye surgery every year, say scientists who developed the new procedure.

Eye experts across the country who spoke with CBS News are alternately excited and cautious about the findings, published Wednesday in the journal Nature.

The procedure, developed by researchers at the University of California San Diego and China, is less invasive than traditional cataract treatment, said the scientists.

Cataracts are most common in older adults. As most people age, an opaque film slowly forms over the lens -- the part of the eye that helps with focusing on images at various distances. It clouds vision and can lead to blindness.

In cataract surgery, which has been around for several decades, eye surgeons make an incision in the front of the eye and remove the lens from its supporting capsule. Then they replace it with an artificial lens.

The new procedure described in Nature involves making a slim incision at the side of the lens capsule, removing the entire lens, yet preserving the empty capsule bag or "scaffold." A certain kind of stem cell, called endogenous stem/progenitor cells, when left intact, then begins to repopulate the damaged lens and essentially grow a new, healthy lens.

Study author Dr. Kang Zhang, the chief of ophthalmic genetics at UC San Diego's Shiley Eye Institute, told CBS News, "Unlike [the] current way of cataract surgery, which destroys over half of lens stem cells and requires implantation of a plastic intranet ocular lens, we devised a new surgery to make a very small opening at the side of a cataractous lens bag, remove [the] cataract inside, allow the opening to heal, and promote dormant lens stem cells to regrow an entirely new lens with vision."

The experimental procedure was done in 12 infants who were born with a congenital cataract condition.

By using a less invasive procedure, Zhang and his colleagues report that they were able to leave the lens epithelial stem cells, also called LECs, intact. These LECs regenerated the eye's lens in the children, eliminating the need for implants. The same technique was also successfully performed in animals.

In little ones with congenital cataracts, eye surgeons need to intervene early so that light can get to the brain and allow for normal, healthy growth, said Suraj Bhat, associate professor of ophthalmology and director of the Vision Molecular Biology Laboratory at the UCLA Stein Eye Institute. Bhat was not involved in the new research, but said it's "extremely exciting" because it offers an alternative to "an extraordinarily invasive" procedure.

"In early childhood cataracts are very bad. We need light to enter into the eyes at a young age to get proper brain function, otherwise, information does not get transferred to the developing brain," said Bhat.

Traditional surgery can cause opacity in the line of a child's vision and, because the eye is still growing, it is difficult to provide good vision with eye glasses, explained Julie T. Daniels, from University College London Institute of Ophthalmology, in an accompanying commentary in Nature.

Many children also later go on to suffer from glaucoma.

Daniels wrote that to correctly refract light onto the retina at the back of the eye, the cornea and lens must remain transparent throughout life. Current treatments for the cornea and lens involve donor transplants or artificial implants, but the procedures can be risky. She said the new procedure, which coaxes stem cells to regenerate normal tissue in the body, offers promise.

"The study's stem cell engineering has led to the regeneration of transparent lens tissue in children, showing that the concept offers a potential therapeutic approach," Daniels wrote.

She noted a second study in Nature that used transplant tissue grown in the laboratory from stem cells to treat damaged corneas, saying it also holds promise.

Zhang said their results need to be validated in a large number of patients "and with a longer follow-up period."

Will it work in older eyes?

One major question remains to be answered: Can it be applied to age-related cataracts, the leading cause of blindness?

According to the National Eye Institute, about 24.4 million Americans suffer from cataracts. Between 2000 and 2010, the number of cataract cases in the U.S. went up by 20 percent, and it's expected to continue to grow as the population ages.

"We are now planning a study to test this approach in this old patient population. In addition, we are testing if this approach can be used in treating other leading causes of blindness, such as macular degeneration and glaucoma," said Zhang.

He hopes the surgery will be available to the general population within four to five years.

"I would anticipate that it may be available after several independent studies with a large number of patients," he said.

Some other experts in the field saw great promise in the research.

"Everyone's working on this. Stem cells are like the Holy Grail of vision research," Dr. James Tsai, M.D., president of the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai, told CBS News. "To me, it's very exciting data. They may be on to something."

But he tempered the hope the study offers by noting that the lens regeneration work is also "very controversial" and could impact a multimillion-dollar industry.

"This is potentially a new surgery. If you think about the implications in the long run, lens implants may not be necessary," he said. "There are a lot of doctors who will want to see more data."

He also pointed out that the study involved infants, and that adults -- the most common cataract patients -- have a different regenerative capacity of lens epithelial stem cells.

In the meantime, Tsai said it's hopeful news for some babies with congenital cataracts like the children who participated in the study. "As a glaucoma specialist, the way we do congenital cataracts, there's a great risk these babies will develop glaucoma for a lifetime and maybe with this new surgery, they won't have that glaucoma risk."

Dr. Maria Valeria Canto-Soler, assistant professor of ophthalmology and director of the Retinal Degeneration Research Center at Johns Hopkins Wilmer Eye Institute, said she was impressed by the research.

"The main excitement for me is the ability to regenerate an organ or a tissue within an organ," said Canto-Soler, a retina specialist.

"From what I know, I'd say this is the first demonstration where you can use endogenous stem cells for replacing tissue within the eye. It's something we are all looking for. They have actually done it in humans."

She said, even without answers to the question of whether it will work in aging eyes, it creates hope for children with congenital issues. "If you can create it in children, that's a big thing. You are giving sight back to little kids and that change their lives."

Dr. Kathryn Hatch, an ophthalmologist at Massachusetts Eye and Ear in Boston, told CBS News the procedure "seems very exciting," but more research is needed.

"I'd need to see a larger study with more eyes, and we need to see some reproducibility, and see how long it would take for the lens -- if it's able to regenerate -- what are the visual results. Because that's what patients really care about. Their vision. If it takes months to get to an outcome, it's not superior to the lens technologies we have now. I'm not sure what the advantage is. Most patients don't even want to wait. They want to get back to work, their life," Hatch added.

She also had questions about how the procedure was done with such a tiny incision. "I don't understand how they're doing the surgery with such a tiny hole without tearing the capsule. If we make a three millimeter incision [in traditional cataract surgery], that's really small in an adult."

Cataract surgery is "traditionally done by hand with a bent needle. That's one of the most difficult steps to learn as a surgeon. One of most important steps to learn," she said and there could be major eye damage if a surgery was compromised by a tear.

She also noted that baby eye surgery is different from adults in that the infant cataract is much softer compared to an adult's harder cataract.

UCLA's Bhat noted another limitation in the study: "These are all genetic cataracts. This study wasn't long enough. They [cataracts] may come back," he said, but it's also possible the genetic defect may not reappear.

He's said it's unclear if the results will be mirrored in older cataract patients, the same concern expressed by others in the field.

"Cell division is slower in older people," Bhat said. "The biggest problem as we grow older, particularly beyond 50, is cell division which keeps on decreasing. Our ability to make new cells is significantly lost. The process that these people are depending upon is tremendously dependent on cell division."

Bhat said he also paused when he read the statement in the paper that claimed a 100 percent success rate three months after surgery.

"I don't know them. I can't second guess them. You've got to believe the written word."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing conventional cataract surgery as the main alternative to this new procedure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - Scientists in Britain have developed a type of HIV test using a USB stick that can give a fast and highly accurate reading of how much virus is in a patient’s blood.

The device, created by scientists at Imperial College London and the privately-held U.S. firm DNA Electronics, uses a drop of blood to detect HIV, then creates an electrical signal that can be read by a computer, laptop or handheld device.

The researchers say the technology, although still in the early stages, could allow patients to regularly monitor their virus levels in a similar way to diabetes patients checking their blood sugar levels.

It could be particularly useful in remote settings to help HIV patients manage their treatment more effectively, since current tests to detect virus levels take at least three days and involve sending a blood sample to a laboratory.

“Monitoring viral load is crucial to the success of HIV treatment. At the moment, testing often requires costly and complex equipment that can take a couple of days to produce a result,” said Graham Cooke, who co-led the research from the Imperial’s department of medicine.

“We have taken the job done by this equipment, which is the size of a large photocopier, and shrunk it down to a USB chip.”

The test, which uses a mobile phone chip, requires a drop of blood to be placed onto a spot on the USB stick. Any HIV in the sample triggers an acidity change, which the chip transforms into an electrical signal. This is sent to the USB stick, which shows the result on a computer or electronic device.

Published in the journal Scientific Reports, results showed the stick test was 95 percent accurate over 991 blood samples, and the average time to produce a reading was 20.8 minutes.

Some 36 million people worldwide are infected with the human deficiency virus (HIV) that causes AIDS, and the majority of them live in sub-Saharan Africa.

Current AIDS drugs, called anti-retrovirals, reduce virus levels in a patients blood to near zero.

But in some cases the drugs stop working - sometimes because virus has developed resistance to them - and the first sign of that would be a rise in a patient’s so-called “viral load”.

Virus levels can’t be detected by routine HIV tests, which can only show whether or not a person has the virus.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Readers are told “current tests to detect virus levels take at least three days and involve sending a blood sample to a laboratory,” which is basic but we’ll mark this one satisfactory. However, knowing how often the WHO recommends viral-load tests be taken, and how sensitive and specific they are, would have made this story stronger.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Fennel extract, herbal tea and sugar water relieved colic in some infants better than a placebo, according to a new study that reviewed clinical trials of alternative remedies for colic.

But parents shouldn't get their hopes up too high. All of the trials reviewed had "major limitations," such as having too few patients, relying on parental reports of symptoms, or the study design (such as not being double-blinded).

"The notion that any form of complementary and alternative medicine is effective for infantile colic currently is not supported from the evidence from the included randomized clinical trials," the researchers from the United Kingdom wrote. "Additional replications are needed before firm conclusions can be drawn."

But because fennel extract, certain herbal teas and sugar water are generally safe, and because the research does suggest babies may benefit, pediatricians said they would feel comfortable recommending them to parents.

"It's reasonable for parents to consider those kinds of interventions for which there is some suggestion of benefit but no known risks," said Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York.

The study, published in the April print issue of Pediatrics, appears online March 28.

Colic usually starts when a baby is about three weeks old, said Dr. Ari Brown, a pediatrician in Austin, Texas, and author of the Expecting 411 book series. Colic is usually defined as excessive and inconsolable crying for at least three hours a day for more than three days a week over more than three weeks.

"It's miserable for both baby and the parents," Brown said. "And although we've been studying it for years, no one has figured out what the cause is, which makes it all the more difficult to treat."

In the United States, between 5 and 19 percent of infants are estimated to have colic, according to background information in the article.

Because pediatricians can't offer parents much help with it -- for the most part, babies grow out of colic in time -- desperate parents often turn to alternative or complementary treatments, according to the study.

In the review, the study authors searched various databases of medical research and chose 15 randomized clinical trials involving alternative treatments for colic. The studies were published between 1991 and 2008, came from 10 different countries and included a total of 944 children.

Several studies looked at spinal manipulation by a chiropractor. In three of those studies, parents reported their children cried significantly less afterwards. But those studies were small and flawed, so no conclusions can be made about the technique, according to the new review.

Three studies looked at herbal supplements. One found improvement in infants given fennel extract compared to infants given a placebo; another found that infants given a tea containing chamomile, vervain, licorice, fennel and balm-mint seemed to work; while a third found infants given a tea containing fennel, lemon balm and chamomile cried less than infants given a placebo.

Fennel, an intestinal "antispasmodic," may increase the speed at which food moves through the intestine, Brown said. This may help if the underlying cause of colic is cramping or discomfort due to an immature digestive tract, although that is just a theory, Brown added.

Two studies looked at giving babies solutions of sugar water, which some researchers believe has pain-killing properties. The parents of babies given sugar water reported significantly less crying. (If parents want to try it, they could deliver sugar water in a dropper, or put a small amount in a bottle, Adesman said.)

A study of probiotics, which are reputed to help digestion, found that 95 percent of infants given L. reuteria probiotics seemed to reduce their average crying time compared to 7 percent of babies given simethicone, which is marketed to relieve gas under the brand names Mylicon and PediaCare Infants' Gas Relief.

"This is pertinent given that simethicone is considered the best available and most commonly prescribed treatment for colic, although it previously has been shown to be no more effective than the placebo," according to the authors.

Brown said the strength of that finding suggests L. reuteria is worth further study.

One study found no difference in improvement of symptoms between infants whose parents were taught to do infant massage compared to infants put in a crib that vibrated. Nor did soy-enriched formula seem to help.

A small study of babies given reflexology showed some improvement, but there was no difference in whether the reflexology targeted the feet, which are considered to be therapeutic for colic, or other parts of the body.

This implies the improvement may "have more to do with the therapeutic effect of touch than the actual therapy itself," Dr. Edzard Ernst, of the department of complementary medicine at Peninsula Medical School, Universities of Exeter and Plymouth, in the United Kingdom, and colleagues wrote in the report.

The Nemours Foundation has more on colic.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This story compared all of the different therapies under review, unlike the MSNBC site’s “Today Moms” story, which narrowly focused on herbal tea. For example, the story quotes the paper saying, ‘This is pertinent given that simethicone is considered the best available and most commonly prescribed treatment for colic, although it previously has been shown to be no more effective than the placebo,’ according to the authors.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Regional cooperation among hospitals on a potentially lifesaving treatment for people who collapse from sudden cardiac arrest is in doubt because MetroHealth Medical Center and Cleveland Emergency Medical Services do not support it.

In Columbus, New York City and several other cities, ambulances take cardiac arrest patients whose hearts have been restarted by electric shock, but who remain unconscious, to hospitals that provide a cooling therapy that lowers the body temperature.

Most of these patients die from brain damage but doctors have found that lowering body temperature by about 8 degrees for 12 to 24 hours protects the brain and can save lives.

Doctors at University Hospitals Case Medical Center are pushing for a systemwide approach to get these patients to hospitals that provide cooling therapy. But MetroHealth and Cleveland EMS officials say they aren't convinced the therapy is proven enough to rewrite the book on cardiac arrest treatment.



The American Heart Association recommended cooling for most cardiac arrest survivors after two small studies in Australia and Europe, published in 2002, showed a clear benefit. The therapy is targeted to patients stricken by ventricular fibrillation, an electrical disturbance that causes the heart's pumping chambers to quiver instead of pump. It's the most common cause of sudden cardiac arrest.

Many hospitals and cities have been slow to adopt the heart association recommendations.

Dr. Arie Blitz, a UH heart surgeon and president of the heart association's Cleveland chapter, is calling for a Columbus-like system here.

Columbus rescue workers start the cooling process with cold saline IV's and ice packs placed in the armpits and groin. Hospitals take over with more sophisticated cooling equipment. Some Cleveland-area hospitals have looked at inflatable suits that circulate cold water.

"I am still amazed that lots of physicians are not aware of the technology," Blitz said in an e-mail. "And if they are aware, they are not using it."

Despite often heroic efforts to save cardiac arrest victims with CPR and defibrillation, two out of three who regain a pulse but don't wake up don't survive to hospital discharge. Even those who do are often neurologically impaired.

"In the past, we thought this was a hopeless cause," said Dr. Michael DeGeorgia, UH's director of neuro-intensive care and a proponent of cooling therapy. "We know now there's a lot we can do about it. Now we cool patients and they walk and talk and go home."

Doctors say they don't fully understand why cooling works. But the process protects the brain from damage caused by a cascade of biochemical reactions that occur when circulation is restored.

UH is working out procedures for its emergency department and Cleveland Heights EMS crews. The Cleveland Clinic is also looking at cooling equipment for all its system hospitals, said Dr. Thomas Tallman, an emergency doctor and Clinic EMS director.

But Dr. David Rosenbaum, director of MetroHealth's heart and vascular center, said there is not enough research data to justify a regional system. Rosenbaum, a heart rhythm specialist, also challenged whether cooling is a priority, considering that heartbeat is restored in only a small number of people who suffer cardiac arrest outside hospitals.

With more than 300,000 deaths a year in the United States from cardiac arrest, Rosenbaum said the focus should be on preventing deadly rhythm disturbances and improving access to defibrillation.

"The more upstream the interventions are, the greater impact they will have on sudden death," Rosenbaum said. Cooling "at best can have really a small impact on the bigger problem."

MetroHealth would play an important role in a coordinated system because of its high patient volume and its medical oversight of Cleveland EMS.

Cleveland EMS Commissioner Edward Eckart said based on advice from Dr. Thomas Collins, city EMS medical director and a MetroHealth emergency doctor, the city has no plans to carry cooling equipment or transport patients only to hospitals that provide the therapy.

Eckart said the city has not been approached about starting a program, but he agrees the medical research on lives saved is not strong enough to shift gears. The city now takes cardiac arrest survivors to the closest hospital capable of emergency angioplasty (a treatment for heart attacks, which often happen in tandem with cardiac arrest).

A regional approach to cooling "is not something we believe right now is worth taking on," Eckart said.

Cooling therapy is part of a larger push to improve dismal survival rates from cardiac arrest.

Chances of surviving depends largely on where you live. For example, patients treated in large, urban teaching hospitals have better odds than those treated elsewhere, according to research from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine published last month.

And people in cities that have pushed cardiac arrest as a public health imperative - focusing on bystander CPR training, defibrillation programs and EMS response - also fare better.

Cities such as Seattle report survival rates above 35 percent for ventricular fibrillation arrests - the type that can be corrected with defibrillation. But the national average is about 4 percent.

In 2007, UH's Blitz, calling the gap in survival rates an embarrassment, pressed Cleveland hospitals and EMS officials to join a national program to track outcomes and improve survival. City officials do not know the survival rate here, according to a spokeswoman. But she said Cleveland plans to join the national program, which is supported by the heart association and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Columbus is already part of the program, called Cardiac Arrest Registry to Enhance Survival. The city's survival rate is 12 percent, and it is expected to improve with a citywide cooling program adopted last July, said Dr. David Keseg, the Columbus EMS medical director.

Columbus handles about 500 cardiac arrests a year. "All our hospitals have signed on to cooling, so we haven't had to establish resuscitation centers," Keseg said. Asked about outcomes, he said results won't be available until the program reaches one year.

Though it's not unusual to have debate over new therapies, the benefits of induced hypothermia is not a new discovery. Napoleon's medics were said to ice soldiers to preserve injured limbs 200 years ago. Cooling was tested as far back as the 1950's for cardiac arrest survivors. Today it's used routinely to reduce complications of heart surgeries, and it has shown promise for stroke and spinal injuries.

Blitz uses a cooling device during some surgeries, and he has received research money from the device-maker, Alsius Corp. of Irvine, Calif.

Blitz said debate should be aired publicly, and he is not rattled by opposition to plans for a regional approach.

"I think the data shows that for patients who have cardiac arrest and are not waking up, there's very little downside," he added. "Why not offer them something?"
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story listed several alternative infrastructure investments that might contribute to the enhanced survival of individuals who suffer ventricular fibrillation in a non-hospital setting.  The story mentioned bystander CPR training programs, defibrillation programs and EMS response as alternative investments to cooling apparatus.  
The story would have been much more valuable to readers had it included information about the size of the benefit and the costs involved with each of these as compared to cooling equipment in emergency departments. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 12, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- People taking popular cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins may have a slightly lower risk than others of developing Parkinson's disease, new research suggests.

This effect may be even more pronounced among people younger than 60, according to the study published in the March issue of Archives of Neurology.

However, the risk reduction was modest and may have been due to chance, the authors said, noting that more research is warranted, especially because statins can cause adverse side effects.

"There is no clear verdict," said Dr. Stuart Isaacson, director of the Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center of Boca Raton, who was not involved in the study.

"Right now we don't have any good evidence that there is anything we can do to reduce the risk of developing Parkinson's disease, but research is ongoing," added Isaacson, also an associate professor of neurology at Florida International University's Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine in Miami.

For the study, researchers led by Dr. Xiang Gao, of Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard University School of Public Health in Boston, analyzed data on more than 38,000 men and almost 91,000 women enrolled in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study and the Nurses' Health Study in 1994.

During 12 years of follow-up, 644 people were diagnosed with Parkinson's disease. People taking cholesterol-lowering drugs, especially those younger than 60, were less likely to develop the neurological disorder than those not using cholesterol drugs, the researchers found.

Nearly one million people in the United States have Parkinson's disease, a chronic and progressive movement disorder, and no one knows what causes it.

The researchers can't say exactly how -- or even if -- statins reduce the risk of Parkinson's. It's thought these drugs may have potent anti-inflammatory effects, which could protect the brain.

The study had some limitations, the authors acknowledged. For example, only about 70 percent of people who were taking drugs to lower cholesterol were actually on statins at the study's start.

Dr. Roy Alcalay, an assistant professor of neurology at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City, said it is way too early to say that statins lower risk for Parkinson's disease. "This is a promising avenue for future research," said Alcalay, an advisor for the Parkinson's Disease Foundation.

But there is some good news, he added. The data are compelling evidence that statins are not detrimental for people with or at risk of Parkinson's disease, he said. There was a concern that statins could be harmful as they might lower the level of coenzyme Q10 in the blood. Co-Q10, an antioxidant, is thought to have benefits for people with Parkinson's disease.

"If you need to be on statins for your heart, it is not going to increase your risk for Parkinson's," Alcalay said.

Learn more about Parkinson's disease and its symptoms at the Parkinson's Disease Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: At the moment there are no alternative strategies to reduce the risk of developing Parkinson’s.  Dr. Isaacson’s comment, “Right now we don’t have any good evidence that there is anything we can do to reduce the risk of developing Parkinson’s disease, but research is ongoing,” says it all.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Although Vicks VapoRub is often used to fight colds and congestion, there has never been proof of how well it works. Now, new research reported in the journal Pediatrics finds, the combination of camphor, menthol and eucalyptus oils actually does ease cold symptoms and help children suffering from upper-respiratory infections sleep.

In the study, funded by an unrestricted research grant from Procter & Gamble, makers of Vicks, researchers took 138 children between the ages of 2 and 11, with symptoms like cough, congestion, runny nose and restless sleep that lasted seven days or more. Only children with moderate cough and severe stuffy nose were eligible, and those were divided into three groups.

Some were treated with Vicks, some with a placebo consisting of petroleum jelly and others got no treatment at all. Parents were surveyed the day before treatment about the severity of their child's symptoms. That night, 30 minutes before bedtime, Vicks or petroleum jelly was rubbed onto the child's chest and neck. The next day parents were questioned about their child's symptoms overnight.

Children in all three groups got better, but those treated with the VapoRub saw the greatest improvement, and parents in this group also had improved sleep, the study found.

"The American Academy of Pediatrics says the currently available oral cough and cold medications are not effective for children and have the potential for side effects, " said Dr. Ian Paul, principal investigator and associate professor of pediatrics and public health sciences, Penn State College of Medicine. "This was based in part on some of the studies that we have conducted at Penn State. The current study shows that Vaporub is more effective than placebo."

Paul is on Procter & Gamble's advisory board but holds no stock in the company and will not profit financially.

Where's the line between research and marketing?

Twenty of the 44 children in the vapor rub group suffered mild side effects including skin irritation and burning sensation of the eyes and nose. There were no side effects in the two other groups.

Dr. Jennifer Shu, a practicing pediatrician and CNNHealth's Living Well expert, uses Vicks for her family. "I have found that when used properly it can be a good option for parents who want to relieve some cold symptoms in their children. Parents get frustrated with the FDA recommendations not to use cold medicines in kids under the age of 4 because they are left with few options. Vicks is used topically on the skin, it's not ingested and is not included in these FDA guidelines."

Shu says when used properly, Vicks appears to be safe. But as with any product, parents need to read the instructions carefully and keep medicines out of the reach of children. Vicks VapoRub is not recommend for children under the age of 2.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 


The story points out that there have been growing concerns about other over-the-counter cold remedies for children. It also reports that the children who were not given any treatment also felt better the next day.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - - Exhausted shift workers may be safer driving home at night when they’re exposed to bright light before they hit the road, a small study suggests.

To test the effect of light therapy on driving, researchers did a series of three experiments with 19 adults. In two scenarios, participants spent a night being sleep-deprived in a lab and then spent 45 minutes in dim or bright light before a driving test. For a third test, people got a good nights’ sleep at home and then went to the lab for 45 minutes of bright light exposure before a driving test.

After sleep deprivation in the lab, five people exposed to dim light therapy got in car accidents during the driving simulations. None of the people who slept at home crashed, and neither did any of the sleep-deprived people who got bright light therapy before getting behind the wheel, the study found.

“We experience severe sleepiness toward the end of the night shift, and this may overlap with our commute time,” said senior study author Dr. Ralph Mistlberger of Simon Fraser University in British Columbia, Canada.

“Sleep deprivation makes this worse of course, and together with the clock, this conspires to impair our ability to sustain attention to task (e.g., driving), and avoid distraction, and react quickly to external stimuli like traffic lights, brake lights in front of you, road signs, etc,” Mistlberger added by email.

Sleepiness is a leading risk factor for automobile accidents because it can make drivers less vigilant, slow reaction times and dull cognitive abilities, researchers note in Sleep Medicine.

Shift workers with chronic sleep deprivation also face an increased risk of accidents. Strategies like drinking coffee or soda, napping before a drive or blasting music or rolling down the windows in the car may help increase alertness behind the wheel, but none of these strategies is fool-proof.

For the current study, researchers wanted to see if bright light might help reduce driving impairments related to sleep deprivation.

They found participants had lower body temperatures after spending a sleep-deprived night in the lab, as well as longer reaction times and increased sleepiness.

Exposure to bright light didn’t appear to improve reaction times or sleepiness. But light was associated with better driving.

Beyond its small size, other limitations of the study include the reliance on lab conditions for sleep deprivation and light exposure, which may not match what shift workers would experience on the job, the authors note.

“There is evidence that the use of bright light at the office (or even at home directly prior to beginning the work shift) may be beneficial in preventing sleep deprivation-related motor vehicle collisions,” said Russell Griffin, a researcher at the University of Alabama at Birmingham who wasn’t involved in the study.

“That said, there is not enough evidence to date to fully suggest the use of bright light therapy to avoid collision,” Griffin added by email.

The proven way to avoid the effects of sleepiness on the road is to consistently get enough sleep, said Dr. Flaura Koplin Winston, a researcher at the University of Pennsylvania and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia who wasn’t involved in the study.

“Drowsy driving is perhaps the most under-recognized cause of serious crashes and sadly, the evidence is not there on how to counter it,” Winston said by email.

More research is needed on the potential of bright light therapy to make exhausted drivers safer, said Dr. Donald Redelmeier, a researcher at the University of Toronto who wasn’t involved in the study.

But there are still things drivers can do now to stay safer on the road.

“Safety strategies while driving can include minimizing distractions, stopping at stop signs, respecting speed limits, yielding right-of-way, buckling a seatbelt, signaling all turns and not driving after drinking alcohol,” Redelmeier said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: An independent source notes that the only “proven” way to avoid the effects of drowsiness when driving is “to consistently get enough sleep.”  Other strategies for remaining alert behind the wheel are also mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATLANTA--A novel class of antimicrobials that inhibits the function of a key disease-causing component of bacteria could be effective in fighting methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), one of the major drug-resistant bacterial pathogens, according to researchers at Georgia State University.

Their study showed that small molecule analogs that target the functions of SecA, a central part of the general bacterial secretion system required for viability and virulence, have potent antimicrobial activities, reduce the secretion of toxins and can overcome the effect of efflux pumps, which are responsible for multi-drug resistance.

Their findings indicate that targeting SecA is an attractive antimicrobial strategy against MRSA and may be several times more effective than the antibiotics now available for treating the infection.

MRSA causes serious hospital and community-acquired infections. Healthcare-associated MRSA infections are typically linked to invasive procedures or devices, such as surgeries, intravenous tubing or artificial joints. Community-acquired MRSA often begins as a skin boil and is spread by skin-to-skin contact. Individuals at risk include competitive wrestlers, child care workers and those living in crowded conditions.

"We've found that SecA inhibitors are broad-spectrum antimicrobials and are very effective against strains of bacteria that are resistant to existing antibiotics," said Binghe Wang, Regents' Professor of Chemistry at Georgia State, Georgia Research Alliance Eminent Scholar in Drug Discovery and Georgia Cancer Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholar. He co-led the study with Phang C. Tai, Regents' Professor of Biology at Georgia State, who is an expert on the functions of SecA in bacteria. Their findings were published in the journal Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry in November.

Because of the widespread resistance of bacteria to antibiotics on the market, there is an urgent need for the development of new antimicrobials. MRSA infection is caused by a type of Staphylococcus bacteria that has become resistant to many antibiotics used to treat ordinary staph infections, according to the Mayo Clinic.

In previous work, the researchers developed novel small molecule SecA inhibitors active against the bacteria strains Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis by dissecting a SecA inhibitor called Rose Bengal (RB).

In this study, they evaluated two potent RB analogs for their activity against MRSA strains. The RB analogs inhibited the ATPase activities of two SecA isoforms identified in S. aureus, SaSecA1 and SaSecA2, as well as the SaSecA1-dependent protein-conducting channel. The inhibitors also reduced the secretion of three toxins from S. aureus and stopped three MRSA strains of bacteria from reproducing.

The best inhibitor in this group, SCA-50, showed strong activity against MRSA Mu50 strain and an inhibitory effect on MRSA Mu50 that was two-to-60 times more potent than all commonly used antibiotics, including vancomycin, the last resort option for treating MRSA-related infections.

In a study recently published online in the journal ChemMedChem, the researchers synthesized and evaluated another new class of triazole-pyrimidine analogs as SecA inhibitors. This study also confirmed that SecA inhibitors have the potential for being broad-spectrum antimicrobials, can directly block virulence factor production and can null the effect of efflux pumps.

Collaborators for the paper published in Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry include Hsiuchin Yang, Hao Zhang, Krishna Damera, Ying-Hsin Hsieh, Arpana Sagwal Chaudhary, Jianmei Cui and Jinshan Jin of Georgia State.

The study is funded by the National Institutes of Health and Georgia State's Center for Biotechnology and Drug Design and Molecular Basis of Diseases Program.

The ChemMedChem study is available at http://dx. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that there are antibiotics currently used to treat MRSA infections. More detail regarding the effectiveness of these antibiotics and rates of antibiotic resistance would have been welcome.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SAN DIEGO -- Mayo Clinic researchers have found that an oral drug, apixaban, used to treat blood clots in patients undergoing cancer therapy, is safe and effective. The drug was associated with fewer major bleeding events and fewer recurrent blood clots, compared to low-molecular- weight heparin. Their findings were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Hematology by Robert McBane II M.D., a Mayo Clinic cardiologist.

"Nearly 1 in 5 patients with cancer will develop a clot in the veins, referred to as either a deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism," says Dr. McBane. "Clotting events can be deadly with pulmonary embolism being the second most common cause of death in cancer patients."

While twice-daily injections of low-molecular-weight heparin has been the traditional treatment of choice for cancer patients who suffer a venous clot, Dr. McBane notes that there are numerous limitations to this therapy. "These injections can be painful and cause considerable bruising at the injection site. Injections are expensive at nearly $100 per day. And cancer patients may experience low platelet counts and be at risk for a clotting disorder called 'heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.'" Dr. McBane noted that cancer and cancer treatment can be associated with kidney injury, which can limit the drug's use further. Finally, Dr. McBane says there isn't is a good antidote for this medication should a bleeding problem arise.

"More recently, a number of new blood thinners called 'direct oral anticoagulants' have become available," says Dr. McBane. "As a class, these drugs have a number of advantages, including oral delivery, lack of interactions with foods or other medications, and the lack of a need for monitoring drug levels." He says these qualities make this class of drug much easier to use than the traditional blood thinners. However, it was unclear whether these drugs could be used safely in cancer patients until now.

Dr. McBane says quality of life surveys, which were taken monthly throughout the six-month trial, showed that patients markedly preferred oral apixaban over injectable dalteparin. "We are hopeful that this medication will also improve medication compliance in cancer patients requiring blood thinner therapy."

As a leading institution funded by the National Cancer Institute, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center conducts basic, clinical and population science research, translating discoveries into improved methods for prevention, diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. For information on cancer clinical trials, call the Clinical Trials Referral Office at 1-855-776-0015 (toll-free).

Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization committed to clinical practice, education and research, providing expert, comprehensive care to everyone who needs healing. Learn more about Mayo Clinic. Visit the Mayo Clinic News Network.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release compares apixaban to low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), although as mentioned above it does not discuss any harms of apixaban or quantify any of the health benefits with numbers. It does do a good job, however, of discussing possible problems with LMWH and why apixaban might be a good alternative medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two groups of scientists presented results at an HIV conference on Monday suggesting that a vaginal ring could prevent HIV transmission in women. In both studies, the ring lowered HIV cases by about 30%, though its effectiveness appears to be much better for women who used the ring consistently.

The ring contains an antiretroviral medication called dapivirine, which prevents HIV from making copies of itself. In the ring, the drug is used as “pre-exposure prophylaxis,” or PrEP, slowly leaching out in the vagina and preventing the virus from taking hold in nearby cells.

One of the new studies, published today in the New England Journal of Medicine, tested the ring in more than 2,600 women in four countries — Malawi, SouthAfrica, Uganda, and Zimbabwe — over nearly two years. At the end of the study, the group of volunteers who had used the dapivirine ring had 27% fewer HIV infections than a control group who had a placebo ring with no drug, the study found.

Looking by age, the researchers saw that the ring did not seem to help women younger than 21. But among women over the age of 21 who used it, new HIV cases went down by 61%.

The other study, which has not yet been published but was presented on Monday at the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections meeting in Boston, studied 2,000 women in South Africa and Uganda. Like the other study, in this one the ring had no visible effect in women younger than 21, whereas new HIV cases dropped by 37% in women over 21.

These age differences are probably due in part to how the women used the drug, the researchers say. Much like the contraceptive NuvaRing, the dapivirine ring should be kept in every day and replaced once a month for maximum effectiveness.

“If used perfectly, how much HIV protection could there be? We don’t know that yet,” Jared Baeten, professor of global health, medicine, and epidemiology at the University of Washington and lead author on the study, told BuzzFeed News.

Adherence is also a big issue for the only other PrEP on the market, a once-a-day pill called Truvada. Initial trials for the pill showed it led to a 44% decrease in HIV infection rates overall. But it’s now known that, when taken properly, Truvada cuts new cases of HIV by at least 92%. Because of its high effectiveness, the CDC has since recommended that 1 in 4 gay and bisexual men should be prescribed the drug to prevent the spread of HIV.

The ring adds a new HIV prevention tool, which some experts say will be particularly useful in African countries where women are at highest risk for HIV infection. More than half of the 35 million people living with HIV worldwide are women, and the vast majority live in sub-Saharan Africa.

“A prevention tool like a ring could be used discreetly, a woman would have control over it, and it could allow her to keep herself safe from HIV without having to ask a male partner to take on prevention strategies,” Baeten said. “That individual control of prevention is so powerful.”

The dapivirine ring has been in development for more than a decade, and the the new studies are the first to show that it prevents HIV transmission. Still, experts caution that the ring should not be a woman’s sole source of protection.

“There is absolute reason to celebrate. But 27% is a lower number than any of us would like to see,” Mitchell Warren, executive director of AVAC, a global HIV-prevention advocacy group, told BuzzFeed News.

“We obviously always want higher numbers. But 1 in 3 infections were prevented overall — and that’s huge.”

Warren noted that other rings with antiretrovirals are also being developed, as well as rings that could offer multipurpose protection, against not only HIV but pregnancy.

Like birth control, the more types of HIV prevention, the better, experts say.

“For some women, a pill every day might work really well. For others, that may be not achievable,” Baeten said. “Pills and rings should be sitting next to each other as options.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: A discussion of the alternatives is a real strength in the article. It mentions other rings in development as well as the Truvada pill which offers some protection against HIV, and examines some pros and cons of the different methods.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She could continue taking the 13 pills a day she needed to control her Parkinson's disease, along with dealing with the side effects. Or she could allow doctors to implant two long, thin electrodes deep into her brain, along with an electrical generator about the size of an iPod in her chest.

In August 2007, Wolter, 63, underwent the surgery at Froedtert Hospital in Wauwatosa, and her life has improved dramatically.

A study released online Tuesday concluded that so-called deep brain stimulation was substantially more effective in treating Parkinson's than the best drug therapy, but it also carried a much greater risk of serious adverse side effects.

The results come at time when a growing number of people are reaching their late 50s and early 60s, when they are most likely to be diagnosed with the disease, which affects between 500,000 and 1.5 million Americans.

"We are on the verge of an epidemic," said Erwin Montgomery, a professor of neurology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The six-month study, which involved 255 people, found that those who underwent surgery had 4.6 more hours each day of good control of their symptoms than those who got the best drug therapy.

"That's huge," said lead author Fran Weaver, a researcher with the Hines VA Hospital in Hines, Ill.

She said the best drugs provide only one to two hours of added improvement, or "on time."

Those who got the therapy also had significantly more improvement in other measures of symptoms, according to the study that will appear today in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

However, they were 3.8 times more likely to experience a serious adverse event, such as an infection, falls, nervous system or psychiatric disorders, or a problem with the device. Forty-nine of the deep brain stimulation patients, or 40%, had 82 serious adverse events, compared with 11% of the drug patients, who had 19 serious adverse events.

Weaver said 99% of the adverse events were resolved within six months, including some cases in which an infection required the removal of the generator from the chest.

There also was one death related to the surgery involving a patient who had bleeding in the brain, went into a coma and died several days later, she said.

Deep brain stimulation also is expensive. At Froedtert Hospital the procedure costs about $120,000, an amount that generally is covered by Medicare and private insurance.

The hospital has done about 300 of the procedures since 2005, said Brad Hiner, an associate professor of neurology at the Medical College of Wisconsin and neurologic director of the hospital's deep brain stimulation program.

"This (the JAMA study) is the largest, most complete and thorough analysis of deep brain stimulation to date," Hiner said.

Some neurologists remain unconvinced about the benefits of the therapy.

"You are doing something pretty invasive," said Paul Nausieda, director of the Regional Parkinson's Center at Aurora Sinai Medical Center in Milwaukee. "It's got too many downside issues."

Nausieda said much of the benefit found in the study could be due to a placebo effect.

Beyond that, doctors need to do a better job of optimizing drug therapy, he said, noting that there are thousands of potential combinations of drugs that can be used to control symptoms.

Nausieda said that of the more than 5,000 Parkinson's patients he has seen, only about 100 were candidates for deep brain stimulation.

"It's certainly not a breakthrough," he said.

Still, deep brain stimulation and several other potential therapies in the growing field of neurostimulation have created a buzz in the medical community.

Clinical trials involving different forms of neurostimulation are looking into its effectiveness in treating a range of disorders, including epilepsy, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and tinnitus, although doctors acknowledge they don't know how the treatments actually work.

In a sense it's a field of science that works backward: Stimulation is applied to the brain, some people get better, and doctors try to figure out why.

"We haven't the foggiest notion," said UW's Montgomery. "(But) we used aspirin long before we knew how it worked. God watches out for fools and little children. We are blessed that we have this therapy."

The problem with deep brain stimulation is that many doctors are not aware of its benefits or don't know how to determine the appropriate patients based on risks vs. potential benefits, he said.

Up to 15% of Parkinson's patients are good candidates for the therapy, but only 2% get it, he said.

Deep brain stimulation is not an option for the 20% to 30% of Parkinson's patients who also have dementia, said Hiner, of Froedtert Hospital.

He said the best candidates are those whose medications are not working well or are causing too many side effects.

Wolter, who lives in Oconomowoc, fit that profile well. She was diagnosed with the disease in 1997 after she developed a slight limp.

She was put on an increasing number of medications, which eventually caused side effects.

At times, she said, she felt incredibly fidgety.

"I'd take my pills and feel good for a while, but I never knew when they would wear off," she said. "I don't know what was worse: the medications or the disease."

She said she worried about having the surgery, but it got to the point where she felt as though she had run out of options.

In the nearly year and a half since having the surgery, her condition has improved substantially, she said.

Her medication use has dropped dramatically and "my body has calmed down," she said. "I can do what everybody does."

In April she went to Disney World with her two daughters and grandchildren and was able to walk around the park.

The study was paid for by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and Medtronic, the company that makes the device used in the study.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story makes it clear that the alternative to surgery is a cocktail of medications, which have their limitations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Middle-aged women may find some relief from hot flashes and other menopause problems with soy supplements, according to Chinese researchers.

They found daily supplements of soy germ isoflavones reduced the sudden sweats more than inactive placebo pills after six months.

But a U.S. expert wasn’t convinced by the results, which run counter to other published studies.

“The majority of them are showing no benefit,” said William W. Wong, a nutrition researcher at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston who wasn’t involved in the new work.

The new study, published in the journal Menopause, is based on 90 Chinese women. A third of them received placebo pills made of starch, while the rest took soy germ isoflavones, either 84 or 126 milligrams a day.

They all kept diaries of their hot flashes and filled out questionnaires about various problems tied to menopause, including hot flashes, sweating, insomnia, tiredness and headache.

At six months, their Kupperman scores — a measure of symptom severity that ranges from 0 to 63 — had dropped by more than 40 percent from an initial value of about 25 in the soy groups.

The number of hot flashes also fell from about 20 a week to less than 10.

While the same pattern was seen in the placebo group, it was less pronounced. Their symptom score dropped by 29 percent and the number of hot flashes by 35 percent, according to Dr. Yan-bin Ye of Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou.

The work was supported by Frutarom Netherlands, which also donated the supplements.

Wong cautioned that the new study was small and that the women involved only had few hot flashes. He said it was “hard to believe” that soy would have an effect on these women.

In one of his own studies, Wong found no effect on soy germ isoflavones among women who took the supplements for two years.

The standard drug treatment for stubborn menopause symptoms is hormone replacement therapy. But doctors and women have become increasingly wary of that option because of serious side effects such as increased risk for heart attack, stroke and breast cancer.

“It is something they need to gauge, is it worth the risk?” Wong told Reuters Health.

He generally recommends exercise and an active lifestyle to women who feel bothered by menopause.

Soy supplements also have side effects such as nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the National Institutes of Health. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

Wong said that in Asia, women tend to think of menopause problems as a natural part of life — not a medical problem.

“There is a major cultural difference in how we deal with menopause symptoms,” he mused.

The new study didn’t find significant hormone changes in women who took soy supplements, and Wong said the compounds are probably safe for women.

“Consuming soy is not bad for them,” Wong noted, “but it might be a waste of money if you don’t see any benefit.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story states that “The standard drug treatment for stubborn menopause symptoms is hormone replacement therapy. But doctors and women have become increasingly wary of that option because of serious side effects such as increased risk for heart attack, stroke and breast cancer.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Premature labor is a serious and hard-to-predict problem. This test might help.

"Those molecules will circulate in the blood for some time, they can be measured, and you can see the contributions from essentially every tissue in the body," senior investigator Stephen Quake told BuzzFeed News. "When you are pregnant you can see the contribution from the placenta and the fetus," said Quake, a professor of bioengineering and applied physics at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California.

Both tests use cell-free RNA (cfRNA), which are snippets of genetic material released by cells when genes are active. They float around in the mother's bloodstream and can be picked up by blood tests.

However, a new blood test — which is still experimental and not yet available outside of a research lab — can pick up on gene activity in the body that suggests a pregnancy is at risk for preterm delivery, according to a study published Thursday in the journal Science . The researchers also found a similar type of blood test could determine gestational age, which is used to calculate the due date of the baby. Currently, gestational age is calculated in the first trimester using ultrasound, and it's not that accurate if used later in pregnancy.

Pregnancies are usually about 40 weeks, and a premature birth is when a baby arrives three or more weeks early. This happens in about 9% of all deliveries and it can be seriously risky for the infant ; they can have all kinds of complications, including lung problems, brain hemorrhages, and infections.

The scientists analyzed 20,000 genes to find the ones that were active during pregnancy and labor.

They identified seven cfRNAs that seemed to be associated with premature birth, and in a test of 38 women, they found that they could predict premature birth up to two months in advance.

All the women were at risk for premature labor because they had early contractions or a previous preterm delivery, and 13 did indeed go on to have a premature baby.

In a subgroup of women, the test accurately classified 4 of 5 preterm deliveries as being at-risk, and incorrectly suggested that 3 of 18 women who had a full-term pregnancy were at risk for early labor.

In a test of 31 healthy pregnant women, testing for nine cfRNAs seemed roughly as accurate as an ultrasound at measuring gestational age. An ultrasound has a 48% accuracy rate at predicting a due date that's within two weeks of a baby's actual birth, while the blood test was 45% accurate. The test, if it does turn out to work in clinical trials, would be cheaper than ultrasound, said Quake.

"It might be tens or hundreds of dollars, rather than thousands," he said.

There's a lot more work to be done before these tests becomes available, including clinical trials. The studies were small and included only black or white women, but not other ethnicities. But the findings are promising, particularly because premature delivery is such a serious problem.

"Preterm birth is the leading cause of neonatal death, it’s a huge problem," Quake said. If doctors know someone is at risk for premature labor earlier in pregnancy, they might start efforts to help delay labor, such as recommending bed rest.

Quake became interested in the problem in part because his first child was born almost a month premature. She's now a healthy 16-year-old. "You realize, holy cow, that was a pretty risky thing that we had no control over and no sense that it was coming," he said.

"We’d like to see a bunch of lives saved, that’s really the goal here," Quake said. "There’s a lot of work left to do before we get to that point, but we are pretty energized and excited at this point."

The study was funded by the March of Dimes and other nonprofit sources, although Quake and his colleagues have filed for a patent on the test.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: BuzzFeed’s story establishes early on that ultrasound tests are the go-to method for determining pregnancies that are at-risk for preterm delivery, among other complications. It also gives the accuracy of that test as a measure (48%) and compares it to the experimental test’s accuracy (45%).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have developed a spit test that could identify the men most at risk of developing prostate cancer.

By testing a man’s DNA, researchers can look for genes linked to the disease, which one in seven men in the Western world will be diagnosed with in their lifetime.

Scientists in the U.K. and U.S. who helped piece together the study, published in Nature Genetics, found 63 new gene variants linked to prostate cancer. This was achieved by assessing the DNA of 80,000 prostate cancer patients and 61,000 men without the disease.

The resulting test hones in on these and the existing 100 known markers to pinpoint the 1 percent of men who are at six times greater risk of developing the condition, and the 10 percent of men who have a threefold greater risk of developing the disease, a study author told The Guardian.

The new method is being trialed on 300 men in doctors' offices across London, and is due to be expanded to 5,000 next year, according to BBC News.

If it is found to be effective, it could be an important tool for physicians. Although prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in the U.S. after lung, few risk factors have been found, and it is difficult to accurately diagnose.

Most men with prostate cancer do not experience symptoms. Doctors can use the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test to detect protein produced by prostate and cancerous cells, respectively. But as these antigens can be present in men without the cancer, it carries a risk of returning a false positive that can kick-start unnecessary, life-changing treatment. Rectal examinations and biopsies are also used to test for the disease.

According to the American Cancer Society, over 160,600 new cases of prostate cancer are diagnosed each year, and around 29,400 people die of the disease. The condition is rare in those below the age of 40; older men and African-Americans are most at risk. The majority of cases are caught at around 66.

Rosalind Eeles, an author of the study at the U.K.-based Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) who specializes in finding genetic variants that increase the risk of prostate cancer, told The Guardian the team is “excited by the test” because it can be used by doctors to offer patients targeted screenings.

Carl Alexander, a spokesman from the charity Cancer Research UK, said: “This study is an exciting example of how research can find clues in our genes to help us uncover those more likely to develop the disease. The next steps should be to understand how this research can be developed into tests that could identify men who might be more likely to develop aggressive cancers, and how this could be rolled out to patients.”

Dr. Iain Frame, the director of research at the charity Prostate Cancer UK, highlighted that men with a family history of prostate cancer are two-and-a-half times more likely to be diagnosed with the disease compared to a man with no family history.

"With Father’s Day fast approaching, use it as an opportunity to ask your dad, your brother, your uncle, your friends about their risk of prostate cancer. It’s a conversation that could save their life," he said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned family history as one way to flag men at greater risk of developing prostate cancer.
It mentioned PSA tests, rectal exams and biopsies as ways to test for the disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A vaccine against the Zika virus could one day be used to fight the deadly brain cancer that claimed the life of Senator John McCain, according to a study in mice.

Researchers used a vaccine against the mosquito-borne virus to kill human glioblastoma brain cells which had been implanted into rodents.

Glioblastoma is the most common and fastest growing form of astrocytoma; tumors which start in the glial cells of the brain.

Currently, most people diagnosed with the condition die within two years. Doctors can try to treat glioblastoma with surgery to remove the cancerous cells, and blast them with radiation and chemotherapy. However, as the disease spreads, it becomes difficult to differentiate healthy brain cells from cancerous glioblastoma stem cells, and the condition is therefore almost impossible to completely remove.

Read more: New prostate cancer DNA spit test developed by scientists

Each year, glioblastoma kills around 15,000 adults in the U.S. The condition recently made headlines as the disease that killed senator John McCain at the age of 81. Symptoms include recurring headaches, loss of appetite, blurred vision, vomiting, shifts in personality and the ability to learn, seizures and the gradual loss of speech.

“Thus, development of an effective therapy to kill glioblastoma stem cells is urgently needed,” Dr. Pei-Yong Shi, professor of genetics at the University of Texas Medical Branch and author of the study published in the journal mBio told Newsweek.

As both the Zika virus and glioblastoma can affect the brain, the team hypothesized that the former could be harnessed to treat the latter.

In 2015, countries in the Americas, including Brazil, as well as parts of Africa, were hit by a public health crisis following outbreaks of Zika and its link to encephalitis, a condition where the brain becomes swollen.

The majority of Zika cases result in a mild fever, rash, aches and pains, conjunctivitis and a headache. But if a pregnant woman becomes infected, the virus can target neural progenitor cells in her fetus, putting the infant at risk of being born with microcephaly. This is where the head develops smaller than normal.

The study showed that a live-attenuated Zika vaccine (containing a weakened version of the virus that does not cause disease in humans) could selectively infect and kill human glioblastoma stem cells, explained Shi. That’s because glioblastoma stem cells have similar properties to neural stem cells.

To investigate whether ZIKV-LAV, a vaccine developed at the University of Texas shown to protect mice and non-human primates against the virus, could kill human glioblastoma stem cells, the scientists injected a combination of glioblastoma stem cells from two human donors and the vaccine into mice.

The animals dosed only with the stem cells developed tumors. But those injected with the combination lived to around 50 days, 20 days longer than the stem cell mice.

When the team sequenced the RNA (a molecule that helps with gene expressions) of glioblastoma stem cells exposed to the vaccine and then those which weren’t, they found the virus prompted an antiviral reaction in the exposed cells in what is known as an oncolytic response.

Before undergoing surgery, cancer patients could be given the Zika vaccine to "let the viruses hunt down the GSCs [glioblastoma stem cells] and eliminate them,” said virologist Dr. Cheng-Feng Qin of the Chinese Academy of Military Medical Sciences in Beijing, who worked on the study.

Shi said: “Scientists may turn the 'bad' side of a devastating pathogen—Zika virus—for potential cancer therapy.”

However, he cautioned any potential treatment which could emerge from the study is far from being rolled out.

“We still need to further improve the specificity of the cancer-killing ability, while retain the safety of the vaccine strain,” Shi explained. “For example, we need to make sure that the therapeutic vaccine virus does not infect and kill normal neurons in humans.”

Dr. Harry Bulstrode, brain tumor expert funded by the charity Cancer Research U.K. who is researching how Zika could be used to treat aggressive brain tumors, who was not involved in the study, told Newsweek: "This study is another interesting piece in the jigsaw, but it is never going to demonstrate what we believe to be the really exciting properties of the virus. These are its ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and to selectively infect and concentrate in the brain tumor stem cells left behind after surgery."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Normal cancer treatments such as radiation, surgery, and chemotherapy are mentioned, and described as not successful in the long run against human glioblastoma brain cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Diseases like Alzheimer’s start years, even decades, before the first symptoms of memory loss shows up. And with rates of those diseases rising, experts say that more primary care physicians—not neurology experts—will have the task of identifying these patients early so they can take advantage of whatever early interventions might be available.

“If we had a simple blood test, a cholesterol test for Alzheimer’s disease, that would help,” says Dr. Ronald Petersen, director of the Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center at the Mayo Clinic, “but we don’t.” But Petersen has a potential solution, and according to a new paper released Wednesday in the journal , his Alzheimer’s test has promise.

Petersen and his team wanted to develop a test that any physician can administer to patients, without the need for any new technology or expensive equipment. Petersen believes that the test they came up with could become a useful tool for any physician, even those without special training in the brain. “What we are trying to do is give them some help so they can be as efficient as possible without ignoring these important cognitive issues,” he says.

In the first phase of the test, his researchers simply collected information from 1,500 patients’ medical charts—their age, family history of Alzheimer’s, factors such as diabetes or smoking that have been linked to Alzheimer’s, and whether the patient had ever reported problems with memory.

In the next phase they studied the results of the patient’s basic mental exam as well as of a psychiatric evaluation, because depression and anxiety have been connected to Alzheimer’s.

And another factor that emerged as important in developing the disease—how quickly the participant could walk a short distance. “We were a little surprised,” says Petersen. “But what’s nice about it is that it’s a nice non-cognitive, motor factor so it’s looking at another aspect of brain function.”

MORE: This Alzheimer’s Breakthrough Could Be a Game Changer

Petersen suggests that every physician should get this information on their patients at age 65; that way, they can have a baseline against which to compare any changes as their patients age. Only if they show such changes — a slower walk, for example, or worsening signs of depression or memory issues — should they move on to the third phase of the test, which is a blood analysis. That would look for known genetic factors linked to Alzheimer’s, including the presence of certain versions of the ApoE gene.

Currently, the only way to truly separate out those on the road to Alzheimer’s is to conduct expensive imaging tests of the brain, or to do a spinal tap, an invasive procedure that extracts spinal fluid for signs of the amyloid protein that builds up in the disease. “We have either expensive techniques or invasive techniques and it’s not practical to do them from a public health screening standpoint,” says Petersen.

MORE: New Test May Predict Alzheimer’s 10 Years Before Diagnosis

While his test is a possible solution to that problem, he acknowledges that the results need be repeated before it’s recommended on a wide scale to physicians across the country. But those who scored higher on the test of risk factors had a seven-fold higher chance of developing mild cognitive impairment than those with lower scores.

For now, even if doctors identify patients around age 65 who might be at higher risk of developing cognitive impairment, there isn’t much they can do to interrupt the process. But they can direct them toward clinical trials of promising new drugs to address Alzheimer’s dementia, which may slow the cognitive decline considerably.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story points out that other methods of testing are available for Alzheimer’s disease including sophisticated scanning and genetic testing. We’ll award a satisfactory rating on that basis. However, we’d note that the story does not point out that many of the tests used in the study are currently used to diagnose mild cognitive impairment and are already used by primary care physicians and others.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Copenhagen, Denmark, July 7, 2017 - Researchers from the Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports at the University of Copenhagen today announced the findings from a weight loss biomarker study published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition (AJCN). The study, "Pretreatment fasting plasma glucose and insulin modify dietary weight loss success: results from 3 randomized clinical trials," found that fasting blood sugar and/or fasting insulin can be used to select the optimal diet and to predict weight loss, particularly for people with prediabetes or diabetes.

The research analyzed data from three diet clinical trials which collectively looked at more than 1,200 individuals - Diet, Obesity, and Genes (DiOGenes); the OPUS Supermarket intervention (SHOPUS); and the Nutrient-gene interactions in human obesity (NUGENOB). The findings suggest that for most people with prediabetes, a diet rich with vegetables fruits and wholegrains should be recommended for weight loss and could potentially improve diabetes markers. For people with type 2 diabetes, the analysis found that a diet rich in healthy fats from plant sources would be effective for achieving weight loss. These diets could also be effective independent of caloric restriction.

"Recognizing fasting plasma glucose as a key biomarker enables a new interpretation of the data from many previous studies, which could potentially lead to a breakthrough in personalized nutrition," said Arne Astrup, M.D., Head of Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports at University of Copenhagen. "The beauty of this concept is its simplicity. While we are looking into other biomarkers, it is quite amazing how much more we can do for our patients just by using those two simple biomarkers. We will continue to participate in and support research to explore additional biomarkers such as gut microbiota and genomics approaches, which may offer more insights and help to more effectively customize the right diet for specific individuals."

The latest findings, as reported in AJCN, have garnered international support with further analysis conducted by researchers from the University of Colorado, Tufts University, and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBER OBN). Presented at the American Diabetes Association's 77th Scientific Sessions on June 11, 2017, the additional research includes an examination of patients in the Prevencion Dieta Mediterranea (PREDIMED Study), a Randomized Trial of a Low-CHO Diet for Obesity (CHO Study), and The Healthy Weight for Living Study. The different studies (six in total) employed a variety of nutrition strategies, including caloric restriction and ad libitum diets, varying the contributions of carbohydrate and fat, and increasing fiber intake.

The study was inspired by a finding in an early trial of Gelesis100, a novel hydrogel which demonstrated pronounced weight loss in people with prediabetes. The latest findings, as published in AJCN, concluded that a personalized nutritional approach based on an individual's biomarkers will lead to improved weight loss and maintenance success. The University of Copenhagen will continue to collaborate with the study's authors and other experts to advance this research and help find solutions for people around the world who struggle with weight loss.

Assistant professor Mads Fiil Hjorth 

Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen 

Email: madsfiil@nexs.ku.dk 

Tel.: 45-4097-8366

Head of Department, 

Professor Arne Astrup, MD, DMSc 

Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen 

Email: ast@nexs.ku.dk 

Tel.: 45-2143-3302

About the University of Copenhagen

With over 40,000 students and more than 9,000 employees, the University of Copenhagen is the largest institution of research and education in Denmark. The purpose of the University - to quote the University Statute - is to 'conduct research and provide further education to the highest academic level'. Approximately one hundred different institutes, departments, laboratories, centres, museums, etc., form the nucleus of the University.

The Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports conducts research, education, innovation, and dissemination of information in nutrition, human physiology and sports at the highest international level, and incorporates the humanities as well as health and social sciences.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the researchers are looking at other types of biomarkers, including gut microbiota, and at “genomics approaches” that might aid in creating personalized diet plans.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The first oral treatment for women with the common condition of uterine fibroids could be available as soon as summer 2018, with two other medications in the pipeline.

The drugs, experts say, would provide a new treatment option for a condition most commonly treated with a hysterectomy, or removal of the uterus.

“For the longest time we have not really had good options from an oral medication standpoint to treat fibroids,” says Arnold Advincula, vice chairman of women’s health and chief of gynecology at Sloane Hospital for Women at NewYork-Presbysterian/Columbia University Medical Center. “It’s nice to have some additional tools in the toolbox.”

Earlier in October the U.S. Food and Drug Administration accepted Allergan ’s new drug application for ulipristal acetate (UA) to treat abnormal uterine bleeding caused by uterine fibroids. The company expects a decision by May.

The drug has been available in Europe and Canada for several years.

Two other oral medications indicated to treat uterine fibroids are also in development. Bayer launched a phase 3 clinical trial—usually the final trial used by regulators to decide whether to approve a drug—for a similar drug, vilaprisan, in the summer. And AbbeVie is in the midst of phase 3 trials for elagolix to treat uterine fibroids and endometriosis, a disorder in which the tissue that lines the inside of the uterus grows outside of it, causing pelvic pain. The company hopes to have a product available by 2020.

Uterine fibroids are benign tumors that grow in and around the uterus. It’s estimated that as many as 26 million women in the U.S. have one or more such tumors, though less than half experience symptoms. The most common symptom is long and excessive bleeding during menstrual periods, which can lead to anemia and the need for blood transfusions. Other symptoms can include pelvic pain or pressure, a swollen abdomen and frequent urination. Fibroids can also cause fertility and pregnancy problems, depending on their size and location.

The cause of fibroids remains unknown, though those with a family history have an increased risk of developing them. Dietary factors may also play a role. African-American women have a higher rate of uterine fibroids. If a woman has no symptoms, treatment of fibroids isn’t necessary, experts say.

While a hysterectomy is the most common way to treat fibroid tumors, women who still want to have children can have a myomectomy. That surgery removes fibroids while keeping the uterus intact. But fibroids can grow back after the procedure. A number of other minimally invasive procedures are less commonly used and usually not recommended for women who want to have children. There’s some chance of recurrence with most of them.

UA belongs to a group of drugs called selective progesterone receptor modulators (SPRM). They block the progesterone from feeding the fibroids, which causes them to shrink.

“This particular drug also works directly on the lining of the uterus—the endometrium—so it also quite fast and dramatically decreases and stops the vaginal bleeding,” says Ayman Al-Hendy, director of interdisciplinary translational research at Augusta University in Georgia and a member of Allergan’s advisory board. Bleeding is reduced within five to six days, he says. Headaches and hot flashes were the most common side effects in the trials with UA, affecting less than 10% of women.

Patients take the once-a-day pill for three months and then stop for one menstrual cycle to allow the endometrium to shed, since the medication makes it grow thicker. Dr. Al-Hendy says the changes to the endometrium don’t raise the risk of endometrial cancer, which some have raised as a concern.

Patients with the condition say it’s time for better treatments.

Tanika Gray Valbrun, a 39-year-old network news producer in Atlanta, says she welcomes less invasive treatments that don’t affect fertility. She started the White Dress Project, a nonprofit patient advocacy group for women with uterine fibroids, in 2014.

She was diagnosed with fibroids at 19. She has suffered from pelvic pain, abdominal bloating that has resulted in people mistakenly thinking she’s pregnant and extremely heavy bleeding that has left her anemic.

“I’ve had five blood transfusions because of the amount of blood I’ve lost,” she says.

She has tried different types of birth control, but none helped with her symptoms. In 2013 she had a myomectomy and doctors removed 27 fibroids, keeping her out of work for nine weeks. Four years later, the fibroids are back.

Vanessa Jacoby, an associate professor in the department of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences at University of California, San Francisco, conducts research in new fibroid treatments.

She says UA appears to have fewer side effects than Lupron, the only medication, an injectable, available in the U.S. that shrinks fibroids. Lupron effectively puts women into early menopause, which can result in hot flashes and bone loss. Women often must take it with hormone replacement therapy. It is usually used in preparation for surgery to shrink fibroids and maintain blood reserves.

While the company has done studies of women taking the drug up to a year, some experts believe the long-term health profile of a drug needs to be evaluated up to seven years, Dr. Jacoby says.

Shao-Lee Lin, vice president of therapeutic areas and international development at AbbVie , says the company is testing a twice daily dosing of elagolix. It is also studying including low-dose hormone therapy within elagolix to help maintain bone health.

Like Lupron, elagolix decreases sex hormones that cause fibroids to grow. What makes it different is it’s fast-acting and easier to reverse the effects if you stop taking it.

Studies have found it significantly reduces heavy menstrual bleeding and decreases the thickness of the endometrium by six months. It also decreases the size of fibroids.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions some alternative treatments in detail. One strength of the article is that it prominently points out that many women with fibroids who have no symptoms do not require treatment of any kind.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - U.S. researchers have developed tiny nanoparticle robots that can travel through a patient’s blood and into tumors where they deliver a therapy that turns off an important cancer gene.

The finding, reported in the journal Nature on Sunday, offers early proof that a new treatment approach called RNA interference or RNAi might work in people.

RNA stands for ribonucleic acid — a chemical messenger that is emerging as a key player in the disease process.

Dozens of biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies including Alnylam, Merck, Pfizer, Novartis and Roche are looking for ways to manipulate RNA to block genes that make disease-causing proteins involved in cancer, blindness or AIDS.

But getting the treatment to the right target in the body has presented a challenge.

A team at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena used nanotechnology — the science of really small objects — to create tiny polymer robots covered with a protein called transferrin that seek out a receptor or molecular doorway on many different types of tumors.

“This is the first study to be able to go in there and show it’s doing its mechanism of action,” said Mark Davis, a professor of chemical engineering, who led the study.

“We’re excited about it because there is a lot of skepticism whenever any new technology comes in,” said Davis, a consultant to privately held Calando Pharmaceuticals Inc, which is developing the therapy.

Other teams are using fats or lipids to deliver the therapy to the treatment target. Pfizer last week announced a deal with Canadian biotech Tekmira Pharmaceuticals Corp for this type of delivery vehicle for its RNAi drugs, joining Roche and Alnylam.

In the approach used by Davis and colleagues, once the particles find the cancer cell and get inside, they break down, releasing small interfering RNAs or siRNAs that block a gene that makes a cancer growth protein called ribonucleotide reductase.

“In the particle itself, we’ve built what we call a chemical sensor,” Davis said in a telephone interview. “When it recognizes that it’s gone inside the cell, it says OK, now it’s time to disassemble and give off the RNA.”

In a phase 1 clinical trial in patients with various types of tumors, the team gave doses of the targeted nanoparticles four times over 21 days in a 30-minute intravenous infusion.

Tumor samples taken from three people with melanoma showed the nanoparticles found their way inside tumor cells.

And they found evidence that the therapy had disabled ribonucleotide reductase, suggesting the RNA had done its job.

Davis could not say whether the therapy helped shrink tumors in the patients, but one patient did get a second cycle of treatment, suggesting it might be. Nor could he say if there were any safety concerns.

Davis said that part of the study will be presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting in June.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story acknowledged that other research teams are exploring using fats or lipids to reach the target.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have identified two new biological markers of cystic fibrosis (CF), a genetic disease which affects children and young adults, leaving them with lifelong health complications including digestive problems and persistent lung infections.

The findings, published in the journal ACS Central Science, shed new light on the underlying mechanisms of CF and could lead to improved prognosis and better therapies for a disease which is quite variable, affecting different children in different ways, say researchers.

"There are chemical signatures in sweat that tell us an infant has CF," says Philip Britz-McKibbin, lead author of the study and a professor in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at McMaster University. "We set out to discover whether there were chemical indicators detected in sweat that could complement the gold standard for CF diagnosis: the sweat chloride test."

The test is commonly used in universal newborn disease-screening programs and measures the concentrations of salt. Elevated sweat chloride confirms that an infant actually has CF.

But there are some obstacles that complicate clinical decision-making, explains Britz-McKibbin, because sweat chloride can result in ambiguous diagnoses in some borderline cases and does not reveal how the disease might progress for individual patients.

"Sweat contains lots of information related to human health that researchers have not fully analyzed and we found some unexpected chemicals associated with CF," he says.

Using a specialized technique developed at McMaster, scientists collected and analyzed sweat samples from infants in CF clinics at the McMaster Children's Hospital and the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto.

They identified several unknown chemicals beyond chloride that were consistently associated with babies who had CF, including two different drug and environmental compounds the infants secreted in sweat at much lower concentration levels.

Testing for these biomarkers could be done in cases in which the chloride sweat test result is unclear, say researchers. The biomarkers also point to other underlying mechanisms that contribute to the progression of CF and could lead to better therapeutic interventions earlier in life.

"The easier it is to detect CF, the earlier it can be diagnosed, and the better people's chances are at living a longer, healthier life", says Joanna Valsamis, Chief Healthcare, Research and Advocacy Officer at Cystic Fibrosis Canada. "CF Canada invests heavily in research that aims to improve the lives of people living with CF, and findings such as those from Dr. Britz-McKibbin are crucial to our understanding of the disease."

In Canada, one in every 3,600 children are diagnosed with CF. But life expectancy rates have risen dramatically in recent decades with the median age of survival now over 50 years, due to better treatments to improve lung function, better nutrition and lung transplants. Further benefits are expected with the advent of newborn screening programs that have resulted in early detection.

The research was funded in part by Cystic Fibrosis Canada. Since 1960, CF Canada has invested more than $244 million in leading CF research and care.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of explaining the sweat chloride test, which is widely used to make a final diagnosis of CF in infants and children.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Calcium in the arteries of the breast predicts early buildup of plaque in the heart's arteries, and may improve risk assessment in many women, especially young women

Routine mammography--widely recommended for breast cancer screening--may also be a useful tool to identify women at risk for heart disease, potentially allowing for earlier intervention, according to a study scheduled for presentation at the American College of Cardiology's 65th Annual Scientific Session.

Data from this study show for the first time a link between the amount of calcium in the arteries of the breast--readily visible on digital mammography--and the level of calcium buildup in the coronary arteries. Coronary arterial calcification, or CAC, is considered a very early sign of cardiovascular disease. Importantly, the presence of breast arterial calcification also appears to be an equivalent or stronger risk factor for CAC than other well-established cardiovascular risk factors such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure and diabetes. Earlier research had shown a link between breast arterial calcification and atherosclerotic disease--even heart attack, stroke and other cardiovascular disease events, but researchers said these data provide a more direct relationship between the extent of calcified plaque in the mammary and coronary arteries, as well as a comparison to standard risk evaluation.

"Many women, especially young women, don't know the health of their coronary arteries. Based on our data, if a mammogram shows breast arterial calcifications it can be a red flag--an 'aha' moment--that there is a strong possibility she also has plaque in her coronary arteries," said Harvey Hecht, M.D., professor at the Icahn School of Medicine and director of cardiovascular imaging at Mount Sinai St. Luke's hospital, and lead author of the study.

All told, 70 percent of the women who had evidence of breast arterial calcification on their mammogram were also found to have CAC as shown on a noncontrast CT scan of the chest. For women under 60 years of age with CAC, half also had breast arterial calcification--an important finding as very few would be thinking about or considered for early signs of heart disease. There were even fewer false positives among younger patients; researchers said that if a younger woman had breast arterial calcification, there was an 83 percent chance she also had CAC.

Notably, breast arterial calcification also appeared to be as strong a predictor for cardiovascular risk as standard risk scores such as the Framingham Risk Score, which underestimates women's risk, and the 2013 Cholesterol Guidelines Pooled Cohort Equations, which tends to overestimate risk, Hecht said. When researchers added 33 asymptomatic women with established CAD, breast arterial calcification was more powerful than both risk assessment formulas, which suggests the presence of subclinical atherosclerosis may be a more important indicator of heart disease than other risk factors.

"This information is available on every mammogram, with no additional cost or radiation exposure, and our research suggests breast arterial calcification is as good as the standard risk factor-based estimate for predicting risk," Hecht said. "Using this information would allow at-risk women to be referred for standard CAC scoring and to be able to start focusing on prevention--perhaps even taking a statin when it can make the most difference."

Multivariate analysis showed that early signs of a buildup of plaque in the coronary arteries were most strongly related to breast arterial calcification. While CAC was about two times as likely with advancing age or high blood pressure, it was three times more likely with breast arterial calcification.

"The message is if a woman is getting a mammogram, look for breast arterial calcification. It's a freebie and provides critical information that could be lifesaving for some women," Hecht said, adding he hopes these findings will prompt clinicians, who rarely report breast arterial calcification, to routinely report not just the presence or absence of breast arterial calcifications but also to estimate and note the amount.

"The more breast arterial calcification a women has, the more likely she is to have calcium in her heart's arteries as well. If all it requires is to take a closer look at the images, how can we ignore it?," he said.

A total of 292 women who had digital mammography and noncontrast CT scans within one year were included in the study. Of these, 124, or 42.5 percent, were found to have evidence of breast arterial calcification. Mammograms were reviewed by a second radiologist who was blinded to the CAC results. Women with breast arterial calcification were more likely to be older, have high blood pressure and chronic kidney disease, and less likely smokers. Women with established cardiovascular diseases were excluded. Breast arterial calcification was evaluated on a scale from zero to 12 by increasing severity, and CAC was measured on the CT using a validated 0-12 severity score. The overall accuracy of breast arterial calcification for the presence of CAC was 70 percent, and 63 percent of those with CAC also had breast arterial calcification.

To date, there is no consensus on using CAC as a screening test, though a very large outcome study of 39,000 subjects is underway in the Netherlands. Mammography, however, is widely used and accepted and, as Hecht said, may provide an opportunity to risk stratify asymptomatic women by breast arterial calcification who might have calcium in the coronary arteries and ordinarily would not have been readily considered for cardiovascular screening.

Heart disease is the leading cause of death among women, yet breast cancer is often the most feared.

Roughly 37 million mammograms are performed annually in the U.S. Mammography is recommended annually for women over 40 years of age by the American Cancer Society and every other year for women 50-75 years old and women at high risk for breast cancer by the U.S. Preventive Service Task Force. Digital mammography is more sensitive to the presence of calcifications and is now available in 96 percent of mammography units in the U.S.

Another intriguing point that deserves additional study, according to the researchers, is that the nature of the atherosclerosis is different in breast arterial calcification and CAC, making it unclear why one should be related to the other.

Hecht stresses that these findings warrant further evaluation and validation in larger studies. Future prospective trials are needed to see what the prognostic significance of breast arterial calcification might be. Because the study involved women who received both mammography and CT scan for clinical indications, these women may have been more likely than the average woman to have coexisting conditions, although Hecht said these were unrelated to heart disease.

This study is being published simultaneously online in JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging.

In an accompanying editorial in JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging, Khurram Nasir, M.D., M.P.H., and John McEvoy, from the Center for Healthcare Advancement and Outcomes at Baptist Health South Florida, said that the report provides impetus to document breast arterial calcification in mammography reports, to improve education of primary care and radiology providers on the link with heart disease, and other actions to establish best practices for incorporating this research into care.

"Even by the conservative estimate of 10 percent, approximately 4 million women nationwide undergoing screening mammography will exhibit breast arterial calcification; with 2 to 3 million of them likely to have signs of premature coronary atherosclerotic disease," the authors said. "Whether the best use of breast arterial calcification is to trigger additional testing or to directly inform preventive treatment decisions, either by flagging high-risk women to their providers or by reclassifying traditional (heart disease) risk estimates, is worth further discussion."

The study was funded, in part, by the Flight Attendants Medical Research Institute.

The study, "Digital Mammography: Screening for Coronary Artery Disease?," will be presented on April 3, 2016, at 9:45 a.m. CT/10:45 a.m. ET/3:45 p.m. UTC at the American College of Cardiology's 65th Annual Scientific Session in Chicago. The meeting runs April 2-4.

The ACC's Annual Scientific Session, which in 2016 will be April 2-4 in Chicago, brings together cardiologists and cardiovascular specialists from around the world to share the newest discoveries in treatment and prevention. Follow @ACCMediaCenter and #ACC16 for the latest news from the meeting.

The American College of Cardiology is a 52,000-member medical society that is the professional home for the entire cardiovascular care team. The mission of the College is to transform cardiovascular care and to improve heart health. The ACC leads in the formation of health policy, standards and guidelines. The College operates national registries to measure and improve care, offers cardiovascular accreditation to hospitals and institutions, provides professional medical education, disseminates cardiovascular research and bestows credentials upon cardiovascular specialists who meet stringent qualifications.

Laurie Margolies, M.D., associate professor of radiology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and co-author of the study will be available to the media in an embargoed web briefing on Tuesday, March 22, 2016, at 2 p.m. ET/1 p.m. CT/6 p.m. UTC. Eligible media should contact Shealy Molpus, smolpus@acc.org, to receive access to the briefing.

Hecht will present the study, "Digital Mammography: Screening for Coronary Artery Disease?," on Sunday, April 3, 2016, at 9:45 a.m. CT/10:45 a.m. ET/3:45 p.m. UTC in Poster Area, South Hall A1.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions alternatives, the standard risk assessment tools, as the Framingham Risk Score and the 2013 Cholesterol Guidelines Pooled Cohort Equations. Although it’s questionable, as noted above, if there is an accurate comparison.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The report estimates the percentage of cancers caused by CT scans -- currently 0.4 percent -- will increase to as much as 2 percent in a few decades because the number of scans has increased so dramatically, reports CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook.

"Our concern is there are so many CT scans being done right now that we should really be starting to think: Do we need to all of these CT scans?" says Dr. David Brenner of the Center for Radiological Research at Columbia University.

Some experts say that estimate is overly alarming. But they agree with the need to curb these tests particularly in children, who are more susceptible to radiation and more likely to develop cancer from it.

"There are some serious concerns about the methodology used," but the authors "have brought to attention some real serious potential public health issues," said Dr. Arl Van Moore, head of the American College of Radiology's board of chancellors.

The radiation and risk from one CT scan is low, but it carries a dose 50 to 100 times greater than a traditional X-ray, reports LaPook.

"We are very concerned about the built-up public health risk over a long period of time," said Eric J. Hall, who wrote the report with fellow Columbia University medical physicist David J. Brenner.

So what's a patient to do? Make sure your doctor explains why you need a CT scan and gives you the lowest possible dose, reports LaPook. It's also a good idea to keep a diary of X-ray exposure, especially for children.

The study was published in Thursday's New England Journal of Medicine and paid for by federal grants.

The average American's total radiation exposure has nearly doubled since 1980, largely because of CT, or computed tomography, scans. Medical radiation now accounts for more than half of the population's total exposure; it used to be just one-sixth, and the top source was the normal background rate in the environment, from things like radon in soil and cosmic energy from the sun.

A previous study by the same scientists in 2001 led the federal Food and Drug Administration to recommend ways to limit scans and risks in children.

But CT use continued to soar. About 62 million scans were done in the U.S. last year, up from 3 million in 1980. More than 4 million were in children.

Since previous studies suggest that a third of all diagnostic tests are unnecessary, that means that 20 million adults and more than 1 million children getting CT scans are needlessly being put at risk, Brenner and Hall write.

Ultrasound and MRI, or magnetic resonance imaging, scans often are safer options that do not expose people to radiation, they contend.

CT scans became popular because they offer a quick, relatively cheap and painless way to get 3D pictures so detailed they give an almost surgical view into the body. Doctors use them to evaluate trauma, belly pain, seizures, chronic headaches, kidney stones and other woes, especially in busy emergency rooms. In kids, they are used to diagnose or rule out appendicitis.

"The CT scan is a wonderful tool for examining internal organs, organs that are below the depth of where a poking finger or a listening stethoscope can hear, and yet don't show up on routine X-rays," Dr. Michael Brant-Zawadzki, a clinical professor of radiology at Stanford University tells CBS News.

But they put out a lot of radiation. A CT scan of the chest involves 10 to 15 millisieverts (a measure of dose) versus 0.01 to 0.15 for a regular chest X-ray, 3 for a mammogram and a mere 0.005 for a dental X-ray.

The dose depends on the type of machine and the person - obese people require more radiation than slim ones - and the risk accumulates over a lifetime.

"Medical care in this country is naturally so fragmented. Any one doctor is not going to be aware of the fact that a particular patient has had three or four CT scans at some point in the past," said Dr. Michael Lauer, prevention chief at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

People with chronic problems like kidney stones are likely to get too many scans, said Dr. Fred Mettler, radiology chief in the New Mexico Veterans Administration health care system.

"I've seen people who are 30 years old who have had at least 18 scans done," he said.

That puts them at risk of developing radiation-induced cancer, Brenner and Hall said. They base this on studies of thousands of Japanese atomic bomb survivors who had excess cancer risk after exposures of 50 to 150 millisieverts - the equivalent of several big CT scans.

"That's very controversial. There's a large portion of the medical physics community that would disagree with that" comparison, said Richard Morin, a medical physicist at the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Fla.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Two other scanning methods -MRI and ultrasound – were briefly mentioned.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Pivotal trial results for Merck & Co Inc’s immunotherapy drug Keytruda show that it lengthened survival by three months, or nearly 40 percent, for patients with advanced bladder cancer who had stopped responding to chemotherapy.

The data, to be presented next month at a meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, follow last week’s announcement that rival drug Tecentriq, from Roche Holding AG, did not improve survival when used as a second-line treatment for bladder cancer in a trial.

The Merck drug is awaiting U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval, but Tecentriq was approved by the agency last year, contingent on verification of its clinical benefit. Roche, in an emailed statement, said it plans to discuss the data with health authorities but did not disclose the timing for the discussions. According to the FDA approval letter, the company has until December to submit the full trial data to the agency.

Merck filed in February for FDA approval of Keytruda for both initial and secondary treatment of advanced urothelial cancer, the most common type of bladder cancer. Keytruda is already approved for treating melanoma, lung cancer, head and neck cancer and Hodgkin lymphoma.

Merck announced in October that the second-line bladder cancer study met its main goal and was stopped early. The company is currently enrolling patients in a phase three trial of Keytruda, combined with chemotherapy, as an initial treatment for bladder cancer.

In addition to Tecentriq’s approval for bladder cancer patients whose disease has stopped responding to chemotherapy, the FDA last month approved the Roche drug as an initial treatment for people with a specific type of advanced bladder cancer and in people whose cancer progressed despite at least one prior platinum-containing chemotherapy.

The agency has also granted contingent approval to AstraZeneca Plc’s Imfinzi, Bristol-Myers Squibb’s Opdivo and Bavencio, developed by Pfizer Inc and Merck KGaA, as second-line bladder cancer treatments.

All five drugs are part of a new class of treatments designed to unleash the body’s immune system to fight cancer by interfering with proteins known as PD-1 or PD-L1 that help malignant cells evade immune attack.

Merck said data from an open-label Phase 3 trial of 542 advanced bladder cancer patients showed median survival of 10.3 months for Keytruda patients and 7.4 months for patients given second-line chemotherapy. The study’s median follow-up was 18.5 months.

After 18 months, 36 percent of Keytruda patients were alive, compared with 20.5 percent of chemotherapy patients, according to research published by ASCO.

The study did not detect a difference in the length of time patients lived without their disease getting worse.

Severe side effects were reported in 16.5 percent of the Keytruda patients, compared with nearly half of the chemotherapy group.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that this drug was compared against standard chemotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Panel Says Aspirin Lowers Heart Attack Risk For Some

Millions of Americans take baby aspirin every day to prevent a heart attack or stroke. If they are at high risk of heart disease, they're doing the right thing, according to draft recommendations issued Monday by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

The independent panel also said that taking low-dose aspirin daily for at least 10 years may protect against colorectal cancer, at least in people who are already taking it to prevent heart attacks and stroke.

Adults between the ages of 50 and 59 who have a 10 percent or greater risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 10 years benefit the most from taking about 81 milligrams of aspirin every day, the panel says.

But the potential benefit is smaller for adults between the ages of 60 and 69. And it's unknown for adults under 50 or over 70. People should talk with their health care provider to find out if they have health problems that would justify taking aspirin, according to Dr. Douglas Owens, a professor of medicine at Stanford University and a member of the task force.

For example, uncontrolled high blood pressure, or high cholesterol, obesity, age and diabetes can all increase heart disease risk. "Because heart attacks are caused by clots in the arteries of the heart, aspirin can help prevent heart attack and it can also help prevent strokes that are caused by blood clots," Owens says.

Several groups including the American Heart Association offer online calculators to help people figure out their risk, which, along with discussion with a health care provider, can help determine whether daily aspirin might be useful.

However, there is a caveat. Daily aspirin can cause bleeding in the stomach and brain. And Owens says that people with medical conditions like ulcers, kidney problems, liver problems or bleeding disorders are more vulnerable, as are people who take blood-thinning drugs and NSAIDs.

These new recommendations aren't final, and are open to public comment.

Concerns have been raised about whether aspirin is really effective enough, when so many other medicines are available to help control heart disease risk.

One physician with major concerns is Steven Nissen, chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic, in Cleveland, Ohio. "I think that millions of Americans are taking aspirin — some of them are really the 'worried well,' " he says.

If people don't have a significantly increased risk of having a heart attack or stroke over the next decade, Nissen says, they may be "causing more harm than benefit."

And while many medical groups recommend daily aspirin to lower heart disease risk, not all federal agencies agree. The Food and Drug Administration actually issued a warning against routinely taking aspirin to prevent heart disease in people without significantly high risk.

Nissen worries that many people are mistaking their actual heart disease risk. "With all the good therapies, better blood pressure control, better cholesterol control, all the things we do in modern medicine," he says, "over the last couple of decades, we've had nearly a 50 percent reduction in the rate of cardiovascular disease."

People who don't really need to should not be taking aspirin every day, says Nissen. "It's just not prudent or safe," he says, noting that bleeding in the abdomen or brain is extremely dangerous and can be fatal. Nissen does agree with the general consensus that taking low dose aspirin is beneficial for people who have had a heart attack or stroke.

But for pretty much everyone else, assessing actual heart disease risk in consultation with your doctor is crucial to deciding whether to take aspirin every day.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The main point of the story is a recommendation to modify existing aspirin use habits.  So it nicely sets up a comparison between current practice and recommended behavior. The story also nods to other approaches and medications (e.g. cholesterol and blood pressure drugs).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A healthy intake of vitamin D in the first year of life appears to set children up to have more muscle mass and less body fat as toddlers, according to a new study published in the journal Pediatric Obesity.

The findings emerged from research initially aimed at confirming the importance of vitamin D for bone density. The additional benefit in terms of body composition came as a surprise for the research team.

"We were very intrigued by the higher lean mass, the possibility that vitamin D can help infants to not only grow healthy skeletons but also healthy amounts of muscle and less fat," said Hope Weiler, one of the study's authors and Director of the Mary Emily Clinical Nutrition Research Unit at McGill University.

For the first time, a connection was made between the benefits of achieving healthy vitamin D status during a baby's first 12 to 36 months and how muscle mass develops. The researchers achieved this by following up on a 2013 study in which 132 infants in Montréal, Québec, were given a vitamin D3 supplement at one of four different dosages between the ages of 1 month and 12 months.

The new study confirmed the importance for the development of strong bones of a vitamin D supplement of 400 IU/day during a baby's first year. This amount is in line with current Canadian health guidelines. The researchers found that higher doses did not provide any additional benefit -- at least not in terms of bone development.

But the body scans used to assess bone density also allowed the team to measure the children's muscle and fat mass. While there were no significant differences in body composition across the different dosage groups, the researchers found children who had vitamin D stores above the threshold recommended by the Canadian Paediatric Society (CPS) averaged around 450 grams less body fat at 3 years of age.

Vitamin D supplementation is routinely recommended for babies until they can get an adequate amount through their diet. The skin synthesizes vitamin D when exposed to sunlight, making supplementation all the more important where long winters reduce the opportunity for this to happen. In addition, Health Canada advises parents and caregivers to avoid direct sunlight and avoid use of sun block creams in young infants.

Further analysis also indicated a correlation between lean muscle mass and the average level of vitamin D in the body over the first three years of a child's life. The only other factor found to make a significant difference to the children's amount of body fat was their level of physical activity.

"Vitamin D supplementation trial in infancy: body composition effects at 3years of age in a prospective follow-up study from Montréal", by T. J. Hazell, S. Gallo, C. A. Vanstone, S. Agellon, C. Rodd, and H. A. Weiler, Pediatric Obesity doi:10.1111/ijpo.12105
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the release a Satisfactory for noting that physical activity is another factor making “a significant difference to the children’s amount of body fat.” The release would have been improved if it had noted that diet, home and family environment can affect the healthy development of young bodies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - The inexpensive tests that look for hidden blood in a person’s stool are effective for colon cancer screening, a study out Tuesday confirms.

The findings, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, give some extra weight to fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) as a valid option for early detection of colon cancer.

Experts generally recommend that people at average risk of colon cancer start screening tests for the disease at age 50. And they can pick from a number of tests that have all been found to cut the risk of dying from colon cancer.

Along with stool tests — done once a year at home — the choices include two invasive procedures: colonoscopy done every 10 years and flexible sigmoidoscopy done every five years.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally supported expert panel, recommends that people at average risk of colon cancer choose any of the three methods.

FOBT detects hidden blood in the stool, which can be a sign of colon cancer or pre-cancerous growths called polyps. Positive results on the screen prompt a follow-up colonoscopy to investigate the source of the blood.

Advances in the stool tests in recent years have made them more effective. A newer version called immunochemical FOBT (iFOBT) is supposed to zero in on colon growths better than an older version known as guaiac FOBT — which often picked up bleeding originating in the upper digestive tract, such as from a stomach ulcer.

Immunochemical FOBT is now largely replacing the older test. But there’s been surprisingly little evidence that it really is highly “specific” to colon cancer, according to Dr. Yi-Chia Lee of National Taiwan University Hospital, one of the researchers on the new study.

So for their study, the researchers followed nearly 2,800 adults who all volunteered to have iFOBT, a colonoscopy and an upper endoscopy to check for problems in the upper digestive tract.

They found that of 28 people confirmed to have colon tumors after a colonoscopy, all but one had also a positive iFOBT result.

“It means that almost every case with colon cancer can be identified by iFOBT,” Lee told Reuters Health in an email. “It is a strong support to iFOBT as an effective screening tool.”

The researchers also found that iFOBT had “specificity” for colon cancer of close to 90 percent, meaning the test would accurately give a negative result to almost 90 percent of people who did not have colon cancer.

Of three study participants who were found to have cancers of the stomach or esophagus, for instance, none had a positive result on the iFOBT test.

Like any screening test, iFOBT does have a risk of false-positive results, which leads to unnecessary invasive testing in some people. In this study, about 10 percent of all participants had a false-positive finding on the stool test.

Among the risk factors for false-positives the authors identified were the use of anticlotting drugs and low levels of the iron-rich molecule hemoglobin in the blood.

In practice, a positive iFOBT result would be followed by colonoscopy, in which a scope is used to investigate the interior of the colon.

Whether used for first-line screening or as a follow-up, colonoscopy has the advantage of allowing doctors to spot and remove pre-cancerous growths called polyps — which means the test can prevent cases of colon cancer.

But as far as cutting the risk of death from colon cancer, stool testing is similarly effective, according to the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

And it’s much cheaper: iFOBT is more expensive than the older stool tests, but it is still roughly $30. A screening colonoscopy averages around $3,000.

The downside of iFOBT being specific to colon tumors is that it is not useful for catching cancers of the stomach or throat.

That’s particularly important in Asia, where those cancers are common.

Lee said researchers there are looking into whether combining iFOBT with the older guaiac test is useful for catching cancers in the lower and upper digestive tract — and whether adding a third stool test, which looks for the ulcer-causing bacteria H. pylori, can help as well. Infection with H. pylori is associated with increased risks of stomach and throat cancers.

In the U.S., cancers of the upper digestive tract are relatively uncommon. The average American has a one in 200 chance of developing esophageal cancer, while the risk of stomach cancer is one in 114.

In contrast, Americans’ lifetime risk of colon cancer is about one in 19, according to the American Cancer Society. More than 50,000 Americans died of the disease in 2010.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Good comparisons between the newer FOBT test, the older stool test, and colonoscopy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA -- Labor is an intensely strenuous activity, with the uterine muscle contracting every few minutes to reposition a baby through the pelvis and down the birth canal. Even low levels of dehydration can seriously compromise normal physiological function, yet recent studies looking at hydration in laboring women via the rates of intravenous (IV) fluid showed conflicting results. By pooling the data of several studies, Thomas Jefferson University researchers showed that a higher rate of IV fluids not only decreased c-section rates, but also shortened the overall length of labor by one hour, as well as shortened the pushing phase. The results were published online as an accepted article in Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica.

"The results are compelling and strongly argue for a change in practice," says Vincenzo Berghella, M.D., the Director of Maternal Fetal Medicine and Professor in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University. "We have already begun changing practice at Jefferson to give women more fluids in labor, to allow them to have the best chance of delivering vaginally."

Dr. Berghella and colleagues compiled data from seven small clinical trials that collectively included a total of 1,215 women. Of those, about half (or 593 women) received IV fluids at a rate of 250 milliliters per hour, and the other half (622 women) received fluids at the lower rate of 125 milliliters per hour. General practice in the United States is to administer IV fluids at 125 milliliters per hour during labor.

With the data pooled, the researchers could see a clear difference in outcomes for women in the two groups. Women getting the faster fluid rate (250 milliliters per hour) were less likely to get a cesarean section. The higher fluid rate also reduced the overall time of labor by an average of 64 minutes, and shortened the pushing phase by nearly 3 minutes, on average.

"We've known that it's important for women to stay well hydrated during pregnancy and labor. This study suggests that IV fluids could help women maintain hydration at appropriate levels, reduce the likelihood of c-section, and decrease length of labor," says Dr. Berghella. "Recently, we also showed that letting women eat more liberally in labor, especially in early labor, has benefits including shorter labor, and no identifiable risks."

Today, approximately one in three births in the United States occurs via c-section, despite an increased attention by national and international obstetric societies on safely reducing the practice. This study and others are providing evidence for changes in obstetric practice that could help safely reduce c-section rates. Drs. Ehsanipoor, Saccone, Seligman, Pierce-Williams, and Ciardulli were the co-investigators with Dr Berghella.

The authors report no conflicts of interest.

Article reference: R.M. Ehsanipoor., et al., "Intravenous Fluid Rate for Reduction of Cesarean Delivery Rate in Nulliparous Women: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis." Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica. doi: 10.1111/aogs.13121. 2017.

Jefferson, through its academic and clinical entities of Thomas Jefferson University and Jefferson Health, including Abington Health and Aria Health, is reimagining health care for the greater Philadelphia region and southern New Jersey. Jefferson has 23,000 people dedicated to providing the highest-quality, compassionate clinical care for patients, educating the health professionals of tomorrow, and discovering new treatments and therapies to define the future of care. With a university and hospital that date back to 1824, today Jefferson is comprised of six colleges, nine hospitals, 34 outpatient and urgent care locations, and a multitude of physician practices throughout the region, serving more than 100,000 inpatients, 373,000 emergency patients and 2.2 million outpatients annually.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The analysis compared increased levels of hydration during labor with levels used in “general practice in the United States.” That’s explained in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON, Sept. 29, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The American College of Radiology (ACR), Society of Breast Imaging (SBI) and major medical organizations experienced in breast cancer care continue to recommend that women start getting annual mammograms at age 40. This approach saves many more lives than screening started at a later age or with less frequent exams. To mark National Breast Cancer Awareness Month, women are encouraged to ask their health care providers about scheduling an annual mammogram.

"All women age 40 and over can benefit from annual mammography. Risk-based screening is a poor approach. Seventy-five percent of women diagnosed with breast cancer have no family history or other factors that place them at high risk for the disease. I encourage women to speak with their providers about mammography benefits and limitations and create a schedule to get their annual mammograms," said Debra Monticciolo, MD, FACR, chair of the American College of Radiology Breast Imaging Commission.

Breast cancer remains the second leading cause of deaths among women in the United States. In 2015, according to the National Cancer Institute, 231,840 women will be diagnosed with the disease and 40,290 will die from it. Deaths are highest among women who are not screened regularly and have their cancers found at later stage.

"Mammography screening is not perfect but has been shown to markedly reduce the number of women each year who die from breast cancer," said Elizabeth Morris, MD, FACR, president of the Society of Breast Imaging. "The decision whether or not to get a mammogram remains with women. We want them to know that mammography can detect cancer early — when it's most treatable and can be treated less invasively — which not only saves lives but helps preserve quality of life."

The ACR and SBI believe women 40 and older should have access to mammograms and that Medicare and private insurers should be required to cover them for these exams.

For information on mammography visit Mammography Saves Lives or the Society of Breast Imaging website.

Contact Shawn Farley at 703-648-8936 or PR@acr.org to arrange an interview with an ACR spokesperson.

Contact Joy Burwell at 202-263-2971 or jburwell@amplifypublicaffairs.net to arrange an interview with an SBI spokesperson.

About the American College of Radiology

The American College of Radiology (ACR), founded in 1924, is a professional medical society dedicated to serving patients and society by empowering radiology professionals to advance the practice, science, and professions of radiological care.

About the Society of Breast Imaging

The Society of Breast Imaging (SBI), established in 1985, is a professional medical organization dedicated to improving the practice of breast imaging and the quality of medical education in breast imaging. The SBI also provides a medium for the exchange of ideas among those involved in breast imaging. The SBI includes leading international breast imaging specialists nationwide among its membership.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: A few options are mentioned, i.e. mammography screening only for high-risk groups, later-age screening, and less-than-annual mammograms. Other approaches that could have been discussed include regular physical exams of the breast by a clinician (without mammography) as well as breast self-exams. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A research team from the University of Liverpool has reached an important milestone towards creating a urine diagnostic test for prostate cancer that could mean that invasive diagnostic procedures that men currently undergo eventually become a thing of the past.

'The use of a gas chromatography (GC)-sensor system combined with advanced statistical methods towards the diagnosis of urological malignancies', published today in the Journal of Breath Research, describes a diagnostic test using a special tool to 'smell' the cancer in men's urine.

Working in collaboration with the University of the West of England's (UWE Bristol) Urological Institute team at Southmead Hospital and Bristol Royal Infirmary, the pilot study included 155 men presenting to urology clinics. Of this group, 58 were diagnosed with prostate cancer, 24 with bladder cancer and 73 with haematuria or poor stream without cancer. The results of the pilot study using the GC sensor system indicate that it is able to successfully identify different patterns of volatile compounds that allow classification of urine samples from patients with urological cancers.

Professor Chris Probert from the University of Liverpool's Institute of Translational Medicine began work on this project with UWE Bristol when he was working in Bristol as a gastroenterologist with clinical and research interest in inflammatory bowel disease.

The research team used a gas chromatography sensor system called Odoreader that was developed by a team led by Professor Probert and Professor Norman Ratcliffe at UWE Bristol. The test involves inserting urine samples into the Odoreader that are then measured using algorithms developed by the research team at the University of Liverpool and UWE Bristol.

Professor Probert said: "There is an urgent need to identify these cancers at an earlier stage when they are more treatable as the earlier a person is diagnosed the better. After further sample testing the next step is to take this technology and put it into a user friendly format. With help from industry partners we will be able to further develop the Odoreader, which will enable it to be used where it is needed most; at a patient's bedside, in a doctor's surgery, in a clinic or Walk In Centre, providing fast, inexpensive, accurate results."

Professor Norman Ratcliffe said, "There is currently no accurate test for prostate cancer, the vagaries of the PSA test indicators can sometimes result in unnecessary biopsies, resulting in psychological toll, risk of infection from the procedure and even sometimes missing cancer cases. Our aim is to create a test that avoids this procedure at initial diagnosis by detecting cancer in a non-invasive way by smelling the disease in men's urine. A few years ago we did similar work to detect bladder cancer following a discovery that dogs could sniff out cancer. We have been using the Odoreader, which is like an electronic nose to sense the cancer."

"The Odoreader has a 30 metre column that enables the compounds in the urine to travel through at different rates thus breaking the sample into a readable format. This is then translated into an algorithm enabling detection of cancer by reading the patterns presented. The positioning of the prostate gland which is very close to the bladder gives the urine profile a different algorithm if the man has cancer."

Mr Raj Prasad, Consultant Urologist at Southmead Hospital, North Bristol NHS Trust, said: "If this test succeeds at full medical trial it will revolutionise diagnostics. Even with detailed template biopsies there is a risk that we may fail to detect prostate cancer in some cases. Currently indicators such as diagnosed prostatomegaly (enlarged prostate) and unusually high PSA levels can lead to recommendations for biopsy if there is a concern that cancer may be prevalent. An accurate urine test would mean that many men who currently undergo prostate biopsy may not need to do so."

The pilot trial was funded by the Rotary Club in Bristol who held annual Run for the Future events in Bristol.

The research team is now looking to fund a full clinical trial.

A video in which Professor Probert explains how the machine works can be found here
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story goes into some detail about how this test might compare with the PSA test and gives a brief mention of biopsies. The lead author states:  “There is currently no accurate test for prostate cancer, the vagaries of the PSA test indicators can sometimes result in unnecessary biopsies, resulting in psychological toll, risk of infection from the procedure and even sometimes missing cancer cases.does indicate that the PSA test is problelmatic for false positives.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ROCHESTER, Minn. — Can estrogen preserve brain function and decrease the risk of Alzheimer’s disease when given early in menopause? Newly postmenopausal women who received estrogen via a skin patch had reduced beta-amyloid deposits, the sticky plaques found in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease, a Mayo Clinic study published this month in the Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease found. Ultimately, these deposits harm neurons, leading to cognitive problems.

In the study, women with APOE e4 — one form of the most common gene associated with late-onset Alzheimer's disease — had lower levels of amyloid deposits.

“This study showed, for the first time, that the brain amyloid deposition ─ a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease ─ is reduced in newly postmenopausal women who received 17beta-Estradiol patch form of hormone therapy,” says lead author Kejal Kantarci, M.D., a Mayo Clinic radiologist. “Women with APOE e4, who have a greater genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease, particularly benefited from this therapy.”

Menopause is defined as occurring 12 months after a woman’s last menstrual period and marks the end of menstrual cycles. In the U.S., the average age of menopause is 51. A rapid decline in estrogen with menopause may be associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease risk in women.

The Women’s Health Initiative study by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) reported that menopausal hormone therapy started in women 65 or older increased the risk of dementia. In contrast, the multicenter Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention Study tested the hypothesis that healthy and younger women would respond to menopausal hormone therapy more favorably.

The Mayo Clinic study used data from the Kronos study to determine the effects of menopausal hormone therapy shortly after menopause, during the critical window of rapid estrogen depletion — five to 36 months past menopause. Researchers investigated the brain amyloid deposition in 68 women ages 42 to 59 who participated in the Kronos trial during this critical window. The researchers used positron emission tomography, also known as a PET scan, to look for the brain amyloid deposits three years after the trial ended.

Of the 68 women, 21 received estrogen via a skin patch, 17 received estrogen orally and 30 received a placebo. Amyloid deposition was lower in women who received the patch, compared to the placebo, and the effect was most apparent in women with the APOE e4 genotype. The oral treatment was not associated with lower amyloid deposition.

The authors are seeking funding to perform amyloid PET imaging at eight more Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention study sites around the U.S.

“If our results are confirmed in the larger group of women, this finding has the potential to change the concepts for preventive interventions that drive the Alzheimer’s disease field today,” Dr. Kantarci says. “It also may have a significant impact on women making the decision to use hormone therapy in the early postmenopausal years.”

Study co-authors are Val Lowe, M.D.; Timothy Lesnick, M.S.; Nirubol Tosakulwong; Kent Bailey, Ph.D.; Julie Fields, Ph.D.; Lynne Shuster, M.D.; Samantha Zuk; Matthew Senjem M.S.; Michelle Mielke, Ph.D.; Clifford Jack Jr., M.D.; Walter Rocca, M.D.; and Virginia Miller, Ph.D., all of Mayo Clinic; and Carey Gleason, Ph.D., of University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health.

This study is funded by the Aurora Foundation to the Kronos Longevity Research Institute and NIH. (NS66147, AG029624, AG44170)

About Mayo Clinic

 Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization committed to clinical practice, education and research, providing expert, whole-person care to everyone who needs healing. For more information, visit http://www.mayoclinic.org/about-mayo-clinic and https://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release offers no other approaches available to postmenopausal women for reducing Alzheimer’s disease risk and that’s appropriate in this case. It would be an over-reach to try and name the many other Alzheimer’s disease prevention options being studied.
In addition, the findings address an intermediate endpoint, i.e. amyloid deposition as a disease marker, not the disease itself.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
October 22, 2015 - A minimally invasive implant procedure is highly effective in reducing pain and disability for patients with sacroiliac joint (SIJ) dysfunction, reports a clinical trial in the November issue of Neurosurgery, official journal of the Congress of Neurological Surgeons, published by Wolters Kluwer.

The randomized controlled trial shows superior outcomes in patients undergoing minimally invasive sacroiliac joint (SIJ) fusion using triangular titanium implants, compared to nonsurgical management, according to the new research overseen by Dr. Daniel J. Cher of SI-BONE, Inc., in San Jose, Calif. (The study was sponsored by SI-BONE, manufacturer of the SIJ implants.)

Good Pain Relief and Other Outcomes with Implant Treatment for SIJ Dysfunction

The study included 148 patients with low back pain caused by confirmed SIJ dysfunction, treated at 19 US spine surgery clinics. The SIJ connects the central (sacrum) and lateral (ilium) bones of the pelvis. SIJ disruption or osteoarthritis is a common pain condition, estimated to cause 15 to 23 percent of cases of chronic low back pain.

Trial subjects had severe SIJ pain, with an average pain score of 82 on a 0-to-100-point scale. Average pain duration was longer than six years, and about two-thirds of subjects were taking opioid (narcotic) medications. Many had previously received many non-surgical SIJ treatments, and many had a history of prior spinal surgery.

Two-thirds of subjects were randomly assigned to undergo minimally invasive SIJ fusion. In this procedure, triangular titanium implants were placed through a small incision to stabilize and fuse the SIJ. Procedures were unilateral in most cases, but some subjects underwent bilateral treatment. The remaining subjects received nonsurgical treatments, such as physical therapy, steroid injections and/or radiofrequency ablation of sacral nerve root lateral branches.

Pain and other outcomes were compared at baseline and at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months. At 6 months, subjects in the nonsurgical group had the option to "cross over" to the implant procedure.

Based on reduction in pain and absence of complications at 6 months, treatment was rated successful in 81 percent of subjects assigned to the SIJ implant procedure, compared to 26 percent with nonsurgical treatment. Average pain score decreased to 30 in the surgical group versus 72 in the nonsurgical group. Seventy-three percent of subjects undergoing the implant procedure had "clinically significant" reduction in disability scores, compared to just 14 percent in the nonsurgical group.

After one year, subjects assigned to SIJ fusion still had significant reductions in pain and disability, as well as improved quality of life. Thirty-five subjects from the nonsurgical group opted to undergo the implant procedure, with similarly good results. There were only a few complications related to the SIJ implant procedure.

Sacroiliac joint dysfunction is a common cause of disabling pain in the lower back, buttocks, or groin. Many different surgical and nonsurgical treatments have been used for this condition, despite a lack of high-quality evidence for their effectiveness.

The minimally invasive SIJ implant approach evaluated in this trial has been cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration. The study is the first randomized controlled trial to directly compare the results of surgical and nonsurgical treatment for SIJ dysfunction.

The results show "clinically and statistically important" improvements in clinical outcomes for patients undergoing the SIJ implant procedure, according to Dr. Cher and colleagues, with "profound differences" between the surgical and nonsurgical groups. The implant procedure is minimally invasive, has few complications, and produces significant and lasting improvements in pain, disability, and quality of life.

The authors note some important limitations of the trial, including the lack of long-term outcomes in the nonsurgical group due to the high crossover rate. They plan further analyses, including two-year follow-up CT scans and a cost-effectiveness comparison of SIJ fusion versus nonsurgical treatment.

Click here to read "Randomized Controlled Trial of Minimally Invasive Sacroiliac Joint Fusion Using Triangular Titanium Implants vs Nonsurgical Management for Sacroiliac Joint Dysfunction: 12-Month Outcomes."

Article: "Randomized Controlled Trial of Minimally Invasive Sacroiliac Joint Fusion Using Triangular Titanium Implants vs Nonsurgical Management for Sacroiliac Joint Dysfunction: 12-Month Outcomes" (doi: 10.1227/NEU.0000000000000988)

Neurosurgery, the Official Journal of the Congress of Neurological Surgeons, is your most complete window to the contemporary field of neurosurgery. Members of the Congress and non-member subscribers receive 3,000 pages per year packed with the very latest science, technology, and medicine, not to mention full-text online access to the world's most complete, up-to-the-minute neurosurgery resource. For professionals aware of the rapid pace of developments in the field, Neurosurgery is nothing short of indispensable.

Wolters Kluwer is a global leader in professional information services. Professionals in the areas of legal, business, tax, accounting, finance, audit, risk, compliance and healthcare rely on Wolters Kluwer's market leading information-enabled tools and software solutions to manage their business efficiently, deliver results to their clients, and succeed in an ever more dynamic world.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2014 annual revenues of €3.7 billion. The group serves customers in over 170 countries, and employs over 19,000 people worldwide. The company is headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands. Wolters Kluwer shares are listed on NYSE Euronext Amsterdam (WKL) and are included in the AEX and Euronext 100 indices. Wolters Kluwer has a sponsored Level 1 American Depositary Receipt program. The ADRs are traded on the over-the-counter market in the U.S. (WTKWY).

For more information about our products and organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release lists alternative therapies for SJD which include “physical therapy, steroid injections and/or radiofrequency ablation of sacral nerve root lateral branches” as well as the therapy compared in the trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new cancer drug, Opdivo, is working so well that pharmaceutical giant Bristol-Myers Squibb announced Monday it is stopping a trial in lung cancer two years ahead of schedule.

The trial compared Opdivo to Docetaxel, a type of chemo used for patients whose cancers have recurred after treatment. The study, in 234 patients, was the largest trial of the drug in lung cancer.

"We as a lung cancer community are incredibly excited about the activity of immunotherapy in various aspects of the disease," said Pasi Janne, director of the Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. "It's a disease where we're desperately looking for new therapies."

Lung cancer kills more Americans than any other type of cancer, nearly 160,000 last year.

The new trial looked at a type of lung cancer called squamous cell non-small cell lung cancer, which accounts for about 20%-30% of lung cancers.

There have been no other recent treatment breakthroughs in squamous cancer, which most commonly occurs in smokers or former smokers, so this advance is particularly welcome, said Janne.

Janne, also a professor at Harvard Medical School, said more research is needed before lung cancer patients should be routinely treated with Opdivo, Keytruda or similar drugs.

"I think it's a little premature to start treating people today," he said, "but I don't think we're far away from that."

In December, the Food and Drug Administration approved Opdivo to treat advanced melanoma, a type of skin cancer that used to be considered a death sentence.

Opdivo and others in its class work by removing a brake that cancer puts on the immune system. In some patients, just removing the brake is enough to allow the person's immune system to fight and contain the cancer. For other patients, researchers expect other drugs will be needed, too.

In addition to melanoma and lung cancer, this brake-release approach has been shown effective in early trials against bladder, kidney, head and neck cancers, and some blood cancers.

"We are feeling more and more confident that we are on the cusp of a treatment revolution," said Roger Perlmutter, president of Merck Research Laboratories, which has its own, similar drug called Keytruda.

Merck is also studying Keytruda in people with advanced lung cancer to better understand how they are responding to treatment, what determines how well a patient will respond, and how to get good results for more patients, Perlmutter said.

Existing treatments – chemotherapy, radiation, surgery and so-called targeted therapies – can help beat back tumors, but once cancer has spread, it almost always returns. Immune therapy drugs offer the possibility that the immune system will keep cancer in check indefinitely.

But there are still a lot of unanswered questions about immune therapy.

"It is early days for the successes of immune therapy," said Mark Fishman, president of the Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, a research arm of drug company Novartis, which is taking a different approach to turning the immune system against cancer. "We're looking right now through a small keyhole at a very very large room, and we really don't know yet how big it will be."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that “chemotherapy, radiation, surgery and so-called targeted therapies – can help beat back tumors, but once cancer has spread, it almost always returns.” We’ll rate this sufficient for a satisfactory, although it would have been useful to have some actual data as to how Opdivo compares to these other approaches.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 30, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Stimulating the brain with an implantable device may be safe -- and possibly helpful -- for some people with Alzheimer's disease, a small pilot study suggests.

In what researchers described as a "proof of concept" treatment, three Alzheimer's patients had deep brain stimulation (DBS) wires implanted in the brain -- in areas related to skills like planning, judgment and problem-solving.

Over the next 18 months or more, the tactic appeared to be safe. And there were "signals" that it was slowing down two of the patients' decline, said lead researcher Dr. Douglas Scharre, director of cognitive neurology at Ohio State University's Wexner Medical Center.

Deep brain stimulation is already used to treat some cases of Parkinson's disease and certain other brain disorders.

But it's far too early to know whether it has value for people with Alzheimer's, Scharre stressed.

"This is not ready for prime time," he said. "It's not something patients can ask their neurologist for."

Keith Fargo, who directs scientific programs and outreach for the Alzheimer's Association, agreed.

It's "much too early" for patients or caregivers to seek out DBS, said Fargo, who was not involved in the study.

Instead, he said, these findings suggest that deep brain stimulation is "a reasonable route" to study in larger clinical trials.

The results were published online Jan. 30 in the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease.

Deep brain stimulation involves implanting electrodes in the brain, then connecting them to a pulse generator placed under the skin of the chest. Sometimes called a "brain pacemaker," it delivers electrical pulses that alter the activity in specific brain "circuits."

The theory behind trying DBS for Alzheimer's patients, Scharre said, is similar to the "use it or lose it" principle: If key brain areas can be stimulated to form new connections among cells, it might slow decline.

Right now, Scharre noted, medications for Alzheimer's target brain chemicals involved in memory.

But Alzheimer's impairs all kinds of mental functions -- including judgment, planning and decision-making. And those issues have a huge impact on daily life, for patients and their caregivers, Scharre added.

So, the patients in his study received DBS, for at least 18 months, to brain areas that regulate those mental skills. All three patients were in the earlier stages of Alzheimer's and were on standard medications.

After starting DBS, all saw a general decline in their memory, problem-solving and other skills. But they declined at a slower rate, compared to 96 similar patients whose information was taken from an Alzheimer's research database.

Two of the DBS patients declined at a "meaningfully" slower rate, according to Scharre. That included one who actually showed some improvements.

That patient was LaVonne Moore, 85, of Delaware, Ohio. When she entered the study, she was not preparing any meals. After two years of deep brain stimulation, she'd regained that skill -- and was better able to perform some other simple tasks, like selecting her clothes and organizing outings.

In a Ohio State news release, her husband, Tom Moore, said her Alzheimer's has progressed, but more slowly than he'd expected.

"LaVonne has had Alzheimer's disease longer than anybody I know, and that sounds negative, but it's really a positive thing because it shows that we're doing something right," Moore said.

If DBS ever becomes an option for Alzheimer's, Scharre said it would not be for everyone.

It would not be appropriate, for example, for people who are frail or have other serious medical conditions.

In the pilot study, side effects included hot flashes, heart palpitations and burning sensations in the skin, which were reversed by adjusting the DBS settings, the researchers said.

There is no larger trial in the works yet, according to Scharre.

What's needed, said Fargo, is research that compares deep brain stimulation against a placebo device.

On a broader level, he noted, this study highlights an important point: "Alzheimer's disease is more than just amnesia."

For caregivers, Fargo said, the problems with abilities like judgment and planning can actually be more challenging. So any new therapies that help address those issues would be welcome.

More than 5 million Americans have Alzheimer's -- a number that could rise to 16 million by 2050, according to the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that “medications for Alzheimer’s target brain chemicals involved in memory.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People who took a newer type of pain pill over a three-year period were less likely to develop polyps that could lead to colorectal cancer — but at the expense of a higher risk of heart problems, new study findings report.

And when participants stopped taking the pain pill Celebrex (celecoxib) out of concerns over side effects, they eventually developed more polyps than people who had remained on an inactive, or placebo, drug throughout the study.

So should people concerned about their risk of colorectal cancer consider Celebrex?

“The findings in this study don’t necessarily make that decision any easier,” said Dr. Andrew Chan of Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, who did not participate in the research.

The study, published in the American Journal of Gastroenterology, received financial support from Pfizer, which sells Celebrex.

This is not the first study to suggest Celebrex and similar drugs — known as COX-2 inhibitors - may reduce the risk of developing colon cancer, he said, but people need to balance that potential benefit with the higher risk of cardiovascular complications.

As a result, he said he suspects most people would choose to rely on regular colonoscopies to catch the disease in its early stages, rather than take a potentially risky drug for years.

But to people who have no underlying cardiovascular problems and a particularly high risk of colon cancer - they were diagnosed with it before perhaps, or have a strong family history - regular screening may not be enough, Chan noted.

“So for those patients, they might consider taking a drug like this,” he said.

Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in men and women, and strikes 1.2 million people each year.

Other research has provided signs that COX-2 inhibitors, which block the COX-2 enzyme that causes inflammation, could also prevent colorectal cancer, as well as lung cancer in heavy smokers.

However, most COX-2 inhibitors ran into safety issues a few years after their approval, and now only Celebrex remains on the U.S. market. At a cost of several dollars per day, depending on dosage, it is much more expensive than older pain relievers such as ibuprofen.

During the study, Dr. Nadir Arber of Tel Aviv University and his colleagues reviewed data collected from 1,561 people with a history of colorectal cancer. More than half had received Celebrex for approximately 3 years, before concerns over the increased risk of cardiovascular problems caused researchers to discontinue the study.

The scientists then followed the people willing to continue the research for another 2 years, noting who developed new polyps, including advanced polyps with features that suggest they’re more likely to become cancerous. Approximately half of the people who started the study agreed to continue.

Not surprisingly, Celebrex users were more likely to develop cardiovascular problems, including a 66 percent higher risk of serious cardiac disorders. But over the total 5-year period, people who took Celebrex were also less likely to develop new and advanced polyps than people who took a placebo.

Specifically, new polyps were found in 58 percent of people on placebo, and only 51 percent on Celebrex.

However, during the 5th year of the study alone, after the trial had been over for 2 years, 27 percent of Celebrex users developed new polyps, versus only 16 percent of people who had been on placebo - translating to a 66 percent higher risk among those who previously took Celebrex. Those who had been on Celebrex were also more likely to develop advanced polyps during that final year.

This rebound in risk actually makes biological sense, Chan told Reuters Health. If COX-2 inhibitors protect against colon cancer by blocking an enzyme pathway, when that blockage is released, the disease could occur “potentially at higher levels than had you never been on the drug in the first place,” he said.

Still, the results are “very promising,” Arber told Reuters Health by e-mail, adding he is now working to identify people who could benefit from the drug without experiencing the side effects.

Only half of the people who originally agreed to participate in the study remained after 5 years, and it’s unclear how this might affect the results, noted Chan, whose own research suggests aspirin could prevent deaths from colorectal cancer.

However, for a study that lasts this long, “those are acceptable numbers,” noted Arber.

If patients asked him whether they should take celecoxib to prevent colorectal cancer, Arber would tell them “no,” he added. “They should speak with their doctor.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that most people should rely on colonoscopies to find colorectal cancer in its early stages rather than take a risky drug to prevent it. It also mentions the fact that aspirin is being studied for its potential cancer prevention effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 6, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Cancer patients who have ovarian tissue removed and stored for later transplantation have a chance at a successful pregnancy, a new study finds.

Powerful chemotherapy and radiation treatments for cancer can impair a woman's fertility. This new study shows that ovarian tissue transplants are safe and effective and pose little risk of the cancer coming back, the Danish researchers said.

"This procedure is gaining ground worldwide as an optional fertility treatment for fertile female cancer patients who after cancer treatment most likely will be infertile," said lead researcher Dr. Annette Jensen, from the Laboratory of Reproductive Biology at Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen.

With this procedure, many women who survive cancer should be able to become pregnant and have healthy children, Jensen said.

Of 32 women who had ovarian tissue frozen and transplanted in this study, 10 women -- or 31 percent -- had a child, she said.

Many young cancer patients today can expect to live a normal lifespan. Their focus shifts from survival to quality-of-life, explained senior researcher Dr. Claus Yding Andersen, a professor of human reproductive physiology at the University of Copenhagen. "Here, fertility is very important to many young women," he said.

"The tissue restores ovarian organ function, and women regain menstrual cycles and sex hormone levels that will avoid menopause," Andersen added.

Dr. Avner Hershlag, chief of the Center for Human Reproduction at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., called the new research "innovative and exciting."

Simultaneous advances in cancer treatment and reproductive medicine have made these scientific leaps possible, he said.

However, Hershlag said he would like to see a pregnancy rate above 31 percent. "The pregnancy rate with frozen embryos is close to 50 percent, and results are getting better," he said, referring to another option for women hoping for a future pregnancy. "It remains to be seen which method is better."

The Danish report was published Oct. 7 in the journal Human Reproduction.

For the study, the researchers reviewed the outcomes of 53 transplantations of thawed ovarian tissue in 41 Danish women. The investigators followed the women for 10 years, looking at ovarian function, fertility and safety.

The women's average age when the tissue was removed and frozen was nearly 30. Average age of the first transplant was 33.

Thirty-two of the women attempted pregnancy. Ten were successful and had at least one child -- 14 children in all.

Eight children were conceived naturally, and six with the help of in vitro fertilization, the researchers reported.

Two women had abortions, one because she was separating from her partner and the other because her breast cancer recurred. Another woman had a miscarriage, the researchers said.

For three of the mothers, more than 10 years had passed since the ovarian tissue transplantation. In six cases, it was more than eight years. And for 15 of the women, transplantation had taken place more than five years earlier, the researchers said.

Although three women had a relapse of their cancer, these relapses did not appear related to the tissue transplantation. And no cancer developed in the transplanted tissue, Jensen said.

"So some of these women will still be able to have more children and avoid menopausal symptoms," she said, noting two more pregnancies have been reported to her laboratory since the study's publication.

Not all women are eligible for ovarian tissue transplants, however. "In particular, we have not performed transplants in patients who have suffered from leukemia, because the ovarian tissue may harbor cancer cells," Jensen said.

For more on fertility and cancer treatments, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that instead of the removal of the entire ovary and storage, it is possible patients could choose embryo cryopreservation/freezing. A physician is quoted as follows:
“The pregnancy rate with frozen embryos is close to 50 percent, and results are getting better,” he said, referring to another option for women hoping for a future pregnancy. “It remains to be seen which method is better.”
We’d add that embryo cryopreservation/ freezing requires a woman to have a partner or use donor sperm AND to undergo IVF — a lot to do in the context of cancer treatment. Freezing unfertilized eggs is another approach where there’s the option to attempt to fertilize them later.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Monitoring high-risk pregnancies with ultrasound tests may help prevent some fetal and newborn deaths, a new research review finds.

The review assessed a technology called Doppler ultrasound, which measures blood flow through the umbilical cord. Abnormal findings indicate that the fetus may be under stress.

Doppler ultrasound, done in the third trimester, is an established way to monitor high-risk pregnancies — those complicated by problems like poor fetal growth or health conditions in the mother, such as high blood pressure and heart and kidney diseases.

Still, the benefits of such monitoring had not been entirely clear. There have been concerns that abnormal findings on Doppler ultrasound may prompt doctors to sometimes unnecessarily intervene — by, for instance, performing a cesarean section.

But in the new review, researchers found that across 16 studies of more than 10,000 high-risk pregnancies, Doppler ultrasound testing was linked to a 29 percent reduction in fetal and newborn deaths.

Among women who did not receive ultrasound monitoring, 1.7 percent suffered a fetal or newborn death, versus 1.2 percent of women who underwent ultrasound.

The benefit seemed to stem from better decisions on C-sections and inductions of labor, according to the researchers, led by Dr. Zarko Alfirevic of the University of Liverpool in the UK.

He and his colleagues report their review findings in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, which is published by the Cochrane Collaboration, an international research organization that evaluates medical studies.

In an interview, Alfirevic said that the evidence supports using Doppler in high-risk pregnancies where the mother has high blood pressure or the fetus is abnormally small. In these cases, the fetus may not be getting enough nutrients and oxygen through the placenta.

“These women really should have a Doppler investigation of the umbilical artery,” Alfirevic said. Typically, high-risk women would receive other types prenatal testing as well, such as electronic fetal-heart monitoring.

“We’re just saying this (Doppler ultrasound) should be part of it,” Alfirevic said.

In practice, Doppler ultrasound may also be recommended for women who have diabetes or are having a prolonged pregnancy (beyond 42 weeks). But there is not yet strong evidence that these women benefit, Alfirevic said.

In general, he and his colleagues found, the trials included in the review, which were mainly done in the 1990s, had their shortcomings. Some had flaws in their design, while in other cases the researchers failed to provide details on key elements of the study design.

However, with Doppler an established technique for monitoring high-risk pregnancies, Alfirevic said it is very unlikely that any future studies will test Doppler against no Doppler — as most studies in this review did.

Research, according to Alfirevic, has moved on to other questions, including how to best manage abnormal findings from a Doppler scan.

In some cases, early delivery may be the best course, but it is unclear whether other options — such as bed rest or tighter blood pressure control in a woman with high blood pressure — are effective.

Another question, Alfirevic said, is whether ultrasounds of blood vessels other than the umbilical artery might improve pregnancy outcomes.

One thing that is clear, the researcher stressed, is that Doppler ultrasound is not necessary for women with average, healthy pregnancies.

“There is no evidence to suggest that it should be done in low-risk women,” Alfirevic said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



 
The story says other types of testing, including electronic fetal-heart monitoring, may also be done during high-risk pregnancies. 

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE



Newswise — The latest in a series of studies led by researchers at Johns Hopkins Medicine shows that addition of a widely available, noninvasive imaging test called 99mTc-sestamibi SPECT/CT to CT or MRI increases the accuracy of kidney tumor classification. The research team reports that the potential improvement in diagnostic accuracy will spare thousands of patients each year in the United States alone from having to undergo unnecessary surgery.

In a recent report on ongoing work to improve kidney tumor classification, published in the April issue of the journal Clinical Nuclear Medicine, the team reports that the sestamibi SPECT/CT test—short for 99mTc-sestamibi single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography(CT) — adds additional diagnostic information in conjunction with conventional CTs and MRI and improves physicians’ ability to differentiate between benign and malignant kidney tumors.

“Sestamibi SPECT/CT lets radiologists and urologists ‘see’ the most common benign kidney tumor, something CT and MRI have not succeeded in doing alone,” says Mohamad E. Allaf, M.D., MEA Endowed Professor of Urology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “This noninvasive scan may prevent patients with a potentially benign kidney tumor from having to undergo a surgery to remove the tumor or potentially the entire kidney, along with its associated risks and high costs. At Johns Hopkins, use of this test has already spared a number of our patients from unnecessary surgery and unnecessary removal of a kidney that would require them to be on dialysis. These results are hugely encouraging, but we need to do more studies.”

For this study, 48 patients who were diagnosed with a kidney tumor on conventional CT or MRI were imaged with sestamibi SPECT/CT at Johns Hopkins prior to surgery. Radiologists, who were not allowed to talk to each other or know the results of the surgeries, graded the conventional and sestamibi SPECT/CT images benign or malignant using a 5-point scale (1 = definitely benign, 5 = definitely cancerous).

Following surgery, similarly ‘blinded’ pathologists analyzed the tumors without knowing the radiologists’ imaging results. Pathology results of surgically removed tumors showed that 8 of the 48 were benign. The remaining 40 were classified as a variety of other tumor types, including malignant renal cell carcinomas.

Reviewing sestamibi SPECT/CT scan results in conjunction with CT or MRI changed the initial rating levels from cancerous (score 3, 4, 5) toward benign (score 1 and 2) in 9 cases, and changed reviewers’ score from likely cancerous (score 4) to definitely cancerous (score 5) in 5 cases, or about 10 percent of all cases. The addition of sestamibi SPECT/CT increased the reviewers’ diagnostic certainty in 14 of the 48 patients, or in nearly 30 percent of all cases.

Overall, the investigators said, adding sestamibi SPECT/CT helped identify 7 of 9 benign tumors, and conventional imaging with added sestamibi SPECT/CT outperformed conventional imaging alone, as measured by a statistical analysis that measures tradeoffs between sensitivity and specificity. On this measure, a value of 0.50 indicates that a diagnostic test is no better than chance. Conventional imaging combined with sestamibi SPECT/CT had a value of 0.85, while conventional imaging alone had a value of 0.60.

Even for patients whose tumors were not reclassified, the addition of sestamibi SPECT/CT increased physicians’ ability to more confidently classify malignant tumors, which reduces the risk of misdiagnosis and unnecessary surgery for all patients, the researchers say.

Radiologists and urologists have been frustrated for decades by the inability of conventional imaging tests, such as CT and MRI, to distinguish benign from malignant kidney tumors. At Johns Hopkins, multispecialty teams work together to determine the best care for patients and as partners on research innovations and quality improvement initiatives. “This collaborative venue enabled two then-residents [Drs. Michael Gorin and Steven Rowe] from different departments and specialties to design a clinical trial based on a few reports in the literature suggesting a potential role for sestamibi SPECT/CT in this diagnostic conundrum, and their hypothesis proved correct,” says Mehrbod Som Javadi, MD, assistant professor of radiology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and the senior author on the paper. Pamela T. Johnson, MD, associate professor of radiology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine notes, “these types of advances are critical to our precision medicine initiative, Hopkins inHealth, designed for individualized patient management, and to our mission of high-value health care, where the highest quality care is safely delivered at the lowest personal and financial cost to the patient.”

“As radiologists, we have struggled to find noninvasive ways to better classify patients and spare unnecessary surgery, but this has not been easy,” says Steven P. Rowe, M.D., Ph.D., one of the two former residents who developed this approach, and now assistant professor of radiology and radiological science at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “Sestamibi SPECT/CT offers an inexpensive and widely available means of better characterizing kidney tumors, and the identical test is now being performed as part of a large trial in Sweden, for which the first results have just recently been published and appear to confirm our conclusions.”

Although further study is needed to validate the accuracy of sestamibi SPECT/CT, this test appears to be a less expensive, faster, noninvasive alternative to surgery, says Michael A. Gorin, M.D., the other resident involved in developing this approach and now chief resident with The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “In the absence of diagnostic certainty, surgeons tend to remove kidney tumors in an abundance of caution, leading to an estimated 5,600 surgically removed benign kidney tumors each year in the United States.”

Other authors on this paper include, Sara Sheikhbahaei, Christopher S. Jones, Kristin K. Porter, Alex S. Baras, Phillip M. Pierorazio, Mark W. Ball, Lilja B. Solnes, Jonathan I. Epstein, and Mehrbod S. Javadi, all of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and Takahiro Higuchi of Wurzburg University in Germany.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release describes the results of comparing the diagnostic accuracy of regular CT or MRI scans alone or with the addition of sestamibi SPECT/CT imaging. The release also states that the alternative to diagnostic certainty is surgery, even when it is unknown whether the tumor is malignant or non-cancerous.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An injection of Botox works about as well as a surgically implanted device to help women with very severe incontinence, researchers reported Tuesday.

It’s good news for women with severe urge incontinence, who can choose between treatments based on preference, said Dr. Cindy Amundsen of Duke University, who led the study.

“What we have learned from the study is the treatments are both good and it will just help inform physicians and patients who are trying to make a decision between these two therapies,” Amundsen said.

“We are actually not surprised that there isn’t a big difference between the two because both therapies are effective at relaxing the overactive bladder muscles.”

Women can choose between a surgical procedure, which is more expensive at first, versus regular Botox injections, which are less costly and less invasive but which could add up over time, Amundsen said.

The team studied women with severe incontinence who could not be helped with drugs or other treatments. The women in the study had to suffer at least six episodes of incontinence over three days.

The Botox injections freed 20 percent of the women in the study of incontinence, compared to 4 percent who had a nerve stimulator implant, Amundesen and colleagues reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

“Forty-six percent in the onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) group and 26 percent in the sacral neuromodulation group had at least a 75 percent reduction in the number of episodes of urgency incontinence,” they added.

Incontinence may sound funny, but it’s no joke, the researchers said.

“The prevalence of this disruptive condition is common and increases with age, from 17 percent of women older than 45 years to 27 percent older than 75 years in the United States,” they wrote.

And, according to the National Institutes of Health, between 25 percent and 45 percent of all women have some degree of urinary incontinence.

“Women experience urinary incontinence twice as often as men,” the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, part of the NIH, says on its website.

“Pregnancy, childbirth, menopause, and the structure of the female urinary tract account for this difference.”

The researchers at nine medical centers did a head to head comparison of a single Botox injection to the implanted medical device, assigning 381 women to randomly get one or the other treatment. The women were asked to keep diaries for six months.

Both treatments calm down the nerves responsible for signaling the bladder to empty.

On average, both treatments cut the number of “accidents” – Botox by almost four times a day and the nerve stimulator by about three times a day.

But both groups of women reported equal satisfaction, and more women in the Botox group got urinary tract infections – 35 percent versus 11 percent in the surgery group. Amundsen said it’s not clear why but her team is studyingthis to find out.

They’re also studying the cost difference. Most women who get either treatment have insurance that pays, Amundsen said.

Incontinence is embarrassing and troubling to men and women alike, who are often unwilling to even tell a doctor. They end up staying close to home and avoiding travel, shopping and visits.

There are different types of incontinence. This study covered urge incontinence, but there’s also stress incontinence, which is caused by pressure on the bladder.

Overflow incontinence is caused when the bladder never really empties. That can be a problem for men with enlarged prostates.

Doctors usually try to start people off with lifestyle treatment, such as weight loss, drinking less caffeine and alcohol, and avoiding lifting heavy objects. Exercises to strengthen the pelvic floor muscles can help, as can “bladder training” to accustom the body to urinating at regular times.

Medications can help as well, although they often have unpleasant side effects such as extremely dry mouth.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We not only see a comparison to the medical device that the study focused on, but also methods that require no overt treatment, “such as weight loss, drinking less caffeine and alcohol, and avoiding lifting heavy objects.” The story also notes that “[e]xercises to strengthen the pelvic floor muscles can help, as can ‘bladder training’ to accustom the body to urinating at regular times.”
The story could have been more clear that these treatments aren’t likely to work for the women in this study who had a specific type of severe urge incontinence that is usually not responsive to exercise and other less invasive measures.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Dec. 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- If colon cancer screening was as easy as taking a breath, more people might do it. Now, a small pilot study suggests such a test could be developed.

The study, of 78 people with and without colon cancer, found that those with the disease tended to have a distinct pattern of chemicals in their breath. And when researchers analyzed the study participants' breath samples, they correctly identified the colon cancer patients 76 percent of the time.

The findings, reported online Dec. 5 in the British Journal of Surgery, sound good. But if you're waiting for your doctor to offer such a test, don't hold your breath.

"It's an interesting concept, but this is in the very early stages," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate and colorectal cancers for the American Cancer Society.

"There's no way to tell if this would work in the general population," said Brooks, who was not involved in the research.

What's more, he added, there are already several good ways to catch colon cancer -- or, even better, precancerous growths called polyps, which can then be removed before a tumor develops. Yet about 40 percent of Americans who should be getting screened are not.

"Colon cancer is a highly preventable disease," Brooks said. "And I would encourage the four out of 10 people who are not taking advantage of the existing screening tools to talk with their doctor."

The idea of using a breath test to catch cancer is not new: Researchers are looking into breath tests for detecting a number of cancers, including lung and breast tumors. It's all based on studies showing that breath samples from cancer patients tend to have a distinguishing pattern of so-called volatile organic compounds (VOCs).

When it comes to colon cancer, people already have several options for screening, which for most adults should begin at age 50 -- or possibly earlier if you are at higher-than-normal risk.

The choices include a yearly stool test that looks for hidden blood, or either of two invasive tests that scope the colon: sigmoidoscopy every five years, along with stool testing every three years; or colonoscopy every 10 years.

But many people are turned off by those tests.

So Dr. Donato Altomare and colleagues at the University Aldo Moro in Bari, Italy, decided to test the feasibility of a breath test.

Analyzing breath samples from 37 patients with colon cancer and 41 healthy middle-aged adults, the researchers found 15 VOCs that seemed to differ between the two groups.

They then used a statistical model to see if certain VOC patterns separated the colon cancer patients from the healthy participants. In the end, the researchers were able to correctly identify the cancer patients 76 percent of the time.

But, Brooks pointed out, that also means the breath test was wrong about one-quarter of the time.

There's no way of knowing how well such a screening test would work in the real world -- including how many people might wrongly get a positive result and undergo needless invasive tests to follow up, Brooks said.

Another big question, he added, is whether breath analysis could pinpoint people with colon polyps.

"One of our goals in screening is to detect polyps, not cancer," Brooks said. "This study doesn't address that."

Altomare's team acknowledges that there is a lot of work left to do. It's still unclear which breath chemicals should be measured, or what statistical method is best for weeding out cases of colon cancer.

Brooks said it would be nice to have a very simple, accurate screening test -- whether that means a breath test or blood or urine tests. Yearly stool tests are simple and cheap, but people often don't want to do them.

"We're always searching for simpler things to do," Brooks said. But for now, he added, "this study raises many more questions than answers."

Learn more about colon cancer from the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses existing options for colon cancer screening, and what some experts think are the appropriate ages and intervals at which these tests should be done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Regular exercise may prevent many cases of future depression, according to a new Australian study, and researchers say that as little as one hour a week can make a real difference.

The paper, published in the , followed more than 22,000 healthy Norwegian adults without symptoms of anxiety or depression for an average of 11 years, asking them about their exercise habits and symptoms of depression and anxiety at the beginning and end of the study.

At the start, about 12% said they didn’t exercise, and the rest said they exercised anywhere from “up to 30 minutes” to “more than 4 hours” a week.

Over the next decade, about 7% of people in the study developed depression, and about 9% developed anxiety. No relationship was observed between exercise and later anxiety, but the researchers did find a link between exercise and later depression.

People who said they didn’t exercise at the study’s start were 44% more likely to become depressed, compared to those who exercised at least 1 to 2 hours a week. For people who worked out more, no additional benefits were observed.

The study could not prove a cause-and-effect relationship between exercise and the risk of depression, but the authors say it strongly suggests one—especially because they controlled for other potential factors, including age, gender, social support, smoking, drinking and body mass index.

If their hypothesis is right, they say, 12% of depression cases could be prevented if everyone got just one hour of exercise a week.

That exercise doesn’t have to be intense, either, they say. People seemed to have mental health benefits from physical activity regardless of whether they reported working out to the point of exhaustion or barely breaking a sweat.

“Given that the intensity of exercise does not appear to be important,” the authors wrote in their paper, “it may be that the most effective public health measures are those that encourage and facilitate increased levels of everyday activities, such as walking or cycling.”

Of course, there are other benefits to more frequent and more intense bouts of exercise. Both the American Heart Association and the World Health Organization recommend getting at least 150 minutes of moderate- to high-intensity physical activity a week for cardiovascular and overall health.

But when it comes to mental health benefits, “the majority of the protective effect comes from the first one or two hours of exercise each week,” said study author Samuel Harvey, associate professor of workplace mental health at the Black Dog Institute and the University of New South Wales, in an email.

MORE: A New Hope For Depression

The authors write that the combined physical and social benefits of exercise are likely responsible for its ability to help stave off depression. It’s also possible, they add, that exercise may trigger changes in self-esteem, the release of mood-boosting endorphins and the production of certain proteins.

“There is good evidence that physical activity can help people recover from depression, though we recommend it be used in addition to the usual treatments we would prescribe for established depression, like medication and counseling,” says Harvey. “Our study takes this a bit further and shows that exercise may also have a role in preventing people developing depression in the first place.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study does mention that exercise, if it is proven to have a positive effect on depression, should be used along with medications and counseling in people who already have been diagnosed.
However, it does not discuss methods for preventing depression. Are there any? Even if there are none, that should be mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When it comes to preventing blood clots after a knee replacement, good old aspirin may be just as effective as newer, more expensive drugs.

That swap could help reduce the cost of caring for the nearly 1 million Americans who have a knee fixed each year, Michigan Medicine researchers say.

After knee surgery, there's a risk of blood clots in the legs or lungs. So it's routine for patients to take clot-preventing drugs for some time afterward.

Some doctors choose powerful anti-clotting drugs like heparin (Lovenox) and rivaroxaban (Xarelto), but it hasn't been clear whether these expensive prescription drugs work any better than cheap, readily available aspirin.

"Aspirin alone may provide similar protection compared to anticoagulation treatments," says Brian R. Hallstrom, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon and associate chair for quality and safety at the University of Michigan Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.

Hallstrom is the lead author of a new study published in JAMA Surgery that found few patients developed a blood clot after surgery, and those patients on aspirin fared just as well as those on anticoagulants.

During the two-year study period from 2013 to 2015, aspirin use rose from 10 percent to 50 percent among the patients cared for by orthopaedic surgeons in the Michigan Arthroplasty Registry Collaborative Quality Initiative, a statewide effort to give patients the best possible recovery and outcomes after hip and knee replacements.

Since then, the shift has become even more distinct: Aspirin prescribing has risen to 70 percent among Michigan surgeons, says Hallstrom, who is co-director of the initiative and a health services researcher at U-M's Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation.

Based on the experience of 41,537 Michigan patients undergoing knee replacement, the study may further the debate about the routine use of aspirin for clot prevention.

A recent Canadian study looked at the issue, but the analysis had a caveat: Each of the more than 3,400 clinical trial patients received rivaroxaban the first five days after surgery. After that, they continued with the drug or switched to aspirin.

The new U-M study suggests patients may be adequately protected if they take aspirin alone from day one.

"This study is truly a real-world experience of what happened in Michigan when the majority of surgeons switched to aspirin," Hallstrom says. "The incidence of blood clots, pulmonary embolus and death did not increase despite this dramatic change in practice."

Over the past decade, surgeons have turned away from powerful anticoagulants and toward aspirin used in addition to nondrug improvements such as compression devices for thwarting clots.

These days, most patients have a generally low risk of blood clots after knee replacement for a number of reasons. Those reasons include shorter surgical times, less invasive procedures and use of regional anesthesia that allows early mobilization after surgery, Hallstrom says. Some patients are even going home the same day.

"The most important way to prevent blood clots is getting moving," says Hallstrom, noting that people are at risk for blood clots when they sit or lie in one position for too long, such as on an airplane or a hospital bed.

The critical care specialists who make up the American College of Chest Physicians favor heparin to reduce the risk of blood clots, while the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons guidelines state that no one drug is better than another for preventing clots.

The U-M study involved patients undergoing knee replacement surgery at any of the 29 Michigan hospitals in the surgical quality group. One-third of the patients took aspirin alone; 54 percent took only an anticoagulant; and 13 percent took an aspirin/anticoagulant combination.

Over three months, just 1.16 percent of aspirin patients developed a serious blood clot. That was true for 1.42 percent of anticoagulant patients, according to the Michigan study. This was not statistically different.

So, neither drug appeared better than the other -- but aspirin has some obvious advantages.

"Aspirin is easy to take and much less expensive," Hallstrom says. "Patients can get it over the counter for pennies, while the other anticoagulants require monitoring, injections, frequent dose adjustments and are extremely expensive."

The reported cost for a 30-day supply of rivaroxaban is approximately $379 to $450; heparin is estimated at $450 to $890. Although warfarin costs a few dollars for a 30-day supply, its cost approaches that of the other anticoagulants when doctor visits for monitoring are factored in, Hallstrom says.

The study suggests most patients can have just aspirin without increasing the risk for venous thromboembolism, but doctors need to consider factors such as a patient's history of clots, obesity and ability to mobilize after surgery when determining the best measure for clot prevention, Hallstrom adds.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release highlights the comparison between alternatives for minimizing blood clot risk due to knee replacement surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When a couple is struggling to conceive, it's the woman who is usually the first — and often the only one — to be poked, prodded and analyzed, experts say. The burden of figuring out infertility is too often placed on the woman alone.

"Unfortunately, the majority of society looks at infertility as a women's issue, but that's just not the case," said Brad Imler, American Pregnancy Association president.

Placed among dozens of pregnancy, ovulation and female fertility kits, an at-home sperm test that hit retail shelves in April could help change that mentality, experts said.

SpermCheck Fertility, which determines in minutes whether a man's sperm count is low, offers almost instant insight into one of the many aspects of male fertility. Although it's not a comprehensive evaluation and could give some consumers a false sense of security, the test does provide a starting point while drawing attention to male infertility as a legitimate health concern.

"It may provide (an opportunity for) both physicians and couples to take a closer look at ways for men to step up to the plate and optimize their reproductive potential," said Dr. Robert Brannigan, urologist at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. "I think anything that highlights the fact that men can have issues, that men do play a role in infertility, is important."

Approximately 15 percent of U.S. couples of reproductive age who are trying to conceive face infertility issues, said Brannigan, an expert in male fertility.

Male infertility contributes to 50 percent of those cases, he said. Male infertility alone is the cause 30 percent of the time; a combination of male and female factors account for the other 20 percent.

SpermCheck Fertility is designed to help couples determine more quickly whether male infertility might be a problem for them, said Ray Lopez, CEO of SpermCheck, based in Charlottesville, Va. Many men put off having a semen analysis because they don't want to provide a sample in a doctor's office or lab, he said.

"No one wants to go through the embarrassment of jumping in that room and looking at dirty magazines," Lopez said.

Giving men the opportunity to take a test in the privacy of their home helps get the process moving, he said.

Men tend to think they're perfectly healthy, especially when it comes to their sexuality, APA's Imler said. This test, which is noninvasive, could be wake-up call for some.

"If there is a problem with him, it's identified a little quicker," Imler said. "We love the idea of avoiding that heartache of that month to month struggle of trying to conceive without success."

SpermCheck Fertility is the only FDA-approved home sperm test currently on the market and available in retail stores, Lopez said. The test costs about $40; the average cost of a semen analysis in a doctor's office is about $100.

At-home sperm tests are a fairly new idea, Imler said, but SpermCheck Fertility is not the first one. Four years ago an FDA-approved home test called Fertell, which is no longer for sale, offered an evaluation of both male and female fertility.

There are also several at-home sperm analysis kits available online. They each include a microscope and cost at least $80.

Although it's not the first ever at-home test, SpermCheck Fertility is the first one to use the lateral flow assay method, Lopez said. When the semen sample is applied to the test strip, the liquid works its way up the paper until it reaches the results window.

"It's very, very similar to a pregnancy test," Lopez said. "The concept behind our test is to keep it simple, user friendly."

For Brittany Scott, a Cortland resident whose husband took the SpermCheck Fertility test, however, it seemed a little more complicated than a pregnancy test. Scott said she was surprised by the number of steps involved, although none were very difficult.

Scott, a "mommy blogger" who requested and received a free test to review, said she wanted her husband to take the test to see if a recent vasectomy had worked. The result showed that the father of four's sperm count was below the test's threshold.

"It was blatantly negative. I was really glad that the test was not ambiguous at all," she said. "There was no line I could mistake."

Scott said she wished the test had been available when the couple was struggling to conceive their first child. After about 11 months of trying, she had pushed her husband to get a semen analysis from a doctor.

"If this test had been around back then, he would have definitely been more willing to do it" than the semen analysis, she said.

SpermCheck Fertility tests were created after a scientist at the University of Virginia discovered a specific protein found only in the head of sperm, Lopez said. By detecting that protein, the test indicates whether or not a semen sample contains 20 million sperm per milliliter.

About 90 percent of fertile men have sperm counts above that concentration, according to the SpermCheck Fertility instructions.

But there is not a strict cutoff point between normal or abnormal, Brannigan said. Some men might be considered in the infertile range and have no problem impregnating a woman. And others have sperm counts that seem fine, but they have difficulty.

"If his sperm concentration is indeed greater than 20 million, that's very encouraging," Brannigan said. "But it's by no means a definitive marker of proven fertility because there is a significant overlap between fertile and infertile men."

As stated in the SpermCheck Fertility instructions, sperm count is not the only factor that contributes to male fertility. The test is not intended to be a complete semen analysis or an overall indicator of a man's fertility, Lopez said.

The male reproductive system should not be oversimplified, Brannigan said. There are several characteristics of sperm alone — at least three that aren't addressed by SpermCheck — that affect male fertility. In addition, hormones and the delivery of the sperm play a part.

"There are a number of components that lead to a man having normal fertility potential," Brannigan said. "It's a complicated picture."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story provides a lengthy list of fertility problems that are not addressed by this home test, but, presumably, would be addressed in a fertility clinic.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dressed in street clothes, Tara Cassidy Driscoll lies face-down on an examining table at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Orthopedic surgeon George Theodore is about to blast her foot with powerful shock waves generated by sound.

After numbing her foot with Novocain, Theodore turns on an expensive German-made machine that beams tightly focused sound energy at Cassidy Driscoll's heel, near the point where her painful plantar fascia attaches to the heel bone. Suddenly the room is filled with the rhythmic click-click-click of a metronome.

It's a kind of paradox: Theodore is damaging her foot in order to heal it.

"The shocks are like a little baseball bat hitting the tissue," Theodore says. "It's producing a little bit of a repair process -- a little microbleeding."

The healing process takes place over several months after the shock-wave therapy, which Theodore does in a single treatment. [Other centers use lower-energy shock waves over several treatments.]

Theodore has been doing the shock-wave therapy for plantar fasciitis for about eight years, after longer experiences in Europe. It's the same technology used since the 1980s to blast kidney stones, an application called lithotripsy, but for foot problems doctors use less intense shock waves.

Shock-wave therapy for plantar fasciitis is beginning to catch on around the U.S., partly since this stubborn type of foot pain is so common -- and so difficult to treat. Nearly 2 million Americans seek care for plantar fasciitis (pronounced PLAN-tar FASH-ee-EYE-tus) every year.

Theodore tells Cassidy Driscoll that shock-wave therapy gives her a 60 to 80 percent chance of reducing her pain by half; about one-quarter of patients will become pain-free from the treatment.

After the 20-minute treatment, Cassidy Driscoll says she felt no pain, only a sort of tapping. She gets off the table, walks out of Theodore's office and drives herself home. Two days later, she says her foot felt bruised, but she didn't have enough pain to require medication.

Cassidy Driscoll will pay $1,000 for the treatment. Elsewhere the charge can range from $500 to several thousand dollars. But most insurers won't pay for it, because they consider it experimental.

Studies have given conflicting results, partly because there's no standardized way of doing shock-wave therapy. Different doctors use different sources of energy, different doses and a differing number of treatments.

"Is it rock-solid science that everyone agrees on? I would say no," says Dr. Naven Duggal, another Harvard orthopedic surgeon at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

Duggal is not impressed with reported success rates.

"Sixty to 80 percent [success] for something that somebody's not going to get guaranteed pain relief -- in my mind, it's not something I would go for," Duggal says.

Duggal says foot specialists don't really know what causes the pain of plantar fasciitis.

The plantar fascia is a tough, rubber-band-like structure on the bottom of the foot.

It has to be strong, because every time the foot strikes the ground, the plantar fascia bears the body's full weight. In high-impact activities like running, the forces even exceed the actual weight because it's so concentrated in a narrow spot where the fascia attaches to the heel bone. That's presumably why sufferers of plantar fasciitis feel the pain in the heel.

Concepts of what plantar fasciitis is have changed in recent years. Doctors used to think it occurred because the fascia became inflamed –- in fact, the suffix "-itis" denotes inflammation. But while inflammation can be involved in plantar fasciitis, it doesn't seem to be the cause, Duggal says.

Many think that plantar fasciitis is caused by heel spurs, bony hook-like growths that develop on many people's heels due to stress. But specialists don't think that anymore.

As ideas of what plantar fasciitis is change, so have treatments. Doctors don't do surgery for it anymore except in rare cases, largely because they've found surgery often makes people worse off.

"Patients have to be patient," Duggal says. "They have to understand that this condition unfortunately is not fully understood."

He's interested in another experimental treatment that's just entering clinical trials. It's called platelet-rich plasma, and it involves isolating blood cells called platelets from patients' own blood and injecting them into the plantar fascia. Though platelets are best known for their role in initiating blood clots, they also contain growth factors. So the hope is that platelet injections will stimulate healing without the damaging effects of shock-wave therapy. But it will be some years before that approach is proven -- or not.

Meanwhile, foot specialists and their patients are left with a smattering of low-tech treatments that they say all plantar fasciitis patients should try, whether or not they eventually go on to shock-wave therapy.

-- Icing the bottom of the foot, sometimes using ice to massage the heel area

-- Using cups made of gel in shoes to cushion the heel (and many orthopedic surgeons say expensive custom-made orthotics are not necessary)

-- Wearing a night splint, a simple brace that holds the foot in a flexed position to keep the plantar fascia stretched during sleep

-- Physical therapy, though some studies indicate that some PT practices such as ultrasound and whirlpool are not helpful

-- Use of NSAID (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory) drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen

-- Corticosteroid injections into the heel, though this is controversial and should not be used repeatedly

-- Backing off activities like running until the pain goes away, and then reinitiating them gradually

About 90 percent of sufferers will get better with time. Duggal says he advises patients to try a combination of these measures for at least a year.

Karen Firestone, a 54-year-old Boston businesswoman and avid runner, says that techniques like stretching, icing and taping were effective for her. She started having plantar fascia pain last summer, and on Duggal's advice has been diligent about doing everything she can to heal the problem.

"The stretching, the icing, the taping -- I do all these little pieces of help for my body, and it responds," Firestone says. "So I think people should take that message and go with it."

After a few months, she's back to running -- but shorter distances. And she stops whenever her heel pain acts up.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The discussion of alternatives is a real strength of this piece. Instead of relegating this coverage to a throwaway line at the end of the piece as many stories do, this story mentioned 10 low-tech treatments that patients are advised to try before considering shockwave therapy. In addition, the story explained that nearly all patients with heel pain eventually get better regardless of what kind of treatment they receive.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - It may be possible to predict which women will develop a dangerous complication of pregnancy called pre-eclampsia weeks before they ever show the first symptoms, an international team of researchers reported Monday.

They found a series of 45 different compounds linked with metabolism that were different in the women destined to develop the condition, and said that could form the basis of a test.

Such a “metabolic fingerprint” test could save the lives of thousands of women, Philip Baker of the University of Alberta in Canada, who helped lead the study, said in a statement.

“If we can bring the rates of maternal deaths in undeveloped countries down to the rates in developed countries, by being able to determine which women are at the greatest risk for developing pre-eclampsia, then it has that potential to save thousands of lives,” Baker said.

There is currently no test to predict which women will develop pre-eclampsia, which is marked by high blood pressure and high protein levels in urine.

If mothers and their babies survive, the women later have a higher risk of high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke and diabetes. The babies are usually born prematurely and suffer complications all their lives.

The cost of treating mothers with pre-eclampsia is $45 billion a year in the United States, Europe, Asia, Australia and New Zealand, the researchers said.

In undeveloped countries, 75,000 women die from pre-eclampsia each year.

Writing in the journal Hypertension, the researchers said they did a simple study, testing the blood of 60 women who developed pre-eclampsia later in pregnancy and 60 women who did not. They ran the test at about 15 weeks gestation.

“We identified 40 organic molecules to be significantly elevated and 5 that were reduced in plasma at 14 to 16 weeks’ gestation,” they wrote.

From this series of compounds they narrowed down a list of 14 sugars, fats and amino acids that were different in the women who developed the condition.

It detected around 90 percent of the cases, with a false positive rate of about 24 percent, meaning 24 percent of the women flagged in the test as having a risk of pre-eclampsia would never actually develop it.

“A high caliber predictive test would allow women who are identified at high-risk for pre-eclampsia to seek obstetric care by specialists and to be monitored more vigilantly,” Eleni Tsigas, executive director of the Pre-eclampsia Foundation, said in a statement.

“It would also ensure that those women are educated about the warning signs of pre-eclampsia. There’s no reason why women should be caught unaware in the late stages of a pre-eclampsia
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION:  The article made it clear there are no validated diagnostic tests for preeclampsia early in pregnancy. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Carbohydrates sound so innocent: mere starches, sugar and fiber that the body uses for energy. Yet health-conscious Americans despise them, designing entire diets just to cut them out.

But out of the pile of cast-off carbs, there are some you should keep. New research around a certain kind of carb, called “resistant starch,” suggests that they could be a key way to help control weight.

When we eat refined carbohydrates, like white bread and cookies, our bodies absorb them very quickly, and the hormone insulin ushers them into our cells. Eat a lot of them, and the body will store most of those calories instead of burning them—which is why we gain weight on high-carb diets.

But that’s not the case with resistant starches, so named because they resist digestion. These kinds of carbs bypass the small intestine (where most food is digested) and head to the large intestine (also known as the colon) to be metabolized. There, they’re fermented and turned into short-chain fatty acids, which the body burns as energy. Resistant starches also serve as powerful prebiotics—food for intestinal bacteria in the colon.

Those benefits—getting digested slower, being converted into fatty acids and sustaining colonies of gut bacteria—set resistant starch apart. Resistant starch is being explored as a healthy food for people with type-2 diabetes; eating it improved certain measures of inflammation, a condition that often precedes type-2 diabetes, and lipid profiles in women with the condition, showed one 2015 study.

“Certain populations and cultures have been benefiting from resistant starches for a long time,” says Paul Arciero, professor in the health and exercise sciences department of Skidmore College. “In my belief, that’s what’s protected them against some of the ravages of the more modern-day high carbohydrate diet.”

Luckily, resistant starch is found in a range of delicious foods. Legumes, beans, whole grains and some seeds have it, as do uncooked potatoes and unripe bananas. Products made from these foods, including bean flour, potato starch, tapioca starch and brown rice flour, also count.

Most intriguing and surprising of all is that so many leftovers contain resistant starch. When you cook a certain starchy food, like white rice, pasta or a potato, and then cool it in the refrigerator, the food develops resistant starches. “Cooking the carbohydrate starch alters the chemical bonds in the food,” Arciero explains. Stick it in the fridge, and as the food cools, those bonds reform in a new design. “The ensuing structure of those bonds during the cooling process is what makes them resistant to then being digested in the small intestine,” Arciero says. Even if you heat them up again, they retain their new resistant starches.

In all of its forms, resistant starch shows promise for helping people control their weight. In a study published in October 2015, Arciero and his team cooked a series of four pancake breakfasts for 70 women. The four pancakes were made from ordinary starch, starch plus whey protein, resistant starch (a tapioca-based starch modified to become resistant—much like leftovers are), and resistant starch with whey protein.

Arciero and his team monitored the women after each meal for three hours and used a device to see how many calories they burned, and what type. To Arciero’s surprise, after women ate pancakes containing resistant starch plus protein, they experienced an increase in fat burning, compared to all of the other kinds of pancakes. “After you eat a meal that’s principally carbohydrate, the fact that your body can burn a greater percentage of fat as its energy source is very unusual,” he says. Adding protein to the batter also made the women feel fuller, they found—which hints at a potentially powerful food combo for people trying to control their weight. “If you can combine a resistant starch with a hardboiled egg, or whey protein, or pea protein, or chicken or Greek yogurt, that’s a pretty powerful combination,” Arciero says.

It’s too soon to tell if resistant starch can help people weight. But the new evidence suggests that it may help control weight by altering body composition and increasing satiety. “The potential for a nutritional lifestyle intervention to counter obesity driven by high-carbohydrate food, though we don’t know yet how significantly, is fascinating,” Arciero says—especially when it’s as simple and delicious as reheating your pasta.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions different types of carbs and lists a variety of foods that contain resistant starches.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Siliq (brodalumab) to treat adults with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis. Siliq is administered as an injection.

Siliq is intended for patients who are candidates for systemic therapy (treatment using substances that travel through the bloodstream, after being taken by mouth or injected) or phototherapy (ultraviolet light treatment) and have failed to respond, or have stopped responding to other systemic therapies.

"Moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis can cause significant skin irritation and discomfort for patients, and today’s approval provides patients with another treatment option for their psoriasis," said Julie Beitz, M.D., director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. "Patients and their health care providers should discuss the benefits and risks of Siliq before considering treatment."

Psoriasis is a skin condition that causes patches of skin redness and flaking. Psoriasis is an autoimmune disorder that occurs more commonly in patients with a family history of the disease, and most often begins in people between the ages of 15 and 35. The most common form of psoriasis is plaque psoriasis, in which patients develop thick, red skin with flaky, silver-white scales.

Siliq’s active ingredient (brodalumab) binds to a protein that causes inflammation, inhibiting the inflammatory response that plays a role in the development of plaque psoriasis.

Siliq’s safety and efficacy were established in three randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials with a total of 4,373 adult participants with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis who were candidates for systemic therapy or phototherapy. More patients treated with Siliq compared to placebo had skin that was clear or almost clear, as assessed by scoring of the extent, nature and severity of psoriatic changes of the skin.

Suicidal ideation and behavior, including completed suicides, have occurred in patients treated with Siliq during clinical trials. Siliq users with a history of suicidality or depression had an increased incidence of suicidal ideation and behavior compared to users without this history. A causal association between treatment with Siliq and increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior has not been established.

Because of the observed risk of suicidal ideation and behavior, the labeling for Siliq includes a Boxed Warning and the drug is only available through a restricted program under a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) called the Siliq REMS Program. Notable requirements of the Siliq REMS Program include the following:
• Prescribers must be certified with the program and counsel patients about this risk. Patients with new or worsening symptoms of depression or suicidality should be referred to a mental health professional, as appropriate.
• Patients must sign a Patient-Prescriber Agreement Form and be made aware of the need to seek medical attention should they experience new or worsening suicidal thoughts or behavior, feelings of depression, anxiety or other mood changes.
• Pharmacies must be certified with the program and must only dispense to patients who are authorized to receive Siliq.

Siliq is also approved with a Medication Guide to inform patients of the risk of suicidal ideation and behavior, and that because Siliq is a medication that affects the immune system, patients may have a greater risk of getting an infection, or an allergic or autoimmune condition. Patients with Crohn’s disease should not use Siliq. Health care providers should also evaluate patients for tuberculosis (TB) infection prior to initiating treatment with Siliq. Health care providers should not administer Siliq to patients with active TB infection, and should avoid immunizations with live vaccines in patients being treated with Siliq.

The most common adverse reactions reported with the use of Siliq include joint pain (arthralgia), headache, fatigue, diarrhea, throat pain (oropharyngeal pain), nausea, muscle pain (myalgia), injection site reactions, influenza, low white blood cell count (neutropenia) and fungal (tinea) infections.

Siliq is marketed by Bridgewater, New Jersey-based Valeant Pharmaceuticals.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The Agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Since Siliq is recommended as a last resort drug of sorts, the news release hints there are other alternatives available. These include other topical treatments like anti-inflammatory drugs, light therapy and oral/injected medications, such as immunosuppressants.
Although we would have liked more elaboration on other treatment options, we feel the news release did just enough for a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The policy response to the opioid epidemic is frequently framed as a conflict: If you pull back the opioid painkillers that led to the epidemic, you are going to harm the pain patients who use these opioids to treat their pain. In effect, you’re trading one problem (addiction) for another (undertreatment of chronic pain).

A new study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, however, offers a cause for optimism: Reviewing the research so far, it found that it may be possible to reduce doses for patients in long-term opioid therapy and improve their pain outcomes. So doctors can potentially pull back the opioids that launched the current drug overdose crisis and still successfully treat pain patients.

Now, by this latest study’s own admission, the evidence is of generally poor quality. Most of the studies reviewed were of poor methodology or sample size, while only a few were of “fair” or “good” quality. The review also only looked at patients who volunteered to taper off opioids, meaning this research does not prove that involuntarily pulling patients off the drugs will lead to similar outcomes.

Suffice to say, then, a lot more research is necessary before this issue is settled.

But the new study does offer a glimmer of hope in a fairly grim opioid epidemic: Maybe it is possible to reduce the amount of dangerous opioids that patients are consuming and still alleviate people’s pain.

For the latest review of the evidence, researchers looked at 67 studies that collectively provided data on more than 12,000 pain patients who were weaned off at least some opioids. Though the researchers found a lot of studies to pool from, they generally graded these studies as “very low” in quality and methodology.

Researchers then identified the studies — none of which were graded as “good” quality — that evaluated pain-related outcomes for patients after long-term opioid therapy was tapered. Focusing on the “fair-quality” studies, they found that after opioid dose reductions, patients on average saw improved pain, function, and quality of life.

The authors provide a few possible explanations for this: Perhaps the non-opioid pain treatments, such as physical therapy and meditation, that accompanied dose reductions simply produced better results than the opioids did. Maybe the opioids themselves caused problems that negatively impacted function or quality of life, “such as constipation, fatigue, poor sleep, and depressed mood.” It’s possible that opioid dose reduction also resolved what’s known as opioid-induced hyperalgesia, “a paradoxical response in which patients receiving opioids become more sensitive to painful stimuli.”

Or, the researchers suggested, the observational studies simply showed reverse causation — “that is, patients successfully tapered opioids because pain severity decreased.”

The findings do not mean that doctors can now simply yank patients off opioids and expect them to get better. For one, the reviewed studies generally looked at the results of tapering, when patients are slowly weaned off opioid painkillers — a process that, Stanford psychiatrist Anna Lembke told me, can take months or even years.

Crucially, the studies also looked at what happened when these reductions in opioid doses were paired with alternative treatments, including alternative medicines like acupuncture, interdisciplinary pain programs, and medication-assisted treatment for addiction. This is very, very different from a situation in which a patient is taken off opioids and effectively left stranded without any other form of care.

As the researchers readily admit, the study also had several major limitations. Most of the studies analyzed were of poor quality — meaning there’s a serious need for better research in this area. And the studies only evaluated voluntary reductions in opioid doses; it’s entirely possible that involuntary reductions in opioid doses would lead to sharply different outcomes.

“We should be cautious in interpreting the findings,” Joseph Frank, lead author of the study, told me. He emphasized that more research needs to be done to fill “important gaps” in our knowledge. He added, “I want patients and their doctors to use caution in applying this.”

A few pain patients will still benefit from opioids

One of the study’s implications is that opioids actually aren’t a good treatment for chronic pain. This isn’t new. As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention concluded in its 2016 summary of the research, there are simply no good long-term studies looking at the effects of opioids on long-term pain outcomes, while there are many studies showing that long-term opioid use can lead to bad results in other areas, including addiction and overdose.

That does not mean opioids are never an effective treatment for chronic pain.

As addiction and pain experts often tell me, health care can vary vastly from patient to patient. Some patients feel worse on opioids, while others report quick pain relief. Some patients experience grueling withdrawal if taken off opioids, while for others the symptoms are much less severe. Some patients are at unusually high risk for addiction, while many — most, in fact — aren’t. And so on.

In a few cases, then, opioids will still be the best answer for some individual chronic pain patients. When prescribed carefully on a schedule that works to diminish the excessive buildup of tolerance, they can work for some people. But as Stanford pain specialist Sean Mackey emphasized to me, opioids should not be a first-line treatment due to the risks, and alternatives should be tried first.

This, then, is another key caveat to the study: Its findings shouldn’t be applied to every patient. Like much of health care, each case will typically require individual evaluations to see what works.

“There are people who do well with tapering [opioids],” Stefan Kertesz, an addiction researcher at the University of Alabama Birmingham who was not involved in the study, told me. “There are people who do not do well with tapering.”

But the study suggests that getting some patients off opioids could improve their pain outcomes. The key is convincing patients that this truly can work so they buy into the treatment and genuinely follow through with it — and making non-opioid treatments for pain accessible enough that patients see them as realistic options.

Alternative pain treatments need to be made more accessible

The reality, though, is non-opioid pain treatments are often out of reach for many Americans. Patients may not have insurance to cover the treatment. Even if they do have insurance, their health plan might not cover comprehensive pain care. And even if they do have insurance and their health plan covers pain treatments, there may not — particularly in rural areas — be a nearby pain clinic or doctor who can actually provide the care these patients are seeking.

This is something the study’s authors readily acknowledge.

“It’s an important part of this challenge,” Frank said. “These non-opioid strategies that were tested in these research studies are not adequately available. Several of the studies were done in pain centers where they have expert programs, and those just are not widespread.”

In fact, the lack of access to non-opioid strategies may be one big reason that doctors resorted to opioids in the first place. The drugs offered an easy answer — if ultimately an ineffective one — to the many problems doctors faced, including patients who had complicated pain problems that physicians didn’t fully understand and tight schedules driven by the current demands of the health care system that made it hard to take the time to work through a patient’s individual problems. (More on all that in my interview with Lembke.)

To address this, Frank argued that patients need better access to pain treatments. And doctors, especially primary care doctors who are frequently the first people patients see in the health care system, also need to be better trained to deal with chronic pain.

These solutions could help a lot of people: According to one study from the Institute of Medicine, 100 million US adults suffer from chronic pain. The opioid epidemic shows that if this care isn’t made available, patients may end up resorting to drugs that can literally get them killed — or, as has been reported in other tragic cases, they may kill themselves once the pain grows too bad. (The newest study, however, noted that there is no good research yet looking at these two potential outcomes if pain patients are taken off opioids.)

“Not only do we lack the data, but I have seen and heard of countless cases of overdose and suicide from people who have been involuntarily discontinued,” Kertesz said, emphasizing this is strictly based on anecdotal observations. “One day in June, in my inbox were 42 deaths.”

The findings show the balancing act of opioid policy: Even if doctors need to pull back opioids, they must be careful to ensure patients suffering from debilitating pain and other problems can still meet their other care needs.

It’s not just pain care. When dealing with opioid users who are addicted, doctors and policymakers also need to ensure that addiction treatment is available. Otherwise, these patients will likely try to find another source of drugs — even if it means resorting to a riskier opioid, such as heroin or fentanyl, to satisfy their cravings.

There’s good evidence this happened to many — but not all — opioid painkiller users: A 2014 study in JAMA Psychiatry found 75 percent of heroin users in treatment started with painkillers, and a 2015 analysis by the CDC found people who are addicted to painkillers are 40 times more likely to be addicted to heroin.

The fundamental problem is many of these patients don’t get addiction treatment once they lose access to painkillers or before they progress to heroin or fentanyl. Without the option of treatment, opioid users’ only answer to averting dependence-induced withdrawal becomes harder drugs. Yet based on a 2016 report by the surgeon general, only 10 percent of Americans with drug use disorders get specialty treatment.

That doesn’t mean that reducing prescriptions is a mistake. By stopping doctors from unscrupulously prescribing the drugs, governments can potentially stop opioids from flowing to new users who didn’t really need the drugs and could have developed addictions had they been allowed to get painkillers.

But the reduction has to be paired with increased access to addiction care — and it frequently hasn’t been.

Beyond addiction treatment, Kertesz argued that policymakers should also address some of the underlying conditions that drive addiction. He emphasized the need for broader mental health care, given that people often have mental health issues that can make addiction more likely.

“Who is at higher risk — John with PTSD and a dose of 10 milligrams a day, or James, who has no PTSD and is on 200 milligrams a day?” Kertesz said. Based on his reading of the data, “it’s John with PTSD on the 10 milligrams.”

But as is true for addiction and pain treatments, adequate mental health care is also out of reach for many patients — showing just another way that the US health care system isn’t built to adequately address the full needs of patients.

All of this shows why the policy solution to the opioid epidemic isn’t as easy as simply pulling back prescription opioids: To avoid exacerbating existing problems or causing new ones, policymakers need to consider the other needs of people who were perhaps getting opioids they didn’t really need.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This is one of the appreciable strengths of the story. It not only implies going cold-turkey as an option (and the pitfalls of that approach), but also digs into the topic of non-opioid pain-relief treatments to help patients deal with chronic pain as people they taper. We’re also told how such treatments can be too expensive/out of reach for some, even those with health insurance — either due to lacking coverage or nearby access to capable doctors and facilities.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON – November 13, 2015 – A clinical trial among more than 300 patients has found that the drug ranibizumab (Lucentis) is highly effective in treating proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), a complication of diabetes that can severely damage eyesight. The results, published by the Journal of the American Medical Association, demonstrate the first major therapy advance for the condition in nearly 40 years.

Funded by the National Eye Institute (NEI) and conducted by the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net), the trial compared Lucentis injections with a type of laser therapy called panretinal photocoagulation, which has remained the gold standard for PDR since the mid-1970s. Although laser therapy preserves central vision, it can damage night and side vision, so researchers have sought therapies that lack these side effects.

The trial results “provide crucial evidence for a safe and effective alternative to laser therapy against PDR,” said NEI Director Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D.

“Patients who received Lucentis showed a little bit better central vision, much less loss of their side vision, and substantially less risk for surgery than patients who received laser treatment,” said Lloyd Paul Aiello, M.D., Ph.D., director of the Beetham Eye Institute at Joslin Diabetes Center and Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School. “These findings will change the available treatment options for patients with PDR.”

Diabetic retinopathy damages blood vessels in the light-sensitive retina in the back of the eye. As the disease worsens, blood vessels can swell and lose their ability to function properly. Diabetic retinopathy becomes proliferative when lack of blood flow in the retina increases production of a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which can stimulate the growth of new, abnormal blood vessels. These new vessels are prone to bleeding into the center of the eye, sometimes requiring a surgical procedure called a vitrectomy to clear the blood. The abnormal blood vessels can also cause scarring and retinal detachment. Untreated, PDR is associated with high risk of visual loss. Lucentis is among several drugs that block the effects of VEGF.

Dr. Aiello and George King, M.D., Chief Scientific Officer at Joslin Diabetes Center and Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School, pioneered the study of VEGF in diabetic eye disease, beginning in the early 1990s. (Their work followed a distinguished Joslin tradition—the basic laser photocoagulation technique was developed in the 1960s by Dr. Aiello’s father, Lloyd M. Aiello, M.D., and grandfather, William P. Beetham, M.D.)

About 7.7 million U.S. residents have diabetic retinopathy, a leading cause of blindness among working-age Americans. Among these, about 1.5 percent have progressed to PDR.

The DRCR.net enrolled 305 participants (394 eyes) with PDR in one or both eyes at 55 clinical sites across the country. Eyes were assigned randomly to treatment with Lucentis or laser. About half of the eyes assigned to the laser group required more than one round of laser treatment. In the other group, Lucentis was injected into the eye once per month for three consecutive months, and then as needed until the disease resolved or stabilized.

Because Lucentis is commonly injected to treat diabetic macular edema (DME)—a build-up of fluid in the center of the retina—the study permitted the use of Lucentis for DME in the laser group, if necessary. Slightly more than half (53 percent) of eyes in the laser group received Lucentis injections to treat DME. About 6 percent of eyes in the Lucentis group received laser therapy, mostly for issues other than DME.

At two years, vision in the Lucentis group improved by an average of about half a line on an eye chart, compared with virtually no change in the laser group.

Participants treated with laser generally lost substantial peripheral vision, but those given injections did not, emphasized Jennifer Sun, M.D., M.P.H., Associate Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School and physician at the Beetham Eye Institute.

“This was a clear benefit associated with the anti-VEGF medication,” said Dr. Sun, who as the DRCR.net nationwide Protocol Working Investigator was instrumental in the study’s development. “Many of our patients who have laser treatment notice that they have more tunnel vision, which can lead to difficulties as they go about activities of daily life. The use of anti-VEGF treatment rather than laser for PDR could help prevent these symptoms.”

Additionally, the need for vitrectomy surgery was lower in the Lucentis group (8 of 191 eyes) than in the laser group (30 of 203 eyes).

Overall, the drug’s benefits are particularly clear for people with both PDR and DME. “We know that this drug will help treat both conditions at the same time, so this is an especially appealing treatment alternative for these patients,” Dr. Aiello noted.

“Lucentis should be considered a viable treatment option for people with PDR, especially for individuals needing anti-VEGF for DME,” said Jeffrey G. Gross, M.D., of the Carolina Retina Center in Columbia, South Carolina, who chaired the clinical study.

The study also suggested that Lucentis may help prevent DME. Among people without this condition at the start of the study, only 9 percent of Lucentis-treated eyes developed it, compared with 28 percent in the laser group. Scientists will follow up on that result as the DRCR.net continues to track patients for a total of five years.

A separate clinical trial, now getting underway, will examine whether anti-VEGF injections given at an earlier stage of diabetic eye disease can help prevent people from developing both DME and the sight-threatening PDR stage of the disease at all, Dr. Aiello said.

The trial reported today “is a major study that may substantially change our approach to treatment of PDR,” summed up Dr. Sun. “Laser still has a role in the treatment of PDR for some patients, but anti-VEGF therapy gives us another tool in our search for better vision outcomes in our patients with diabetes.”

Founded in 1898, Joslin Diabetes Center is world-renowned for its deep expertise in diabetes treatment and research. Joslin is an independent, non-profit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and a federally-designated Diabetes Research Center. Joslin is dedicated to finding a cure for diabetes and ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives. We develop and disseminate innovative patient therapies and scientific discoveries throughout the world.

Our mission is to prevent, treat and cure diabetes. Our vision is a world free of diabetes and its complications. For more information, visit www.joslin.org.

Joslin Research comprises the most comprehensive and productive effort in diabetes research under one roof anywhere in the world. With 30‐plus faculty‐level investigators, Joslin researchers focus on unraveling the biological, biochemical and genetic processes that underlie the development of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and related complications.

Joslin research is highly innovative and imaginative, employing the newest tools in genetics, genomics and proteomics to identify abnormalities that may play a role in the development of diabetes and its complications. Joslin Clinic patients, and others with diabetes, have the option of participating in clinical trials at Joslin to help translate basic research into treatment innovations.

Joslin has one of the largest diabetes training programs in the world, educating 150 M.D. and Ph.D. researchers each year, many of whom go on to head diabetes initiatives at leading institutions all over the globe. For more information, visit www.joslinresearch.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of comparing Lucentis to conventional laser treatment for PDR and we’ll award a Satisfactory rating on that basis.
However, we’d note that these are not necessarily the only two options. Lucentis is classed as an “anti-VEGF” (anti- vascular endothelial growth factor) drug — by blocking a protein called VEGF, the drug can reverse abnormal blood vessel growth and decrease fluid in the retina. Other drugs in this category include Avastin and Eylea. Are those drugs under consideration for trials related to PDR treatment? If so, it’s worth mentioning — particularly since Avastin costs around $60 per dose, as compared to Lucentis’s $2,000 per dose.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, June 1, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- If you find yourself hospitalized, you've got a one in five chance of needing a urinary catheter -- raising your risk for a urinary tract infection.

Now, researchers report that a new program shows it might be possible to reduce both catheter use and its associated infections.

"Catheter-associated urinary tract infections are common and costly patient safety problems," said lead researcher Dr. Sanjay Saint. He is a professor of internal medicine at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.

Roughly 250,000 such infections occur in hospitals each year in the United States, costing about $250 million, the researchers pointed out.

Although about 20 percent of hospitalized patients get a urinary catheter, one-third of the time they aren't needed, Saint said. He believes that patients can play a role in reducing catheter use.

"A lot of patients and families don't realize that there are problems with a urinary catheter, so they may request them because they think it will allow patients to stay in bed," Saint said.

"Unfortunately, there are side effects with a catheter. And I've seen patients who have gotten up in the middle of the night and they trip and fall on the tubing," he explained.

"Patients and families should request that a catheter not be put in, and if there is one there, the patient should ask every day whether it is still needed," Saint suggested.

For the study, Saint and his colleagues tried the new program in 600 hospitals.

After 18 months of using the program, infection rates among hospital patients in general wards dropped by one-third, while catheter use had dropped about 1 percent.

But there was no drop in infections or catheter use in intensive care units (ICUs), the study findings showed.

Hospital-acquired urinary tract infection rates rose nationwide during the same time period, Saint noted.

The program Saint helped develop -- called the "bladder bundle" -- includes protocols, checklists, training and information-sharing that help doctors and nurses reduce catheter use and prevent infections.

Included in the program are:
• Daily checks to see if a catheter is still needed.
• Using other options to collect urine, such as bedpans.
• Use of infection-control techniques for catheter placement and maintenance.
• Feedback to the medical team about catheter use and infection rates.

The researchers found that catheter infection rates in the new program dropped 14 percent overall in general wards (non-ICU).

The findings were published June 2 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Dr. Susan Huang, a professor of infectious disease at the University of California, Irvine, wrote an editorial accompanying the study. She said, "While we've known the correct care processes for managing urinary catheters, we haven't been able to reliably reduce catheter-related infections."

An intervention that focuses on changing the culture in hospitals to make them more responsive to the problem of infection control -- one that involves "rallying around a focused problem and ensuring team-based solutions -- is integral to improving infection control in hospitals," she said.

As for improving infection control in intensive care units, Huang said, "further analysis may help us understand why this intervention didn't work."

"This program can reduce urinary infections in hospitals if a team is assembled to ensure adoption of best practices and to rapidly correct reasons for failing to comply with these processes," she added.

Visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for more on urinary tract infections.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternative is the status quo, which is discussed in terms of its problems.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Orlando, Fla - Researchers at Orlando Health have developed a blood test that can detect even the most subtle signs of a concussion in children, correctly identifying the presence of traumatic brain injuries 94 percent of the time in a recent study.

"This could ultimately change the way we diagnose concussions, not only in children, but in anyone who sustains a head injury," said Linda Papa, MD, MSC, an emergency medicine physician and NIH funded researcher at Orlando Health and lead author of the study. "We have so many diagnostic blood tests for different parts of the body, like the heart, liver and kidneys, but there's never been a reliable blood test to identify trauma in the brain. We think this test could change that," she said.

In a new study published in the journal Academic Emergency Medicine, Papa and her team recently performed CT scans on 152 children and compared the results of those scans with results from the blood test she developed. As expected, the high definition imagery from the CT scans was able to identify which patients had suffered visible traumatic brain injuries. Moreover, the study showed that the blood test detected symptoms of concussions, even when brain injuries were not visible on the CT scan.

The team then tested blood serum from the same patients, which was taken less than 6 hours after their injuries. "With our blood test, we were able to identify the presence of brain injuries 94 percent of the time," said Papa. "This simple blood test was nearly as accurate as a state-of-the-art CT scan."

Even more impressive, the blood test also gave doctors an indication of how severe the brain injury was. "We were looking at different types of brain lesions detected by the CT scans, ranging from mild to serious injuries, and found that the biomarker we tested for actually corresponded to the injuries. Levels of the biomarker were lower in mild cases, and were much more elevated in severe case," said Papa.

The biomarker this particular blood test looks for is known as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). These proteins are found in glial cells, which surround neurons in the brain.

When there's an injury to the brain cells, the GFAP are released. What makes them unique is that they pass the blood-brain barrier and enter the bloodstream, which makes them easy to detect with this particular test.

Currently, almost all concussions in children are diagnosed only by symptoms, which are either observed, like vomiting or balance problems, or symptoms that are reported by the child, like headaches, blurred vision or feeling groggy. Neither scenario gives doctors an objective indication of the severity of the injury.

CT scans can provide a more definitive profile of the injury, "however, they are expensive and are associated with radiation exposure," said Papa. "You really want to minimize the amount of CTs you do to your patients, especially children, who are a lot more sensitive to radiation and the side effects that can come with it."

"If there was a simple diagnostic tool like a blood test that can tell us quickly and accurately if a brain injury has occurred, and how severe it might be, that would be ideal," said Papa. "That's what we are striving for with this project."

In fact, Papa envisions the development of mobile devices that could diagnose concussions on the spot, much like the devices diabetics use to test their blood with a simple finger prick and a drop of blood.

"The idea is to get a point-of-care test that could be used on the field, to help the coaches, the trainers and the athletic directors, make a decision then and there about whether the child should go back to play," said Papa.

It's estimated nearly a quarter of a million children a year are treated in hospitals for traumatic brain injuries like concussions, that occur while playing sports. That's an average of nearly 700 children a every day.

"If we could find a simple test that takes the guess work out of diagnosing these kids, that would completely change the way we approach concussions and would certainly give parents greater peace of mind," said Papa.

Researchers plan to do more studies with the blood test, but they hope it will be commercially available within the next 5 years.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story provides information on the routine use of CT scanning as the standard for traumatic head injury. Since there are a host of biomarkers under study at the present time to detect concussion, we would have liked to have seen a couple of words on the other research taking place.  For example, Banyan Biomarkers has one additional biomarker under study at the present time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among older adults with an unstable ankle fracture, the use of a modified casting technique known as close contact casting (a molded below-knee cast with minimal padding) resulted in similar functional outcomes at 6 months compared with surgery, and with fewer wound complications and reduced intervention costs, according to a study appearing in the October 11 issue of JAMA.

The number of older adults sustaining ankle fractures is increasing. Treatment of unstable fractures is either surgical or nonsurgical (using externally applied casts). Neither method yields an entirely satisfactory outcome in older adults. Traditional casting techniques are associated with poor fracture alignment and healing, as well as plaster-related sores. Surgery is often complicated by poor implant fixation (bone healing), wound problems, and infection. A modified casting technique has been developed, close contact casting, which uses minimal padding compared with traditional casting and achieves fracture reduction by distributing contact pressure by close anatomic fit.

Keith Willett, M.B.B.S., F.R.C.S., of the University of Oxford, United Kingdom, and colleagues randomly assigned 620 adults older than 60 years with acute, unstable ankle fracture to surgery (n = 309) or casting (n = 311). Casts were applied in the operating room under general or spinal anesthesia by a trained surgeon.

Among the 620 adults (average age, 71 years; 74 percent women) who were randomized, 96 percent completed the study. Nearly all participants (93 percent) received assigned treatment; 52 of 275 (19 percent) who initially received casting later converted to surgery. At 6 months, casting resulted in measures of ankle function equivalent to that with surgery. Infection and wound breakdown were more common with surgery (10 percent vs 1 percent), as were additional operating room procedures (6 percent vs 1 percent).

Radiologic malunion (abnormal healing of a fracture) was more common in the casting group (15 percent vs 3 percent for surgery). Casting required less operating room time compared with surgery. There were no significant differences in other secondary outcomes: quality of life, pain, ankle motion, mobility, and patient satisfaction.

"Close contact casting was delivered successfully for most participants, substantially reducing the number of patients requiring invasive surgical procedures at the outset and additional operations during a 6-month period," the authors write.

The researchers add that close contact casting may be an appropriate treatment for older adults with unstable ankle fracture.

Editor's Note: Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

"The results reported by Willett et al demonstrate that most unstable ankle fractures in older patients can be treated with a cast without the need for surgery," writes David W. Sanders, M.D., M.Sc., F.R.C.S.C., of Western University, London, Ontario, Canada, in an accompanying editorial.

"However, many patients who were initially treated by casting subsequently required repeat casting or surgery. Further studies are needed to help identify which patients will not benefit from casting. Although close contact casting may be unfamiliar to some orthopedic surgeons, it can avoid surgery for older patients with ankle fractures, yet result in equivalent functional outcomes. This technique is worth considering when treating this challenging clinical problem."

Editor's Note: The author has completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.

To place an electronic embedded link to these articles in your story These links will be live at the embargo time: http://jama. http://jama.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release aptly compares this new treatment with traditional surgery, which has largely been abandoned due to high rates of malunion resulting in functional deficits in displaced ankle fractures. The release also briefly mentions traditional “hard” casting.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The paper was published last week in The Cochrane Library, a journal devoted to systematic reviews of health care interventions. In all, the researchers examined eight trials involving 3,417 men and women ages 18 and older.

None of the studies compared A.A. with no treatment at all, and the researchers said that made it more difficult to draw conclusions about effectiveness. About one-fifth of alcoholics achieve long-term sobriety without treatment.

There is no single known cause of alcoholism, but the researchers wrote that about two-thirds of alcohol dependence could be attributed to genetic factors and one-third to environmental causes like stress or emotional problems. Men and women are equally affected, and age does not appear to affect prognosis.

A member of the staff of the general service office of Alcoholics Anonymous said the organization did not comment on published studies of the program, but some experts objected to the methods and conclusions of the review.

“Although the randomized controlled trial is the gold-standard methodology in comparing between conditions,” said Thomas G. Brown, an assistant professor of psychiatry at McGill University, “it washes out a factor that may be important in potentiating A.A.’s benefits, namely patient choice and preference.” In other words, having a patient choose the form of treatment, rather than being assigned to it as in most studies, could be an important factor.

Despite the largely negative findings, John F. Kelly, a clinical psychologist at Harvard, said he still believed that A.A. and other 12-step programs were effective.

A.A. and other 12-step programs “are not cure-alls,” Dr. Kelly said, “but I would say at a minimum, they help.”

Dr. Edward V. Nunes, a professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia, said research had demonstrated that certain elements of A.A. were effective. “Some of the wisdom embodied in A.A., such as the notion of persons, places and things that trigger drinking, are very much a part of cognitive-behavioral therapy, which is a scientifically driven, empirically validated treatment,” Dr. Nunes said.

The review covered only carefully controlled trials. But Sarah Zemore, of the Alcohol Research Group of the National Alcohol Research Center, said studies that observed the results of a treatment without setting up randomized control groups could also be informative.

“Does A.A. or some other mutual-help group work for people who seek it voluntarily?” she said. “Obviously, a randomized trial cannot address that question. But observational data can.”

It is unlikely that substance abuse experts will widely reject A.A. on the basis of these findings.

“A.A. has helped a lot of people,” Dr. Nunes said. “There are a lot of satisfied customers. On the basis of that, we have to take it seriously.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions several treatment options compared with, on in conjunction to 12-step groups.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - People who drink hot tea daily may be less likely than others to develop glaucoma symptoms, U.S. researchers say.

Compared to coffee, soft drink and iced tea drinkers, study participants who consumed a cup or more of hot caffeinated tea daily had 74 percent lower odds of having glaucoma, the study authors report in the British Journal of Ophthalmology.

“Glaucoma can lead to blindness, and it would be great if it could be prevented because there is no cure,” said lead author Dr. Anne Coleman of the University of California, Los Angeles.

“The best way to prevent it is to get your eyes checked,” Coleman told Reuters Health in a telephone interview. “But we are also interested in lifestyle habits and what we can do to make a difference.”

Glaucoma is the second leading cause of blindness worldwide, according to the World Health Organization, affecting an estimated 58 million people. That includes more than three million Americans, only half of whom are aware they have the disease, according to the Glaucoma Research Foundation.

Coffee, or caffeine in general have previously been linked to increased glaucoma risk, although recent studies don’t agree, Coleman and her colleagues write.

To evaluate the relationship between specific caffeinated drinks and glaucoma, Coleman and colleagues analyzed data on a sample of more than 10,000 people in the U.S. who were representative of the entire population. Participants in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey during 2005-2006 answered questions about their diets and lifestyles, had medical exams and blood tests and also underwent eye examinations.

About 1,700 participants were over age 40, had no other known eye diseases and had full eye examination results from the survey. In this group, Coleman’s team found that just over 5 percent, 82 people, had glaucoma.

Almost half of participants reported drinking coffee often, but less than 10 percent drank hot tea daily. The research team found no associations between coffee, iced tea, decaffeinated tea or soft drink consumption and the likelihood of having glaucoma.

“Tea drinkers should keep drinking and don’t need to stop because of a fear of glaucoma,” Coleman said. “This makes sense, but we’ll see if it holds up in future studies.”

Future studies should look at the habits, activities and nutrition that affect lifestyle and glaucoma risks, said Idan Hecht of Tel-Aviv University in Israel, who wasn’t involved in the research.

“In the past few years, there has been a tremendous increase in interest, and subsequently research, into the ways lifestyle changes can influence diseases,” Hecht told Reuters Health by email.

Recent research indicates that vitamins C, E and zinc can help vision. Other studies indicate that antioxidants in tea could have similar effects, he noted.

“Patients can and should be involved and take an active role in the management of their ailments,” Hecht said. “Exercising, eating healthy and trying novel ways to improve your health is something you should definitely explore and bring up with your physician.”

Environmental factors could play a role in glaucoma risk as well, said Dr. Ahmad Aref at the University of Illinois at Chicago.

“As our population grows older, we need to think about the other factors that could help, particularly when it comes to the health benefits of physical activity,” he told Reuters Health by phone.

Overall, both medical and non-medical approaches are key to treating the disease in the future, Aref added.

“It’s a tough disease because we don’t have a way to bring vision back once it’s lost,” he said. “All we can do is prevent it from getting worse, and we want to help patients do that.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does make brief mention of lifestyle, environmental and diet interventions that may influence glaucoma, but could have made it more clear that none of these have been proven to prevent glaucoma.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration approved a device on Tuesday meant to treat cluster headaches — a rare form of headache that affects mostly men.

The device is a vagus nerve stimulator and it’s not entirely clear how it works. The idea is to disrupt signals that run along the vagus nerve, a giant nerve that runs from the brain all the way to the colon. It's involved in many bodily responses.

A study in the journal Headache last September showed the treatment appeared to help just over a quarter of cluster headache patients who tried it, versus about 15 percent of those given a sham treatment. This went up to about a third of patients with so-called episodic cluster headaches.

“GammaCore transmits a mild electrical stimulation to the vagus nerve through the skin, resulting in a reduction of pain,” the company said in a statement.

Cluster headaches are rare but devastating to their sufferers. Like migraines, they cause intense pain and an inability to function much at all when they strike.

"Cluster headache is a rare, debilitating and difficult to treat disorder with few effective acute therapies," Dr. Stephen Silberstein, director of the headache center at Jefferson University in Philadelphia, said in a statement.

Fewer than 1 percent of people have cluster headaches and most have a form called episodic cluster headaches, which come and go, as the name suggests, in clusters. Sufferers can go months without an attack and then suffer several sudden headaches in a single day for days on end.

There aren’t many specific treatments but they include the migraine drug sumatriptan, delivered via auto-injector, and inhaled oxygen. Both approaches are limited — it’s not safe to use the injection more than twice a day — and inconvenient.

Related: New Migraine Drugs Would Treat Pain Before it Starts

Silberstein helped test the device, which users press against the neck.

"The FDA release of gammaCore is an important advance in the treatment of the pain associated with cluster headache,” Silberstein said in the statement provided by the company.

“It is a way for patients to treat their symptoms as often as they need to use the device. It does not have the side effects or dose limitations of commonly prescribed treatments or the need for invasive implantation procedures, which can be inconvenient, costly and high-risk."

The company, which says gammaCore is already available in the European Union, expects to start selling it later this year in the U.S.

Vagus nerve stimulation is used to treat a range if disorders, including epilepsy, depression and overeating.

Usually devices are implanted. GammaCore is hand-held.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article did mention that there are “commonly prescribed treatments,” and it named some of them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A seaweed-based fiber supplement, taken daily before meals, helped people lose weight in a new study.

But that was only the case among people who stuck with the diet study over a few months. More than one-fifth of people dropped out when they couldn’t tolerate the supplement’s taste, texture and side effects.

Researchers have explored the potential of seaweed as an appetite suppressant, but so far products haven’t panned out.

“There have been problems in the past to develop something (that tastes) acceptable,” said Dr. Arne Astrup, one of the study’s authors from the University of Copenhagen and a member of the advisory board to S-Biotek, a Danish company that provided funding for the study.

Previous seaweed-based supplements were slimy and caused bloating, and they also had a fishy taste. The new supplement used in this study is less unpleasant — but there’s still room for improvement, said Astrup.

The supplement is based on the seaweed extract alginate, a thickening agent and a common ingredient in foods like soups and jellies. It’s also increasingly used by the weight-loss industry, marketed as an appetite suppressant.

Packaged in powder form and mixed with liquid, alginate expands in the stomach to form a thick gel, mimicking the effect of a large meal.

“This gel is really like a pudding that will last in the stomach for hours, gradually degrading and disappearing,” Astrup said.

For the study, the researchers randomly divided 96 generally healthy but obese people, aged 20 to 55, into two groups.

One group was given packets of the gel supplement, containing 15 grams of fiber, and the other got a seaweed-free placebo drink. Neither the researchers nor the participants knew who was receiving the seaweed supplement.

In terms of calories, flavor and appearance, the placebo and treatment drink were identical.

For three months, study participants drank the supplements, dissolved in two cups of water, 30 minutes before each meal. They were also told to cut back on calories. By the end of the trial, sixteen people had dropped out of the study, including 10 out of 48 from the seaweed group, according to findings published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

Among people who stuck with the trial, those on the fiber supplement lost 15 pounds, on average, compared to 11 pounds in the placebo group. But when all 96 original participants were included in the analysis, the researchers found no significant difference in weight loss between the two treatment groups.

Previous studies have shown eating a high-fiber diet can help reduce the hunger pangs that may lead to over-eating and derail a healthy diet plan.

Still, the new results should be treated with caution, according to Dr. Maria Vazquez Roque, who has worked on alginate-based gels at the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Florida, but was not involved in the study. Just looking at the effect of the supplement on people who finished the treatment can bias the findings, she said.

For Mette Kristensen, one of the study’s authors, the message seems clear: “If you actually comply with the treatment, you do have the improvement in weight loss.”

However, effects on blood pressure were less promising. Systolic blood pressure — the top number on a blood pressure reading — fell by almost six points on average in the placebo group over the 12-week study, but by just over one point in the treatment group. At times during the trials, systolic blood pressure increased in the alginate group by one to two points.

According to the researchers, the higher sodium content of the alginate drink — a little over one gram per dose, or about half a teaspoon of salt — could have offset any potential blood-pressure reducing effect of the supplement. The American Heart Association recommends that adults eat less than 1.5 g of sodium per day.

Questions remain about the safety of the fiber supplement over the long term. Five people taking the fiber gel left the study due to problems with stomach bloating, nausea and diarrhea. Two people taking a placebo supplement, which didn’t contain the seaweed fiber, experienced similar problems.

There are many different types of alginate, said Richard Mattes, who has studied the effect of alginate fiber on appetite at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana — so the trick is to find the right alginate in the right dose.

And just feeling less hungry due to a supplement won’t make you lose weight unless you eat fewer calories, said Mattes, who was not involved in the new study.

The research group is working on a new supplement that uses 80 percent less alginate, with less sodium, better taste and fewer side effects than the current formula, Astrup told Reuters Health.

Alginate as an aid to weight loss is already commercially available in pill form and costs around $45 for a seven-day supply. These supplements are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, said Vazquez Roque.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There was an important reminder that “just feeling less hungry due to a supplement won’t make you lose weight unless you eat fewer calories.” The story could have mentioned other evidence-based weight loss approaches including behavioral weight loss counseling.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Older adults who get plenty of vitamin E in their diets may have a somewhat lower risk of developing dementia than those who consume less of the nutrient, a study published Monday suggests.

Researchers found that among 5,400 Dutch adults age 55 and older, the one-third who reported the highest vitamin E intake from food were 25 percent less likely to develop dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease, over the next decade than the third with the lowest intakes.

The findings, reported in the Archives of Neurology, do not prove that vitamin E itself protects the aging brain. Studies so far have come to conflicting conclusions as to whether vitamin E or other antioxidants may influence older adults’ risk of dementia.

However, the new study followed participants for a longer period than most previous studies on antioxidants and dementia. And it supports findings from some previous research that dietary vitamin E, in particular, might be related to a lower risk of dementia.

Researchers have been interested in whether antioxidants like vitamins E and C and beta-carotene might help stave off dementia because, in theory, their actions might interfere with the process of brain-cell degeneration.

Antioxidants neutralize unstable forms of oxygen called reactive oxygen species that can damage cells throughout the body. Reactive oxygen species are produced naturally in the body, as byproducts of metabolism; because the brain is an area of high metabolic activity, it is thought to be particularly vulnerable to accumulating oxidative damage over a lifetime.

However, studies so far have come to mixed conclusions as to whether older adults with a high dietary intake of various antioxidants have a lower risk of dementia. And clinical trials looking at the effects of antioxidant supplements have found no evidence that they cut Alzheimer’s risk.

For the new study, researchers led by Dr. Monique Breteler, of Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, used data from 5,395 adults age 55 and older who were dementia-free at the start of the study. At that point, they were interviewed about their usual diet habits, which the researchers used to estimate their intake of vitamins C and E and beta-carotene.

Over the next decade, 465 study participants were diagnosed with dementia, including 365 with Alzheimer’s.

Among the one-third of men and women with the highest vitamin E intakes from food, 120 developed dementia. Of the third with the lowest intakes, 164 were diagnosed with dementia.

When Breteler’s team considered a number of other factors — including participants’ age, education, weight, and smoking and drinking habits — high vitamin E intake was linked to a one-quarter reduction in dementia risk.

The one-third of study participants with the highest vitamin E consumption typically got 18.5 milligrams (mg) per day, just over the recommended daily intake of 15 mg.

The researchers acknowledge that they cannot exclude the possibility that factors other than vitamin E explain the connection. Nor is it clear why vitamin E, but not vitamin C or beta-carotene, was linked to a lower dementia risk.

But the finding is in line with a previous study of U.S. adults that found that a higher intake of vitamin E, but not vitamin C or beta-carotene, was related to a lower risk of developing Alzheimer’s over two years.

According to Breteler’s team, studies should continue to look at the relationship between antioxidant intake and dementia — including whether antioxidant consumption at different points in life might have different effects on dementia risk.

Food sources of vitamin E include wheat germ, nuts such as almonds and hazelnuts, vegetable oils such as sunflower and safflower oils, and some green vegetables, such as spinach and broccoli.

In the current study, participants’ primary vitamin E sources included vegetable oils, margarine and butter.

It is unlikely that people could get too much vitamin E from food. However, high doses of vitamin E from supplements carry a risk of bleeding. Experts advise that adults consume no more than 1,000 mg of vitamin E per day.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There is currently no proven method for preventing age-related dementia. We might have wished that this story had mentioned some other diet and lifestyle choices that are associated with reduced risk in observational studies. These include staying physically active, not smoking, eating a Mediterranean-style diet (rich in fruits and vegetables and omega-3 fatty acids), and keeping your mind engaged in intellectually challenging pursuits.  But since the evidence is kind of squishy for all of this, we rule this satisfactory. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 2, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- MRI images can serve as a "surrogate clock" to pinpoint stroke onset in patients whose symptoms began during sleep, increasing the number of patients eligible for highly effective clot-busting therapy, according to a new study.

Researchers found that MRI data could accurately determine if patients had experienced stroke symptoms within a three-hour period or less, which would allow the use of a clot-busting drug that works best if administered within that window of time. Tissue plasminogen activator, known as tPA, can dramatically reverse stroke symptoms in those whose strokes are caused by blood clots and blockages, which account for an estimated 85 percent of all strokes.

Strokes strike about 795,000 Americans each year, killing 137,000, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The condition is a leading cause of serious, long-term disability in the United States.

"A tool that can estimate the age of stroke would be of great value in cases of unknown stroke onset time," said lead researcher Dr. Catherine Oppenheim, professor of radiology at Universite Paris Descartes in France. "This concerns as many as a quarter of all stroke patients who cannot be given tPA because they wake up with stroke symptoms or are unable to say when their stroke began."

Under current guidelines, patients who awaken with symptoms are arbitrarily excluded from tPA therapy, Oppenheim said, because the onset is considered to be the last time the patient was symptom-free, which might have been the night before.

The clot-busting drug is recommended for use only within 4.5 hours of stroke onset because it carries a risk of brain hemorrhage, a potentially fatal prospect, with the risk increasing as more time passes.

The study, reported online Nov. 2 and in the December issue of the journal Radiology, reinforces results from similar research, Oppenheim said. Her team reviewed MRI images from 130 patients treated for clot-caused strokes at Sainte-Anne Hospital in Paris between May 2006 and October 2008.

Of those patients, whose average age was 64.7 years, 63 underwent MRI within three hours of stroke onset and 67 were imaged between three and 12 hours afterwards. With the MRI data, radiologists could predict with more than 90 percent accuracy which patients had experienced stroke symptoms for longer than three hours.

However, the study did not compare patients with unknown stroke onset who received tPA to those who did not, Oppenheim said.

"Providing stroke neurologists with a reliable marker of stroke age will help to ensure that patients . . . are managed as urgently as those with known stroke onset time," she said. "These results will be useful for centers that offer 24-hour access to acute stroke patients. The main limitation is the limited access to MRI in emergency rooms worldwide."

Oppenheim said the next step would be clinical trials to validate whether MRIs serve as a "surrogate clock" for stroke onset.

Several doctors specializing in stroke care were encouraged by Oppenheim's study, though they cautioned further research would be necessary to determine if the results could be replicated.

"It's potentially helpful, and I don't know that it would take years to prove that," said Dr. Larry B. Goldstein, director of the Duke University Stroke Center in Durham, N.C.

Goldstein noted that about 40 percent of stroke patients who arrive at his facility within two hours of symptom onset receive tPA. If they don't, "the major reason . . . is that they get there too late," he said.

Dr. Wally Ghurabi, emergency department director at Santa Monica-UCLA Medical Center, said a group of ongoing studies there include a similar focus on MRIs and stroke.

"Really pinpointing the time of onset is so crucial for us. This will definitely give us that edge," Ghurabi said. "I've seen it with my own eyes -- a 60-year-old male or female patient comes into the ER and they're not able to move on one side or speak. A couple of hours later [after therapy], they can walk and talk. What more could we as doctors want?"

Dr. David F. Kallmes, an interventional neuro-radiologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., was also optimistic about Oppenheim's results.

The MRI is "trying to act as a surrogate clock," said Kallmes, who edited Oppenheim's journal article. "Like any imaging technique, it has a certain accuracy but it won't be perfect. It's certainly an innovative approach for patients with stroke-like symptoms."

In October 2008, the American Heart Association, the American Stroke Association and the European Stroke Association revised their guidelines to recommend that tPA be used up to 4.5 hours after the onset of an ischemic (clot-caused) stroke, but the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not yet revised its approved treatment window of 3 hours.

A study in The Lancet Neurology also found that a slight increase in deaths and bleeding in an extended treatment group over a three-month follow-up period underlined the notion that treatment within 3 hours -- although not required -- is still optimal.

Review the warning signs of stroke at the American Stroke Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story provided insight about a couple of situations in which it wasn’t possible to determine the time of stroke onset.  The study reported on whether MRI could be used in these sorts of situations when the patient isn’t able to provide information about the time of stroke onset.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At workshops and conferences across the country, students, counselors and psychologists in private practice throng lectures on mindfulness. The National Institutes of Health is financing more than 50 studies testing mindfulness techniques, up from 3 in 2000, to help relieve stress, soothe addictive cravings, improve attention, lift despair and reduce hot flashes.

Some proponents say Buddha’s arrival in psychotherapy signals a broader opening in the culture at large — a way to access deeper healing, a hidden path revealed.

Yet so far, the evidence that mindfulness meditation helps relieve psychiatric symptoms is thin, and in some cases, it may make people worse, some studies suggest. Many researchers now worry that the enthusiasm for Buddhist practice will run so far ahead of the science that this promising psychological tool could turn into another fad.

“I’m very open to the possibility that this approach could be effective, and it certainly should be studied,” said Scott Lilienfeld, a psychology professor at Emory. “What concerns me is the hype, the talk about changing the world, this allure of the guru that the field of psychotherapy has a tendency to cultivate.”

Buddhist meditation came to psychotherapy from mainstream academic medicine. In the 1970s, a graduate student in molecular biology, Jon Kabat-Zinn, intrigued by Buddhist ideas, adapted a version of its meditative practice that could be easily learned and studied. It was by design a secular version, extracted like a gemstone from the many-layered foundation of Buddhist teaching, which has sprouted a wide variety of sects and spiritual practices and attracted 350 million adherents worldwide.

In transcendental meditation and other types of meditation, practitioners seek to transcend or “lose” themselves. The goal of mindfulness meditation was different, to foster an awareness of every sensation as it unfolds in the moment.

Dr. Kabat-Zinn taught the practice to people suffering from chronic pain at the University of Massachusetts medical school. In the 1980s he published a series of studies demonstrating that two-hour courses, given once a week for eight weeks, reduced chronic pain more effectively than treatment as usual.

Word spread, discreetly at first. “I think that back then, other researchers had to be very careful when they talked about this, because they didn’t want to be seen as New Age weirdos,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn, now a professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Massachusetts, said in an interview. “So they didn’t call it mindfulness or meditation. “After a while, we put enough studies out there that people became more comfortable with it.”

One person who noticed early on was Marsha Linehan, a psychologist at the University of Washington who was trying to treat deeply troubled patients with histories of suicidal behavior. “Trying to treat these patients with some change-based behavior therapy just made them worse, not better,” Dr. Linehan said in an interview. “With the really hard stuff, you need something else, something that allows people to tolerate these very strong emotions.”

In the 1990s, Dr. Linehan published a series of studies finding that a therapy that incorporated Zen Buddhist mindfulness, “radical acceptance,” practiced by therapist and patient significantly cut the risk of hospitalization and suicide attempts in the high-risk patients.

Finally, in 2000, a group of researchers including Dr. Segal in Toronto, J. Mark G. Williams at the University of Wales and John D. Teasdale at the Medical Research Council in England published a study that found that eight weekly sessions of mindfulness halved the rate of relapse in people with three or more episodes of depression.

With Dr. Kabat-Zinn, they wrote a popular book, “The Mindful Way Through Depression.” Psychotherapists’ curiosity about mindfulness, once tentative, turned into “this feeding frenzy, of sorts, that we have going on now,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn said.

Mindfulness meditation is easy to describe. Sit in a comfortable position, eyes closed, preferably with the back upright and unsupported. Relax and take note of body sensations, sounds and moods. Notice them without judgment. Let the mind settle into the rhythm of breathing. If it wanders (and it will), gently redirect attention to the breath. Stay with it for at least 10 minutes.

After mastering control of attention, some therapists say, a person can turn, mentally, to face a threatening or troubling thought — about, say, a strained relationship with a parent — and learn simply to endure the anger or sadness and let it pass, without lapsing into rumination or trying to change the feeling, a move that often backfires.

One woman, a doctor who had been in therapy for years to manage bouts of disabling anxiety, recently began seeing Gaea Logan, a therapist in Austin, Tex., who incorporates mindfulness meditation into her practice. This patient had plenty to worry about, including a mentally ill child, a divorce and what she described as a “harsh internal voice,” Ms. Logan said.

After practicing mindfulness meditation, she continued to feel anxious at times but told Ms. Logan, “I can stop and observe my feelings and thoughts and have compassion for myself.”

Steven Hayes, a psychologist at the University of Nevada at Reno, has developed a talk therapy called Acceptance Commitment Therapy, or ACT, based on a similar, Buddha-like effort to move beyond language to change fundamental psychological processes.

“It’s a shift from having our mental health defined by the content of our thoughts,” Dr. Hayes said, “to having it defined by our relationship to that content — and changing that relationship by sitting with, noticing and becoming disentangled from our definition of ourselves.”

For all these hopeful signs, the science behind mindfulness is in its infancy. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which researches health practices, last year published a comprehensive review of meditation studies, including T.M., Zen and mindfulness practice, for a wide variety of physical and mental problems. The study found that over all, the research was too sketchy to draw conclusions.

A recent review by Canadian researchers, focusing specifically on mindfulness meditation, concluded that it did “not have a reliable effect on depression and anxiety.”

Therapists who incorporate mindfulness practices do not agree when the meditation is most useful, either. Some say Buddhist meditation is most useful for patients with moderate emotional problems. Others, like Dr. Linehan, insist that patients in severe mental distress are the best candidates for mindfulness.

A case in point is mindfulness-based therapy to prevent a relapse into depression. The treatment significantly reduced the risk of relapse in people who have had three or more episodes of depression. But it may have had the opposite effect on people who had one or two previous episodes, two studies suggest.

The mindfulness treatment “may be contraindicated for this group of patients,” S. Helen Ma and Dr. Teasdale of the Medical Research Council concluded in a 2004 study of the therapy.

Since mindfulness meditation may have different effects on different mental struggles, the challenge for its proponents will be to specify where it is most effective — and soon, given how popular the practice is becoming.

The question, said Linda Barnes, an associate professor of family medicine and pediatrics at the Boston University School of Medicine, is not whether mindfulness meditation will become a sophisticated therapeutic technique or lapse into self-help cliché.

“The answer to that question is yes to both,” Dr. Barnes said.

The real issue, most researchers agree, is whether the science will keep pace and help people distinguish the mindful variety from the mindless.

A variety of meditative practices have been studied by Western researchers for their effects on mental and physical health.

An active exercise, sometimes called moving meditation, involving extremely slow, continuous movement and extreme concentration. The movements are to balance the vital energy of the body but have no religious significance.

Studies are mixed, some finding it can reduce blood pressure in patients, and others finding no effect. There is some evidence that it can help elderly people improve balance.

Meditators sit comfortably, eyes closed, and breathe naturally. They repeat and concentrate on the mantra, a word or sound chosen by the instructor to achieve state of deep, transcendent absorption. Practitioners “lose” themselves, untouched by day-to-day concerns. Studies suggest it can reduce blood pressure in some patients.

Practitioners find a comfortable position, close the eyes and focus first on breathing, passively observing it. If a stray thought or emotion enters the mind, they allow it to pass and return attention to the breath. The aim is to achieve focused awareness on what is happening moment to moment.

Studies find that it can help manage chronic pain. The findings are mixed on substance abuse. Two trials suggest that it can cut the rate of relapse in people who have had three or more bouts of depression.

Enhanced awareness through breathing techniques and specific postures. Schools vary widely, aiming to achieve total absorption in the present and a release from ordinary thoughts. Studies are mixed, but evidence shows it can reduce stress.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does an excellent job describing the practice of mindfulness mediation, as well as the utility and purpose of mindfulness therapies in a clinical setting. The notes that mindfulness is typically compared with  traditional cognitive therapy, another treatment option. The sidebar listing meditative therapies and evidence of their relative benefit is an excellent addition to the article. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Wednesday, Oct. 19, 2016, Cleveland: A team of Cleveland Clinic researchers, in collaboration with Nestlé Research Center, conducted one of the largest controlled studies of its kind on whole grains and concluded that a diet rich in whole grains may significantly lower the risk of cardiovascular disease in overweight and obese adults under the age of 50.

The findings, published in the Journal of Nutrition today, suggest that whole grains can be a key regulator of blood pressure, and could provide an effective nutritional strategy to reduce cardiovascular-related deaths and disorders.

"Heart disease and strokes are a leading cause of death in the United States. This research shows that eating whole grains reduces the risk of heart disease," said John Kirwan, Ph.D., principal investigator and director of the Metabolic Translational Research Center, which is part of Cleveland Clinic's Endocrinology & Metabolism Institute.

Researchers conducted a double-blind, randomized, controlled crossover trial. In the study, a group of 33 overweight and obese adults followed a whole grain diet (intervention) or a refined grain diet (control) for two eight-week periods. The diets were exactly the same, except for their content of whole grains or refined grains. At the beginning and end of each diet period, participants spent three days undergoing metabolic testing in a clinical research setting. Participants taking antihypertensive medication were instructed to maintain medication usage throughout the study.

While on the whole grain diet, participants saw a three-fold improvement in diastolic blood pressure (the lowest pressure when your heart relaxes between beats) compared to the refined grain diet. This improvement equates to reducing the risk of death from heart disease by almost one-third, and the risk of death from a stroke by two-fifths.

"The uniqueness of this study is that each of the 33 participants consumed both diets," said Kirwan. "This level of control can only be performed for small numbers and provides the essential empirical data that cannot be obtained from large observational studies. These evidence-based data demonstrate the effect of diet on cardiovascular disease outcomes, particularly diastolic blood pressure."

Blood pressure is typically recorded as two numbers. Systolic is the top number that measures the pressure in the arteries when the heart beats. Diastolic is the bottom number, which measures the pressure in the arteries when the heart muscle is resting between heartbeats.

Hypertension - or high blood pressure - is a common obesity-related condition that affects about 30 percent of U.S. adults and it is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Before age 50, an elevated diastolic blood pressure is associated with increased cardiovascular disease risk. As they age, people with elevated diastolic blood pressure are at a higher-than-average risk of developing elevated systolic blood pressure.

Overall, there were substantial reductions in body weight, fat loss, systolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, and LDL cholesterol during both diet periods, but these differences were due to the people changing their normal dietary habits to carefully controlled diets.

This collaborative research began in 2010. It was supported by an investigator-initiated grant from Nestlé, NIH National Center for Research Resources Grant UL1RR024989, and NIH Grant T32 DK007319. Nestlé Product Technology Center, Solon and Cereal Partners Worldwide provided the study meals and foods.

Cleveland Clinic is a nonprofit multispecialty academic medical center that integrates clinical and hospital care with research and education. Located in Cleveland, Ohio, it was founded in 1921 by four renowned physicians with a vision of providing outstanding patient care based upon the principles of cooperation, compassion and innovation. Cleveland Clinic has pioneered many medical breakthroughs, including coronary artery bypass surgery and the first face transplant in the United States. U.S.News & World Report consistently names Cleveland Clinic as one of the nation's best hospitals in its annual "America's Best Hospitals" survey. Among Cleveland Clinic's 49,000 employees are more than 3,400 full-time salaried physicians and researchers and 14,000 nurses, representing 120 medical specialties and subspecialties. The Cleveland Clinic health system includes a 165-acre main campus near downtown Cleveland, nine community hospitals, more than 150 northern Ohio outpatient locations - including 18 full-service family health centers and three health and wellness centers -- and locations in Weston, Fla.; Las Vegas, Nev.; Toronto, Canada; Abu Dhabi, UAE; and London, England. In 2015, there were 6.6 million outpatient visits, 164,700 hospital admissions and 208,807 surgical cases throughout the Cleveland Clinic health system. Patients came for treatment from every state and 180 countries. Visit us at http://www. . Follow us at http://www. .

Editor's Note: Cleveland Clinic News Service is available to provide broadcast-quality interviews and B-roll upon request.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Since the study itself is a comparison between diets rich either in whole grains or refined grains, it’s obvious that there are a multitude of diet alternatives.
As mentioned above, more details on the contents of the diet would have been beneficial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS — Heart patients should be regularly screened for signs of depression, the American Heart Association recommended Monday.

Depression is about three times more common in heart attack survivors and those hospitalized with heart problems than the general population, according to the recommendations published in the journal Circulation. The authors said only about half of heart doctors say they treat depression in their patients — and not all those diagnosed with depression are treated.

“I think we could reduce considerable suffering and improve outcomes,” by screening, said Erika Froelicher, professor of nursing at the University of California, San Francisco. “I know we can do more.”

Although there’s no direct evidence that heart patients who are screened fare better, depression can result in poorer outcomes and a poorer quality of life, the panel said. Depressed patients may skip their medications, not change their diet or exercise or take part in rehabilitation programs, they said.

Anyone from cardiologists to nurses to primary care doctors can and should be involved in determining whether a patient is depressed, said Froelicher, who was co-chairwoman of the panel that wrote the recommendations.

The panel suggests that heart patients be screened by first asking two standard questions: In the past two weeks, have you had little interest or pleasure in doing things? Have you felt down, depressed or hopeless?

If the patient answers yes to one or both, a questionnaire is recommended to determine if the patient is depressed and the severity. If depression is indicated, the patient may need to see a professional qualified in treating depression, the panel said, adding that treatment options include antidepressants, seeing a psychotherapist and exercise.

“Some physicians are qualified to treat it — others may be more comfortable referring the problem to a qualified mental health professional,” Froelicher said.

Psychiatrist Michelle Riba said the statement’s emphasis on frequent screening is important.

“What you want to see in a particular patient is how they do over time,” said Riba, past president of the American Psychiatric Association, which has endorsed the heart association’s recommendations.

One doctor said screening isn’t enough; patients need close monitoring to make sure they get help.

“A lot of patients with depression don’t follow up on it,” said Dr. Mary Whooley, a professor of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, who was not on the panel.

Barbara Forman, 62, struggled with depression after her double bypass about five years ago. She said she spent most of her time at her Englewood, Ohio, home sitting in her chair, frequently crying for no reason. When she did get out, she was often winded, even from a walk up a sidewalk to deliver cupcakes to her grandchild’s classroom.

“I’m thinking, is this the way it’s going to be for the rest of my life? Since I’ve had a heart event, is my life over?” she said. “It also made me afraid to do things. I didn’t know how a heart attack felt. I would think, ‘Is this a heart attack?’”

A couple of months after she got home she called Mended Hearts, a group affiliated with the heart association that provides support to heart patients, and talked to someone who let her know depression was common in heart patients.

Her family doctor sent her to a psychologist, and after some initial reluctance, she started taking an antidepressant. That, along with starting a walking routine and volunteering with Mended Hearts and the heart association, improved her outlook.

“You can’t sit in your house and just vegetate,” she said. “Over the last 18 months to two years — It’s really gotten better.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions antidepressants, psychotherapy and excercise as possible treatments for depression.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists are finding more clues to help determine whether people with mild dementia symptoms are at risk for Alzheimer's.

A new study suggests that biomarkers found in cerebrospinal fluid (fluid that surrounds the spinal cord and brain and acts as a protective cushion) could predict who would develop Alzheimer's disease 90% of the time among patients with mild cognitive impairment, a condition characterized by measurable memory problems.

Researchers report these findings in the journal Archives of General Psychiatry.

This is the longest clinical follow-up ever of patients who begin with mild cognitive impairment, researchers reported. Patients were tracked from four to 12 years, with a median of 9.2 years. The research builds on a 2006 Lancet Neurology study that followed patients for a median of 5.2 years, beginning with a group of 137 volunteers with mild cognitive impairment.The new study is important because of the long follow-up period, according to Adam Brickman, assistant professor of neuropsychology at Columbia University School of Medicine, who was not involved in the research.

Knowing which patient with mild cognitive impairment patients may go on to develop Alzheimer's is vital information for researchers, who are looking for treatments for the fatal brain disease. The current thinking is that interventions will be most effective when given to a patient as early as possible, Brickman said. Clinical trials can better focus their efforts if patients are known to be in the early stages of Alzheimer's. Generally, about 30% to 60% of patients with mild cognitive impairment show evidence of underlying symptoms of Alzheimer's, so not everyone with this condition is a good candidate for an Alzheimer's trial.

Researchers focused on two biomarkers previously thought to be involved in Alzheimer's disease: a kind of protein called beta-amyloid, and another protein type called tau. Experts believe a decrease in beta-amyloid in the fluid of the spinal cord is associated with a toxic buildup of that protein in the brain, which causes the formation of plaques linked to Alzheimer's disease. Tau has been tied to neurofibrillary tangles in the brain; researchers find that an increase in tau in cerebrospinal fluid is associated with Alzheimer's also.

The results from the study suggest that beta-amyloid is a much earlier predictor of Alzheimer's disease than tau, which supports the hypothesis that beta-amyloid accumulation in the brain occurs first in the course of the disease.

Some of the participants, who were originally found to be stable with mild cognitive impairment after about five years, went on to develop Alzheimer's disease during the longer follow-up. That suggests that a five-year follow-up period is not long enough to determine how well biomarkers can predict which patients will develop Alzheimer's disease, researchers say.

The association between biomarkers in the fluid and Alzheimer's was also described in studies in December 2009 and August 2010, building on the idea that a spinal tap could be useful in predicting Alzheimer's.

When these sorts of studies get published, Brickman and other doctors get phone calls from aging adults wondering whether they should be getting spinal taps to assess their risk. But it's too early to use this as a diagnostic tool in clinical settings, says Brickman. Down the road, the "fantasy" is that asymptomatic people will be able to get a biomarker test to determine whether they'll one day get Alzheimer's, but that's not possible right now, he adds.

"What I tell people is: If they’re worried about their thinking abilities, that they should make an appointment with a neuropsychology or a neurologist to get an evaluation," Brinkman says. "The way we diagnose Alzheimer’s disease is by evaluating the behavior and the risk factor medical profile, not by looking at biological markers at this point."

As scientists gain more insight into predicting Alzheimer's, aging adults may struggle with the question of whether they want to know their risk, especially since there's still no cure. Some people want to enroll in clinical trials as soon as they start showing symptoms; others would rather be ignorant of their status since there is no cure. In looking for treatments, however, researchers depend on people's willingness to contribute to science.

The Alzheimer's Association runs a system called TrialMatch. Check it out if you're interested in finding a trial for yourself or someone you care about.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: That independent expert added this important reminder:
“What I tell people is: If they’re worried about their thinking abilities, that they should make an appointment with a neuropsychology or a neurologist to get an evaluation,” Brinkman says. “The way we diagnose Alzheimer’s disease is by evaluating the behavior and the risk factor medical profile, not by looking at biological markers at this point.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Gentle Cesarean: More Like A Birth Than An Operation

There are many reasons women need cesareans. Sometimes the situation is truly life-threatening. But often the problem is that labor simply isn't progressing. That was the case for Valerie Echo Duckett, 35, who lives in Columbus, Ohio. After receiving an epidural for pain, Duckett's contractions stopped. By late evening she was told she'd need a C-section to deliver her son, Avery. Duckett says she has vague memories of being wheeled into the operating room, strapped down and shaking from cold.

"They were covering me up with warm blankets,"she says. "I kind of slept in and out of it." Her only memory of meeting her newborn son for the first time was from some pictures her husband took.

This is the experience many women have. The cesarean section is the most common surgery in America — about 1 in 3 babies is delivered this way. But for many women, being told they need a C-section is unpleasant news. Duckett says she felt like she missed out on a pivotal moment in her pregnancy.

"It took me a long time even to be able to say that I gave birth to Avery," she says. "I felt like I didn't earn the right to say I gave birth to him, like it was taken from me somehow, like I hadn't done what I was supposed to do."

Duckett's reaction to her C-section is unfortunately a common one, says Betsey Snow, head of Family and Child Services at Anne Arundel Medical Center, a community hospital in Annapolis, Md.

"I hear a lot of moms say, 'I'm disappointed I had to have a C-section.' A lot of women felt like they failed because they couldn't do a vaginal delivery," says Snow.

Now some hospitals are offering small but significant changes to the procedure to make it seem more like a birth than major surgery.

In a typical C-section, a closed curtain shields the sterile operating field. Mothers don't see the procedure and their babies are immediately whisked away for pediatric care — a separation that can last for close to half an hour. Kristen Caminiti, of Crofton, Md., knows this routine well. Her first two sons were born by traditional cesarean. She was happy with their births because, she says, it was all she knew. Then, just a few weeks into her third pregnancy, Caminiti, who is 33, saw a post on Facebook about family-centered cesarean techniques catching on in England.

"I clicked on the link and thought, 'I want that,' " she says.

The techniques are relatively easy and the main goals simple: Let moms see their babies being born if they want and put newborns immediately on the mother's chest for skin-to-skin contact. This helps stimulate bonding and breast feeding. Caminiti asked her obstetrician, Dr. Marcus Penn, if he'd allow her to have this kind of birth. He said yes.

When Caminiti told Penn what she wanted, his first thought was it wouldn't be that difficult to do. "I didn't see anything that would be terribly out of the norm," he says. "It would be different from the way we usually do it, but nothing terrible that anyone would say we shouldn't try that."

Family-centered cesareans are a relatively new idea in the U.S., and many doctors and hospitals have no experience with them. Penn and the staff at Anne Arundel Medical Center quickly realized the procedure would require some changes, including adding a nurse and bringing the neonatal team into the operating room.

And there were a bunch of little adjustments, such as moving the EKG monitors from their usual location on top of the mother's chest to her side. This allows the delivery team to place the newborn baby immediately on the mother's chest. In addition, Penn says, the mother's hands were not strapped down and the intravenous line was put in her nondominant hand so she could hold the baby.

At the beginning of October, Caminiti underwent her C-section. She was alert, her head was up and the drape lowered so she could watch the delivery of her son, Connor. Caminiti's husband, Matt, recorded the event. After Connor was out, with umbilical cord still attached, he was placed right on Caminiti's chest.

"It was the most amazing and grace-filled experience to finally have that moment of having my baby be placed on my chest," Caminiti says. "He was screaming and then I remember that when I started to talk to him he stopped. It was awesome."

And the baby stayed with her for the rest of the procedure.

Changes like this can make a big difference, says Dr. William Camann, the director of obstetric anesthesiology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and one of the pioneers of the procedure in the U.S. At Brigham and Women's, their version of the family-centered cesarean is called the gentle cesarean. Moms who opt for it can view the birth through a clear plastic drape, and immediate skin-to-skin contact follows.

Camann says the gentle C-section is not a replacement for a vaginal birth; it's just a way to improve the surgical experience. "No one is trying to advocate for C-sections. We really don't want to increase the cesarean rate, we just want to make it better for those who have to have it," he says.

So why has the procedure been slow to catch on? Hospitals aren't charging more for it — so cost doesn't seem to be a major factor. What's lacking are clinical studies. Without hard scientific data on outcomes and other concerns like infection control, many hospitals may be wary of changing their routines. Betsey Snow of Anne Arundel Medical Center says the family-centered C-section represents a cultural shift, and her hospital is helping break new ground by adopting it.

"It is the first time we have really done anything innovative or creative with changing the C-section procedure in years," she says.

Kristen Caminiti says her hope is that these innovations become routine. She says she'd like nothing more than to know that other women having C-sections are able to have the same amazing experience she had.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The piece compared other alternatives to the family-centered cesarean — mainly, the vaginal delivery and the traditional C-section. It mentioned that in a typical C-section, a closed curtain shields the operating field and the baby is quickly whisked away after birth.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Toronto, ON (February 5, 2018) -- A deceased donor kidney has been preserved and kept healthy outside the body in a device that mimics the body’s physiological functions and successfully transplanted into a human, for the first time in North America.

The technique, unique solution, and device are part of a Phase I clinical trial at Toronto General Hospital (TG), University Health Network (UHN), assessing the safety of the device, with subsequent phases examining its efficacy.

Kidneys are the most frequently transplanted solid organ, but a continuing shortage of donor kidneys impacts wait times and quality of life of those waiting for a transplant.

One way to address this gap by the transplant community worldwide has been to extend the criteria of those donor kidneys used for transplantation. But these “extended criteria” organs – those from older donors or from donors who have two or more risk factors - do not tolerate current “cold storage” methods for organ preservation well.

This can result in greater injury to the kidney, or in a “sleepy kidney” which functions poorly at the beginning, requiring dialysis until it recovers days or weeks later. This early delayed function also impacts its longer-term survival.

In Ontario, about 20 per cent of all transplanted kidneys are expanded criteria donor kidneys. This means donors are on average older than 60 years, or younger than 60 years and likely have hypertension, higher BMI (body mass index), diabetes, or died due to stroke.

Ex vivo organ perfusion is an innovative organ preservation technique that seeks to overcome the limitations of current “cold storage” method of preservation.

Developed in the laboratory of UHN transplant surgeon Dr. Markus Selzner, with the help of UHN transplant surgeons Drs. David Grant and Anand Ghanekar, as well as Drs. Lisa Robinson and Darius Bagli from The Hospital for Sick Children (SickKids), it took four years to perfect the solution for the donor kidney and to modify the heart-lung machine for use in the warm perfusion technique.

This technology has advantages over the usual cold storage method in which a deceased donor kidney is cooled on ice to about four degrees Celsius, with no oxygen, slowing down its metabolism, and inhibiting the repair process.

The kidney cannot survive longer than 30 hours in cold preservation. The new warm preservation technique avoids the damage of cold storage and instead allows the donor organ to improve and repair itself, potentially leading to better outcomes for patients.

Using a heart-lung bypass machine, with customized tubing adapted to the kidney’s smaller blood vessels - and a specially blended preservation solution of blood, nutrients, minerals, amino acids, oxygen, glucose, antibiotics and drugs – surgeons, nurses and perfusionists at TG prepared a deceased donor kidney in a transplant operating room to be placed in a warm preservation solution before transplantation into a patient in late November, 2017.

The aim was to enhance kidney function, minimize injury and avoid a “sleepy kidney” from an extended criteria kidney. About 30-40 per cent of deceased donor kidneys do not work immediately, requiring longer hospitals stays for the patients and dialysis.

Zhao Xiao, 53, received the deceased donor kidney, which was placed on the device for 3.5 hours at body temperature.

“I feel great,” says Xiao, through an interpreter. He was able to get up and walk two day after his transplant. Xiao says he was happy to volunteer to become the first patient to receive a kidney that was improved by the new technology.

“This can make a difference to other patients, so I am glad to be the first one helping them with my experience.”

As soon as the donor kidney was reattached to the patient, it turned ruby-red and started to pour out urine, indicating that it was functioning well.

“It is a champion!” says an elated Dr. Selzner, who has done about 500 kidney transplants in the past 14 years. “It behaved like a normal kidney, despite it being an extended criteria donor kidney.”

He points out blood tests within 48 hours showed that the kidney was removing wastes and excess fluid from the blood normally. Since the kidney did not “struggle” after transplant, there is a greater likelihood that its long-term outcome will be better, he adds.

“This technique will change the landscape of organ donation by improving organ preservation, allowing us to better assess and regenerate the donor organ on the device before we transplant it into a patient. We will know how healthy that organ is before the transplant operation,” says Dr. Markus Selzner, co-investigator of the clinical trial.

Dr. Selzner, a clinician-scientist at the Toronto General Hospital Research Institute and Associate Professor of Surgery at the University of Toronto, previously modified the preservation solution and supervised the research on a successful warm perfusion technique for the deceased donor liver organ.

“Working on this project has been one of the most rewarding experiences of my professional career,” says Dr. Lisa Robinson, Division Head of Nephrology at SickKids. “It is exciting to see this work be transformed from an idea to experimental research, and now to directly impacting patients.”

“Even with the shortage of donor organs, we have to decline some of our donor organs because of the damage they sustain in the retrieval process,” says Dr. David Grant, Surgical Director of the Multi-Organ Transplant Program, UHN. He is also co-investigator of the clinical trial and transplanted the donor kidney, which was on the modified heart-lung bypass machine, into the recipient.

“This new technology can help us answer the critical question, ‘What’s the best way to improve function and recover and repair the kidney before transplantation to get the best results for our patients?’”

Dr. Grant, who is also Professor of Surgery at the University of Toronto, emphasized that high-impact research projects such as this require strong collaborative teams – including researchers, surgical residents, nurses, Canadian Blood Services, perfusionists, colleagues at SickKids - working together on experimental and clinical trials.

“UHN is one of the few places in the world where you can have a good idea and then find the right people to make something like this happen.”

Other collaborators on the research and clinical trial at UHN include: Drs. Joseph Kim and Anand Ghanekar, co-leads of the kidney transplant program at UHN and transplant nephrologist Dr. Istvan Mucsi.

Dr. Grant also praised the strong support and efforts of Trillium Gift of Life, which co-ordinates organ and tissue donation across Ontario, in helping to ensure that the transplant team could begin their clinical trials with this new technique.

The technique of warm organ perfusion outside the body was pioneered by the Toronto Lung Transplant Program at TG in 2008 by Drs. Shaf Keshavjee and Marcelo Cypel to better treat, repair and assess high-risk donor lungs outside the body. The lungs are placed in a protective dome in which a system continuously pumps a bloodless solution of oxygen, proteins and nutrients into the injured donor lungs, mimicking normal physiological conditions.

This makes it possible for the injured cells to begin repairing themselves, and sets the stage for more sophisticated repair techniques to be applied to donor lungs. Since 2012, there has been an unprecedented 63 per cent increase in lung transplants at TG as a result of this system.

At any point in time, there are about 1,500 patients waiting for a transplant in Ontario. About 1,000 people wait for a kidney transplant across the province, usually about four years. About five per cent of people on kidney waiting lists die every year.

Research for the ex vivo kidney perfusion project was supported by the Canadian National Transplant Research Program (CNTRP), a national research network designed to increase organ and tissue donation in Canada and enhance the survival and quality of life of Canadians who receive transplants.

Generous philanthropic support, made through Toronto General & Western Hospital Foundation, has played and continues to play an integral role in the development of ex vivo technology and its impact on patients’ lives.

Toronto General Hospital is a partner in University Health Network, along with Toronto Western, the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto Rehabilitation Institute and the Michener Institute of Education. The scope of research and complexity of cases at Toronto General Hospital have made it a national and international source for discovery, education and patient care. It has one of the largest hospital-based research programs in Canada, with major research in transplantation, surgical innovation, cardiology, infectious diseases, genomic medicine and liver disease. Toronto General Hospital is a research and teaching hospital affiliated with the University of Toronto. www.uhn.ca

To download video and photos of the ex vivo kidney perfusion circuit and kidney transplant, please visit:
• Preparing ex vivo kidney circuit in the OR
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Here’s how the release handles the issue: “This technology has advantages over the usual cold storage method in which a deceased donor kidney is cooled on ice to about four degrees Celsius, with no oxygen, slowing down its metabolism, and inhibiting the repair process. The kidney cannot survive longer than 30 hours in cold preservation. The new warm preservation technique avoids the damage of cold storage and instead allows the donor organ to improve and repair itself, potentially leading to better outcomes for patients.”
This is a direct comparison, which is good, but raises some questions. For example, how long can a kidney survive using the new technique? More than 30 hours? There’s a reference to “the damage of cold storage,” but it doesn’t tell readers what that damage is — or what it means when they say a kidney can “improve and repair itself.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every month, some 50 percent of women suffer from monthly period-related pain. And there's not a whole lot they can do beyond trying to blunt it with pain-relieving pills or oral contraceptives.

Whoopi Goldberg recently stepped in with a new line of medical marijuana–based edibles and bath products (of questionable effectiveness) aimed at this underserved market.

Now there's Livia, a medical device that's being marketed as the "off switch for menstrual pain."

Here's how it works: Users simply attach two electrodes to the areas on their abdomen that hurt and switch on the colorful, palm-size gadget. According to Livia's makers, the device immediately sends nerve-stimulating electric pulses through the two electrodes, and poof! — the pain is gone.

Livia has received rave reviews in international women's magazines like Cosmopolitan and Glamour, and more than 3,000 crowdfunders from around the world have put upward of $284,000 into Livia's Indiegogo campaign. For now, it's only possible to preorder the device (at a cost of $85) and wait six months for it to ship.

As far as gadgetry for women's health goes, this one is novel. But does Livia actually work? There's no good way to evaluate that right now, since Livia's makers haven't made the findings of their studies on the device's effects public.

But there's some reason for optimism: The device is basically a repackaging of another (cheaper) technology that has already been proven to help women who suffer with their monthly cycles.

To learn more about Livia, I reached out to Chen Nachum, the company's founder and CEO. He explained that the key to the device is TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation), those electronic nerve stimulators you've probably seen in strip malls that hook up to the body to treat neck or back pain. (They're also available on the internet's strip mall, Amazon.)

TENS devices are generally thought to work through the "pain-gate theory" of pain. "The idea is the nerve system cannot work with two types of signals at the same time," Nachum explained, "so what Livia does is transmit frequency to the nerve system that it is very similar to the body's frequency, but it's not something the body knows."

When the frequency from the device hits the brain faster than the pain, the brain takes that signal first and is distracted from the menstrual aches, the company claims.

So far, Nachum said they have tested the device on 163 women in two different trials — and more than 80 percent experienced relief with the device. The company is currently working on another study, which will include about 60 women. 



Based on these studies, Nachum is trying to get Food and Drug Administration approval to market Livia as a menstrual pain reliever.

Jen Gunter, an OB-GYN and pain medicine specialist, noted that the idea of using TENS for menstrual pain is actually very sound. In fact, there's enough research that the Cochrane Collaboration was able to put together a review of the evidence. Its conclusion: "High-frequency nerve stimulation may help relieve painful menstrual cramps."

In an email, Gunter said she frequently prescribes high-frequency TENS (pulses between 50 and 120 hertz at a low intensity) to treat patients who suffer through their periods: "I have done so for more than 15 years. Prescribed one this morning in fact." They really help some women, she added.

The benefit here is that, unlike anti-inflammatories and oral contraceptives, TENS is a non-drug intervention, and according to the Cochrane Review, there's research that suggests women even take fewer pain relievers when using these devices.

Gunter's main question about Livia is whether it will be significantly different from the already available and effective TENS devices, which usually cost around $35. "Nothing [the CEO] has disclosed makes Livia sound like anything other than a TENS unit," she wrote. "So I guess it's an expensive, pink TENS unit?" 



(The company says the device would retail at $149, about the cost of four TENS units. But this assumes Livia will take off enough to justify retailing.)



Gunter also wondered whether Livia will be high frequency enough to be helpful. As that Cochrane review found, low-frequency TENS don't seem to do much to cut pain for women.



When I asked Nachum about the device's frequency, he said, "We can't share this information at this point."



And while he claims that Livia is more effective at treating period pain than the cheaper, already available TENS units (he said "its frequency and wave shape are unique and optimized especially for relieving menstrual pain"), without publicly available studies comparing the two, all we have to go on is his word. (The Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists wouldn't comment on Livia because no studies on it have been published.)



For now, Gunter pointed out, the TENS units that are already available can help women — and raising awareness about that might be Livia's biggest benefit.

"If [Livia] gets more women to know about TENS, then great," she said. "[B]ut to call it something new or different seems disingenuous, unless of course they have published ... data that says otherwise."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that oral contraceptives and analgesics are also used, and that traditional TENS units are also widely available.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women of child-bearing age are strongly encouraged to take it, because it can prevent birth defects. Now, there's new information showing how important folic acid is. Dr. Emily Senay discussed it on The Early Show Tuesday. To watch the segment,

For much more on folic acid, from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, click here.

Elisa Zied, a registered dietitian and a spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association, talked about how to properly interpret information on food labels. For more information on this subject, see these two articles on WebMD: Weight Loss: How To Read Food Labels and Cracking the Code.

Zied is also the author, with Ruth Winter, of a book titled "So What Can I Eat?"

Thousands of women are quitting corporate jobs to create more flexible, family-friendly careers in their homes. Early Show national correspondent Hattie Kauffman did a two part series, "Up and Running," in which she spoke to moms with home businesses, doing what they love.

For tips to help you launch your own home business you can go to Mompreneursonline.com.

For more information about the businesses featured in the series, click on:

The Consumer Product Safety Commission wishes to remind you that using camp stoves, portable camping heaters, or lanterns or charcoal grills inside your home produces dangerous levels of carbon monoxide, as does using a portable generator inside your home.

Carbon moxoxide is an invisible killer. You can't see or smell it. It can kill you and your family in minutes.

For safety tips from the CPSC on generators and carbon monoxide, click here.

For detailed information from the CPSC on the use of camping equipment indoors, click here.

It's a tremendous challenge for parents to teach their teenagers and "tweens" everything they ought to know. But a few small lessons now can turn out to be valuable later in life.

On The Early Show Friday, Family Circle magazine Editor in Chief Linda Fears discussed everyday lessons that can make a big difference.

The magazine says small gestures by parents make big impressions, teaching enduring lessons. Fears says kids do follow their parents' leads, "even though they may never admit it. In fact, according to a recent survey we conducted on the emotional lives of tweens and teens, kids want more time just hanging out with their parents, and more time talking about important issues."

Among everyday lessons parents can practice to teach their kids to live better (and, in turn, make parents' lives easier!) are following your passion, taking finances seriously and teaching teens and tweens about them, accepitng your flaws, and insisting on family time.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Recommendations of adequate folic acid intake were presented.  The treatment options, obtaining folic acid from dietary sources or from supplements were both presented.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It sounds almost too good to be true — a two-step cream that tightens up baggy eyes and can keep dry legs from flaking.

A team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has developed the cream and licensed it to two companies with close ties to the lab — one called Living Proof, best known for spinning out MIT inventions to the hair care market, and a second one called Olivo Labs, which will develop it for medical uses, perhaps to deliver drugs to the skin.

The cream’s effects are detailed in a scientific report in the journal Nature Materials, but as part of the school’s close association with the companies, it’s being patented and produced at almost the same time.

First the science. The research was led by Robert Langer, a prolific inventor who heads a biological engineering lab at MIT.

Writing in the journal Nature Materials, the team said they searched databases for materials that were already on the market and recognized as safe that could take a whole new approach to skin care.

Betty Yu, the company’s principal scientist, earned her PhD in biochemistry and toxicology. She has studied how to deliver drugs into the skin and led efforts to develop hair care products. She wanted to move on to skin products.

They wanted something stretchy and strong that wouldn’t pucker up when it dried on the skin and that would be breathable.

“It has to have the right optical properties, otherwise it won’t look good, and it has to have the right mechanical properties, otherwise it won’t have the right strength and it won’t perform correctly,” Langer said.

“Creating a material that behaves like skin is very difficult,” added Dr. Barbara Gilchrest, a dermatologist at the Massachusetts General Hospital who worked on the study.

“Many people have tried to do this, and the materials that have been available up until this have not had the properties of being flexible, comfortable, nonirritating, and able to conform to the movement of the skin and return to its original shape.”

They screened about 100 compounds before settling on polysiloxane, a silicone-based gel. They call it a cross-linked polymer layer or XPL for short.

“It works in two parts,” Langer told NBC News. “You put on a primer layer, just kind of rub it in. Then you put on a second layer and rub that one in. There’s cross-linking and it tightens it up.”

Cross-linking is a well-understood process. Separate strands of material become stronger when they link up. “Vulcanization, used to make tires, is a cross-linking process,” Langer said. “Rubber alone would not be that strong.”

In this case, the catalyst is platinum-based and it turns the gel into a thin, stretchy sheet. There are hundreds of skin products that do this now, but this one sticks better and doesn’t pucker the skin, the team reports.

Light-scattering particles are added to the second layer, and they reflect light off the skin, making it look clearer and smoother.

Langer tried it on his arm. “It was almost like you couldn’t see it. After a minute, I didn’t know it was there,” he said.

They ran four experiments on the product. In one, they applied it to the skin under the eyes of 25 volunteers. It lasted for 16 hours before it started peeling off, and smoothed out the eye bags that become so common as people age, they wrote.

“Such a result has been previously achieved only by a lower lid blepharoplasty, an invasive surgical procedure,” they wrote.

They demonstrate it in this video.

They also put tested at against petroleum jelly and regular moisturizer on 22 people with dry, flaky legs. The XPL lasted longer and helped keep the skin from losing moisture better than the petroleum jelly, which lasted better than moisturizer.

“The results confirmed the XPL as a ‘second skin’ barrier that protects the skin from excessive moisture loss to the environment,” they wrote.

“Repeated daily wear resulted in no report of irritation or other adverse events resulting from the XPL use. Furthermore, the XPL remained intact following activities such as swimming, running and exposure to rain,” they added.

The stuff can just be peeled off, or taken off with makeup remover, the researchers said.

Dermatologist Dr. Jennifer Lucas of the Cleveland Clinic, who was not involved in the study, said she’d have to see long-term results to make a judgment. “Conceptually, it’s a great and novel idea,” she said.

“For now, there is no magical cream that can make you look younger.”

Olivo will work first to develop the product to deliver drugs to the skin –perhaps allergy or eczema medication, or long-lasting sunscreen, MIT said. Langer said it might also be used to help burn patients.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give a Satisfactory in this category since the story states that the problem of undereye bags–which the story seems to focus on–is normally addressed by surgery, and clearly a topical product is preferable to an invasive approach.  Another obvious alternative, with no risks or costs, is leaving the normally aging skin alone, but that’s not discussed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (January 26, 2017): Patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease, known as GERD, who undergo laparoscopic anti-reflux operations compared with traditional "open" operations suffer fewer postoperative complications, experience faster recovery, and incur lower health care costs, according to study results published online as an "article in press" on the Journal of the American College of Surgeons website, ahead of print publication.



GERD affects nearly 20 percent of American adults, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.* Heartburn, a burning sensation in the chest, is a common symptom of GERD.



"Patients with GERD have an incompetent lower esophageal sphincter, which allows gastric acid to go back up into the esophagus," said lead study author Francisco Schlottmann, MD, a surgeon at the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. "Anti-reflux surgery should be considered in patients who do not achieve complete control of their symptoms [regurgitation or cough] with medications; who do not want to take medications for the rest of their lives; or who experience complications of medical therapy."



For the study, researchers analyzed data in the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) database of more than 75,000 adults who underwent either laparoscopic or open fundoplication for GERD between 2000 and 2013. NIS represents 1,000 U.S. hospitals and contains data on more than seven million hospitalizations each year. During the study period, 58.4 percent of patients underwent laparoscopic procedures and 41.6 percent had open anti-reflux operations performed through a long abdominal incision.



The study showed that the rate of laparoscopic procedures increased from 24.8 percent in 2000 to 84.3 percent in 2013. "Surprisingly, in 2003, 12 years after the first laparoscopic anti-reflux operation was reported, only 25 percent of all the anti-reflux operations were performed laparoscopically in the U.S.," Dr. Schlottmann said. "Subsequently, the rate increased, but 15 percent of all anti-reflux operations were still being performed through an open approach in 2013. We believe this percentage is very high, and we hope that in the next year this percentage will decrease."



Along with discovering that the use of laparoscopy for the surgical treatment of GERD has increased significantly in the last decade, the researchers also found that, on average, the minimally invasive approach reduced length of hospital stay by approximately two days, and open operations were more than $9,000 more expensive than minimally invasive procedures.



The researchers also found that laparoscopic procedures were better for patients in terms of fewer complications. Laparoscopic anti-reflux operations were less likely to result in postoperative blood clots, wound complications, surgical site infection, esophageal perforation (which can be life threatening), bleeding, cardiac failure, and death.



"Our study highlights the fact that laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery is as effective as the open approach, and in 2017, with all its advantages, should be the standard of care," said senior study author Marco G. Patti, MD, FACS, a surgeon and Director of the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.



"We found that laparoscopic surgery is associated with significantly lower costs. In addition, indirect costs of the open approach, including an impaired ability to work, time off from work, and intangible costs of postoperative pain and healing, are difficult to measure but also favor the laparoscopic approach," said Dr. Patti.



"GERD is a common digestive disorder that can usually be treated with dietary changes and medications such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). However, chronic and not-controlled GERD can cause serious complications. Repeated exposure to stomach acid can damage the lining of the esophagus and lead to a precancerous condition called Barrett's esophagus," said Dr. Schlottmann.



Study results also revealed that urban academic or teaching hospitals performed laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery at a higher rate than open procedures, 54.4 percent versus 45.6 percent. "We think that it is important to make this information more available to the public. In order to achieve good outcomes, anti-reflux surgery should be performed laparoscopically in specialized centers," said Dr. Patti.



Paula D Strassle, MSPH Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC also participated in this study.



Citation: Comparative Analysis of Perioperative Outcomes and Costs Between Laparoscopic and Open Antireflux Surgery. Journal of the American College of Surgeons. DOI: http://dx.

*National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Digestive Diseases Statistics for the United States. https:/ . Published November 2014. Accessed January 20, 2017.

About the American College of Surgeons

The American College of Surgeons is a scientific and educational organization of surgeons that was founded in 1913 to raise the standards of surgical practice and improve the quality of care for surgical patients. The College is dedicated to the ethical and competent practice of surgery. Its achievements have significantly influenced the course of scientific surgery in America and have established it as an important advocate for all surgical patients. The College has more than 80,000 members and is the largest organization of surgeons in the world. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release does a good job here. It compares different surgical methods and it also names alternatives for treating GERD such as medications and changes in the diet.
It also states which group of patients the surgery is aimed at: “Anti-reflux surgery should be considered in patients who do not achieve complete control of their symptoms [regurgitation or cough] with medications; who do not want to take medications for the rest of their lives; or who experience complications of medical therapy.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
What's New The Pill. The Ring. The Sponge. They're all temporary means of birth control -- devices you have to keep ingesting or inserting. Even the IUD can't stay in place for more than 10 years.

The only once-and-be-done-with-it option for women has been tubal ligation ("tying the tubes") -- surgery that renders a woman sterile. Now a procedure called Essure, recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration, gives women an alternative. The nonsurgical approach uses a hysteroscope -- a camera-tipped instrument -- to thread two small wires through the vagina, cervix and uterus and into the fallopian tubes. The wires, composed of polyester fibers and metals, cause inflammation and, over time, scar tissue that blocks the fallopian tubes, preventing sperm from reaching eggs. Women can undergo the procedure in 35 minutes in their doctor's office, under local anesthesia; they are advised to rest for 24 to 48 hours before resuming normal activity. Essure is 99.8 percent effective in preventing pregnancy -- a rate similar to that of tubal ligation, according to the manufacturer, Conceptus Inc. of Mountain View, Calif.

Pros and Cons Ellen Whitaker, a gynecologist at the Washington Hospital Center, says "the biggest advantage" of Essure is that it involves no incisions or general anesthesia, which both carry risks. By going through the vagina, she says, you "avoid all the organs in the abdomen." In a tubal ligation, she says, "there's always the possibility of bowel injury, bladder injury . . . which can be very serious."

The biggest drawback, Whitaker says, is the need for X-rays three months after the procedure to confirm the fallopian tubes are blocked. Until then, the patient must use another form of birth control.

Side effects may include pain, cramps and mild bleeding or spotting. There is the risk of infection or a puncture of the vagina or uterus while inserting the hysteroscope. As with tubal ligation, there is also an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy -- a pregnancy that develops outside the uterus.

One for the Guys Men, too, have an option for a faster, less painful procedure than vasectomy to tie the vas deferens -- the tubes that carry sperm from the testicles to the penis. In the increasingly popular "no-scalpel vasectomy," a doctor uses an instrument called a dissecting forceps to poke a very small hole in the skin of the testicles to reach the vas deferens. There is very little bleeding, and no stitches are needed to close the tiny openings (one on each side). The procedure is very effective (there is less than a 1 percent chance the man's partner will get pregnant) and takes about 10 minutes to perform in the doctor's office.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention the Pill, the Ring, the Sponge, an IUD and tubal ligation as alternatives to Essure. The story could have provided more content for the reader about the pros and cons of the different approaches. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using data from a national study, Johns Hopkins researchers determined that using heart CT scans can help personalize treatment in patients whose blood pressure falls in the gray zone of just above normal or mild high blood pressure. Previously, the appropriate blood pressure treatment for these patients used risk calculations and some guesswork, potentially leaving many vulnerable to heart disease or taking drugs they don't need. Nearly one in three adults in the U.S. has prehypertension, blood pressure higher than normal but not considered high yet.

The scans detect levels of calcium in the heart's arteries, and the physicians suggest those people with the highest calcium levels would benefit most from aggressive blood pressure treatment, whereas those with little or no calcium may not need to be treated as intensively, depending on their other heart disease risk factors.

In the study, published on Jan. 10 in Circulation, the researchers say these calcium scores allow physicians to go beyond the traditionally calculated risk factors to determine which blood pressure treatment strategy may be most appropriate for a particular patient.

"If a health care provider wants to target blood pressure in a patient with traditional heart disease risk factors and above-normal blood pressure, he or she can look at coronary artery calcium to help with tiebreakerlike decisions," says J. William McEvoy, M.B.B.Ch., M.H.S., assistant professor of medicine and member of the Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. "Our study, along with others, such as SPRINT and HOPE, positions cardiac risk and coronary artery calcium as helpful ways to determine if a given patient would either benefit from more intensive blood pressure control or do just fine with a more traditional blood pressure target."

In late 2015, the SPRINT trial showed improved outcomes for participants with increased risk for heart disease whose physicians targeted their systolic (the top number) blood pressures to 120 millimeters of mercury, rather than the traditional 140 millimeters of mercury. But not all people deemed "higher risk" by traditional methods may need to be aggressively treated, McEvoy says. Some people react poorly to higher doses of blood pressure medicines and experience side effects, such as sexual dysfunction, dizziness, falls, weakness and more. And the risk factor equations that determine whether certain people are at higher risk and should be treated more intensively with blood pressure medications may have inaccuracies on the individual level, says McEvoy. "We can predict that about 15 out of every 100 people with a particular risk score will die of a heart attack, but the equations don't tell us which of those people will be one of the actual 15; they don't give us personalized information," says McEvoy.

Conventionally, coronary artery calcium scores have informed physicians' decisions of whether to put a patient on statins, but the researchers say they haven't been evaluated before for their potential ability to determine blood pressure treatment. To determine if coronary artery calcium scores could inform blood pressure recommendations too, the researchers used data from 3,733 participants in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) who had systolic blood pressures between 120 and 179 millimeters of mercury. Participants were an average of 65 years old, and 48 percent were men. Thirty-five percent were white, 32 percent were African-American, 22 percent were Hispanic and 11 percent were Chinese-American. At the beginning of the study, investigators measured their blood pressure and performed a cardiac CT scan to determine coronary artery calcium scores. They also calculated each participant's heart disease risk with the Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk Algorithm, which uses traditional risk factors, such as race, age, sex, cholesterol levels and family history of disease. About once a year for 10 years, an interviewer contacted each participant or a family member to determine heart disease diagnosis, hospitalizations or deaths. After about 10 years, the participants had 642 heart disease events, such as heart attack, heart failure, stroke and death.

The researchers divided the participants by their coronary artery calcium scores into one of three groups: those with a score of zero, those with a score of one to 100 and those with a score greater than 100. Then, they looked at the number of heart disease-related events in each calcium score category broken down by blood pressure range and calculated heart disease risk. Low heart disease risk was classified as a less than 15 percent chance of a heart disease event over the next 10 years, and high risk was 15 percent or greater risk of a heart disease event. To get the event rate, the investigators divided the number of events in each category by the amount of people in the study multiplied by the length of time they spent in the study, known as a person-year.

Participants with calcium scores of zero with a high calculated risk of heart disease had a relatively low actual event rate after the 10-year study. For example, according to the researchers, those with systolic blood pressures below 140 millimeters of mercury and no calcium had an event rate of 12.7 events per 1,000 person-years, and similar people with systolic blood pressures between 140 and 159 millimeters of mercury had an event rate of 13.6 events per 1,000 person-years.

In contrast, participants with systolic blood pressure under 140 millimeters of mercury -- below the current cutoff for treatment -- and rated with a low predicted risk of heart disease who had a calcium score over 100 had a high actual event rate of 19.7 events per 1,000 person-years. Thus, even though their calculated heart disease risk is relatively low and their blood pressure is below traditional cutoffs for treatment, the researchers say people in this category with calcium over 100 are high risk and may benefit from more aggressive blood pressure treatment.

Participants with high systolic blood pressure between 160 and 179 millimeters of mercury had high event rates ranging from 20 to 40 heart disease events per 1,000 person-years regardless of their calcium scores. The researchers say this demonstrates that calcium scores may only be useful in guiding more personalized blood pressure treatment for patients with mild high blood pressure -- the gray zone -- not those with high blood pressure.

"It may be that if patients are in that blood pressure treatment gray zone with a high risk score but their coronary artery calcium score is zero, then they don't need to be treated aggressively to 120 millimeters of mercury and can be treated to 140 instead," says McEvoy. "But if patients have a high calcium score and are in the gray zone, then it would make sense to go with 120 as a treatment goal."

The researchers caution that results are from an observational study, and a randomized trial would be needed to confirm the recommendations.

Coronary artery calcium scans aren't usually covered by insurance and can range in cost from $100 to $400. The scans use radiation, so there is a very small cancer risk for susceptible individuals.

About 70 million adults in the U.S. have high blood pressure -- a systolic blood pressure over 140 millimeters of mercury -- putting them at increased risk for heart attacks, stroke, heart failure and kidney disease, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Additional authors on the study included Seth Martin, Zeina Dardari, Wendy Post, Khurram Nasir and Michael Blaha of Johns Hopkins; Michael Miedema of the Minneapolis Heart Institute; Veit Sandfort of the National Institutes of Health; Joseph Yeboah of Wake Forest Baptist Health; Matthew Budoff of the University of California, Los Angeles; David Goff of the Colorado School of Public Health; and Bruce Psaty of the University of Washington.

The study was funded by the P.J. Schafer Cardiovascular Research Fund, the Johns Hopkins Magic That Matters Research Fund for Cardiovascular Research, grants from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (UL1-TR-000040 and UL1-TR-001079), and contracts from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (HHSN268201500003I, N01-HC-95159, N01-HC-95160, N01-HC-95161, N01-HC-95162, N01-HC-95163, N01-HC-95164, N01-HC-95165, N01-HC-95166, N01-HC-95167, N01-HC-95168 and N01-HC-95169).
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release offers this comparison: “Previously, the appropriate blood pressure treatment for these patients used risk calculations and some guesswork, potentially leaving many vulnerable to heart disease or taking drugs they don’t need.”
Previous treatment guidelines (JNC 7) recommended only lifestyle changes for the average-risk prehypertensive patient. (And as noted above, the current guidelines do not include a prehypertensive category.) We would like to see some mention of these recommended lifestyle changes such as exercise, weight loss, dietary changes, and limiting alcohol, which can reduce blood pressure along with providing other health benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A music legend fights Alzheimer's disease on his unforgettable farewell tour. CNN Films Presents:" Glen Campbell ... I'll Be Me ," Saturday, November 7, at 8 p.m. ET.

(CNN) Over the years, resveratrol, an antioxidant found in grapes, chocolate and red wine, has been touted as a possible antidote to Alzheimer's disease, cancer, diabetes and many other conditions. Now, the first study in people with Alzheimer's suggests that the compound, when taken in concentrated doses, may actually have benefit in slowing progression of this disease.

Researchers at 21 medical centers across the United States looked at the safety and effectiveness of taking high doses of resveratrol in an experimental pill -- equal to the amount found in 1,000 bottles of red wine -- in people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's.

The researchers looked at several biomarkers of Alzheimer's, and found that people who took up to four pills a day for a year had higher levels of amyloid-beta proteins in their spinal fluid than those who took a placebo (control) pill.

Although accumulation of amyloid-beta in the brain is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease, patients actually have lower levels of this protein outside of the brain. The study finding suggests that resveratrol could help change the balance from amyloid-beta buildup in the brain to circulating protein in the body.

Even if concentrated forms of resveratrol pills like the kind used in this study were available, it's too soon to recommend going out and getting some just yet.

"The study is encouraging enough that we should certainly go ahead and do a [larger] clinical trial because we showed that it is safe and does have significant effects on Alzheimer's biomarkers," said Dr. R. Scott Turner, professor of neurology at Georgetown University Medical Center and lead investigator of the study, which was published on Friday in the journal Neurology.

The main goal of the current study, which included 119 patients, was to find out whether high doses of resveratrol could be safe. The only small concern they found was that patients taking resveratrol lost about two pounds during the one-year study, and weight loss is already a problem with Alzheimer's, Turner said. In comparison, the control group gained about 1 pound.

Much more research is needed

The study was not big enough to answer some important questions, such as whether patients taking resveratrol actually had lower levels of amyloid-beta plaques in their brain, and most importantly, whether they experienced less decline in their mental faculties.

A large, phase 3 clinical trial getting at these issues could start in as soon as a year, Turner said. (The current study was a phase 2 trial, typically meant to evaluate safety and get an early look at efficacy of a new drug.)

Even for the relatively small number of participants in the study, the researchers did see indication that resveratrol could improve cognition. Patients in this group had slight improvements in their ability to carry out daily tasks, such as remembering to brush their teeth. And anecdotally, patients who took resveratrol told the researchers that they felt like they were maintaining their mental ability. (Neither the participants nor the researchers knew who was taking resveratrol and who was taking placebo.)

"To really get a better feel of how effective this could be you really need to do larger studies for longer periods of time (such as several years)," said James A. Hendrix, director of global science initiatives at the Alzheimer's Association, a research and advocacy organization. "Other potential therapies we've had had some early exciting results and then they didn't pan out in later trials," he added.

If resveratrol does pan out in further research, it may add to the medications that are currently available, such as Aricept and Exelon, which slow, but do not halt, progression of the disease, Hendrix said.

Ultimately, it will probably be a combination of several drugs, as well as diet, exercise and social and mental stimulation that help stave off the rapid mental decline that is often associated with Alzheimer's, he added.

Antioxidant may be most effective in combination

This is one of the first studies to look not only at these biomarkers, but also the metabolites of resveratrol in spinal fluid, to show that resveratrol is probably getting into the brain, said Dr. Giulio M. Pasinetti, who is the Saunders Family Chair and professor in neurology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. However, he added that changes in biomarkers may not necessarily lead to mental and behavioral improvements, which larger studies will address.

In addition, resveratrol on its own might not end up working as well as a combination of resveratrol and other polyphenol compounds found in red wine, grape juice and grape seed extract, which could help people at risk of Alzheimer's and those who already have mild symptoms, Pasinetti said.

The current study used high doses of resveratrol to increase the chances that enough of the compound got into the brain to have an effect. But for now, the best way to get resveratrol is probably through diet. One glass of red wine a day could help those with mild Alzheimer's, "but no more than that," Turner said.

There is probably little benefit in taking currently available resveratrol supplements, even if they claim to contain levels similar to the ones used in this study. "The things that are on the market are not regulated, and you don't know how much is in them," Turner said. "There could be 500 milligrams, which is what they advertise [researchers gave participants in the study four 500 milligram pills a day] or there could be zero," he said.

Previous research has suggested that people who consume diets rich in resveratrol do not have lower rates of cancer, heart disease and other conditions.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions both drugs used in Alzheimer’s treatment and lifestyle factors — such as diet and exercise — that may help slow mental decline in Alzheimer’s patients.
However, we thought one of the comments from Dr. Turner on this subject was confusing and not backed by evidence.
One glass of red wine a day could help those with mild Alzheimer’s, “but no more than that,” Turner said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People who can’t control cholesterol with diet, exercise and statin drugs could soon have a new option.

According to a new study, a medication, ancetrapib, appears to simultaneously raise the level of HDL – sometimes called “good” cholesterol- and to lower the level of LDL, or “bad” cholesterol.

HDL cholesterol is not fully understood, but essentially sucks cholesterol out of cells, to be flushed from the body through the liver.

The study was sponsored by Merck, the drug’s manufacturer. It was published in the New England Journal of Medicine and results were to be presented Wednesday at a meeting of American Heart Association in Chicago.

The so-called DEFINE trial involved 1,623 patients with coronary heart disease or at high risk for it. All were taking statins to lower LDL cholesterol. Roughly half also received ancetrapib, while half got a placebo. On average, within 24 weeks patients getting ancetrapib saw LDL levels drop by nearly 40 percent compared with the placebo group, while their HDL levels rose by 138 percent. There were no significant side effects.

If the same benefit were seen in all patients at risk of heart disease – far from a sure thing – it would translate to hundreds of thousands of fewer deaths and heart attacks over a five-year period, according to Dr. Christopher Cannon, the lead study author and a cardiologist at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

“It’s an amazing result,” said Dr. Robert Eckel of the University of Colorado, a past president of the American Heart Association. “It’s like a rocket that landed on Jupiter, rather than the moon.” Still, Eckel warned it’s too soon to say whether ancetrapib would actually prevent disease over the long run.

There’s ample reason for caution. A similar medication, torcetrapib, was considered promising four years ago, but was shelved by Pfizer after studies found it actually raised blood pressure and the risk of heart problems and death.

Dr. PK Shah, cardiologist at the Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute, said that he’s encouraged by DEFINE but that some of the details give him pause. “It appears to be safe and to not raise blood pressure,” Shah told CNN, “but it’s not a slam-dunk.” For one thing, despite improved cholesterol levels, patients did not see less inflammation in their blood vessels. Inflammation is a sign of damage from cholesterol.

To try to provide final answers, Merck is launching a study – called REVEAL – to follow 30,000 people, in several countries, over four years. The first patients will be enrolled in April, according to Dr. Rory Collins of Oxford University, where the research will be overseen.

Lee Davies, a Merck spokesman, said the company is not likely to seek FDA approval until those results are in, most likely in 2015. By then, results will also be in on a large study of a similar drug, dalcetrapib, made by Merck’s competitor, Roche.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The lead sentence of this story portrays the experimental drug as a potential complement to lifestyle changes and statin treatment. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Two new drugs using very different scientific approaches can extend survival among patients with the deadliest form of skin cancer, offering the first new hope for real progress in many years.

Advanced melanoma patients taking an experimental pill, vemurafenib, developed by Roche and Daiichi Sankyo were 63 percent less likely to die than patients given chemotherapy, according to a new trial presented on Sunday at a meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology in Chicago.

Dr. Paul Chapman of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and the study’s lead investigator called the results an “unprecedented level of difference” for patients with advanced melanoma, who typically survive just eight months on current treatments.

In a separate study presented at ASCO, previously untreated people with advanced melanoma treated with Bristol-Myers Squibb’s Yervoy, or ipilimumab, plus chemotherapy lived an average of two months longer than people who got chemotherapy alone.

Yervoy works by spurring the immune system to fight off the cancer. Vemurafenib is designed for use in patients with tumors that have a mutation in a gene known as BRAF that allows melanoma cells to grow. About half of all melanomas have the genetic aberration.

The Roche trial included 675 patients with previously untreated, inoperable late-stage metastatic melanoma with the BRAF mutation.

After a median three months of treatment, vemurafenib patients also had a 74 percent reduction in the risk of cancer progression compared to dacarbazine.

“This is a huge difference,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas, an oncologist at the University of California, Los Angeles, who has studied vemurafenib. “Even if it diminishes over time, who cares?”

“Nearly half of patients treated with the Roche drug had tumor shrinkage, compared with 5.5 percent with chemotherapy.

Side effects included skin rashes and joint pain. About 18 percent of patients developed a low-grade skin cancer.

More than 70,000 people in the United States and 160,000 worldwide are diagnosed with melanoma each year, according to the American Cancer Society. The five-year survival rate for the aggressive cancer is just 15 percent.

Analysts, on average, have forecast annual vemurafenib sales of $452 million by 2015 and expect Yervoy annual sales of $1.26 billion, according to Thomson Pharma.

ISI Group analyst Mark Schoenebaum said although the vemurafenib results look the most encouraging, the findings are unlikely to make a difference for current sales estimates, since virtually all eligible patients will be treated with both drugs, either in sequence or in combination.

MORE HELP FOR MELANOMA PATIENTS

Roche expects U.S. and European regulators to decide on approval of its drug before the end of the year.

Bristol-Myers’ Yervoy was approved in March for patients with inoperable or metastatic melanoma, based on a previous study which showed the drug given alone extended survival by four months in patients who had failed other treatments.

“What was interesting about this study was not only was it the second one to show a benefit,” but that the improvement “took place even in the presence of dacarbazine chemotherapy,” Dr. Jedd Wolchok of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, who presented the study at the meeting, said in a telephone interview.

“We worried a lot that chemotherapy could be immunosuppressive,” Wolchok said, noting that that might explain why the average survival benefit was two months instead of four.

“We don’t know what dacarbazine did to the ipilimumab, but we do know even in the presence of dacarbazine, ipilimumab still produced a durable response and extended survival.”

Doctors said taken together the new studies offer new options for patients.

“This is really unprecedented time to have two new approaches to treat advanced melanoma,” said Dr. Lynn Schuchter of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, a melanoma expert who moderated a panel discussion of the drugs.

“Once you finally understand what is driving the disease we can develop therapies that are more effective,” she said.

She and others expect vemurafenib to be approved this year. Meanwhile, doctors are already working out treatment strategies.

For patients who are stable with slow-growing tumors, Chapman said he would start them off on ipilimumab.

“That is a drug that can take a while to work, so if the person has time I would rather give him essentially two shots on goal rather than one.”

For advanced patients who need a quick response, he would use vemurafenib first.

Schuchter, who was not involved with the studies, said now the future is going to be to build upon this success and combine therapies.

“Cancer cells outwit us — they are brilliant — and figure out other pathways,” she said.

Bristol-Myers and Roche announced earlier this week a collaboration to evaluate the combination of Yervoy and vemurafenib as a therapy for metastatic melanoma.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately described the comparison data reported in the two studies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 14, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Not only do cooler heads prevail, they might also sleep better, according to researchers who say they have developed a cooling cap that, when worn during sleeptime, may help treat insomnia.

Previous research has shown that the brains of people with insomnia are "hyperaroused" and have a higher brain metabolism in the frontal lobes, which helps explain why they have trouble drifting off to sleep and staying asleep, said study co-author Dr. Daniel Buysse, a professor of psychiatry and clinical and translational science at University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

To help the brain cool down, researchers outfitted 12 primary insomnia patients with a temperature-controlled cap that has cool water flowing through it and recruited 12 healthy controls matched for age and gender. ("Primary insomnia" means that medical problems, medicines, or other substances have been ruled out as a cause of sleep difficulties. The more common type of insomnia is "secondary insomnia," in which medical issues or medications contribute.)

Of the patients with insomnia, the average age was 45 and nine were women. Participants slept for two nights in a sleep lab with no cap; two nights with the cap set at a "neutral" temperature (about 86 degrees Fahrenheit); two nights at a moderately cool temperature (72 degrees Fahrenheit); and two nights with the coolest temperature (57 degrees Fahrenheit).

While the participants slept, researchers monitored their brain electrical activity, eye movements (to determine if someone was in REM, or rapid eye movement sleep) and jaw muscle tone (during REM, the muscles go slack due to 'sleep paralysis').

In this preliminary study, about three-quarters of those with insomnia said the cap helped them sleep better when the water temperature was about 57 degrees Fahrenheit.

At higher temperatures -- 72 and 86 degrees -- patients reported no benefit, according to the study presented Monday at SLEEP 2011, the Associated Professional Sleep Societies meeting in Minneapolis.

While wearing the cooling cap, it took insomnia patients an average of 13 minutes to fall asleep and they spent 89 percent of their time in bed actually sleeping, about the same as controls who didn't have insomnia (the latter group averaged 16 minutes to fall asleep and 89 percent of the time in bed sleeping) .

The cooling cap was, however, associated with an increased amount of slow-wave sleep -- or the deepest, restorative portion of sleep, the researchers reported.

"What we wanted to find out was: 'Would cooling the surface of the brain of insomnia patients result in lower metabolism and improved sleep? The basic answer in this preliminary study, is yes, it seems to work, and it works in two ways," said Buysse. "It does reduce brain metabolism in the frontal lobes, and it improves sleep."

Dr. William Kohler, medical director of the Florida Sleep Institute, said the concept was exciting and worth further research in larger studies that include body temperature measurements and brain imaging tests.

"The theoretical concept is correct, in that we do know from many previous studies that as the body core temperature cools, our sleep improves, and with warming of the core temperature, we have more restless sleep," Kohler said.

Chronic insomnia -- which the American Academy of Sleep Medicine attributes to about one out of every 10 Americans -- can be difficult to treat. Medications can help, although many people complain of side effects, Kohler said. The most effective treatment is cognitive behavior therapy, which involves changes such as avoiding cigarettes, alcohol and caffeine before bed, and getting plenty of bright light in the morning but turning off the TV, computer and dimming the lights during a wind-down period, among other techniques for improving "sleep hygiene."

"It's in the brain where the chemical changes are occurring that lead to sleep," he said.

The cap is not yet available to consumers, although the lead researcher, Dr. Eric Nofzinger, has plans to bring it to market, Buysse said.

Because this study was extremely small and presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal and confirmed in larger studies.

Buysee said there shouldn't be any safety issues. If people get too cold, they would likely just wake up and take the cap off, he said.

The U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute has more on insomnia.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story included some good context:
“Medications can help, although many people complain of side effects, Kohler said. The most effective treatment is cognitive behavior therapy, which involves changes such as avoiding cigarettes, alcohol and caffeine before bed, and getting plenty of bright light in the morning but turning off the TV, computer and dimming the lights during a wind-down period, among other techniques for improving “sleep hygiene.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lest you have doubts about the value of this vaccine, consider the effects of shingles. It is a painful infection of a single sensory nerve on one side of the body that can occur almost anywhere but most commonly involves the torso or face. Initial symptoms of tingling or burning pain within days develop into a red bumpy rash and very painful blisters.

The blisters heal in a week or two to form crusty scabs that eventually fall off. But for about 15 percent of people, shingles does not end there. Instead, it leaves them with deep, searing nerve pain — a condition called postherpetic neuralgia, or PHN — that can last for months or years and has no treatment or cure. More than half the cases of PHN affect people over 60.

Other possible complications of shingles include pneumonia, hearing problems, blindness and encephalitis.

That’s not all. Although most people get shingles only once, it can happen again, especially if you have a weakened immune system, which most everyone does with advancing age.

If you’re lucky you may detect the onset of shingles before the rash appears. Years ago when I went to bed with what had been a daylong gnawing irritation on one side of my back, I awakened in the middle of the night with the thought, “I have shingles.” First thing in the morning I got a prescription for the antiviral drug acyclovir, which halted progress of the disease.

Not willing to trust my luck a second time, I got the new vaccine. Here’s how it compares to its predecessor Zostavax, which over all reduces the risk of shingles by 51 percent and of PHN by 67 percent. According to the C.D.C., Shingrix can protect 97 percent of people in their 50s and 60s and 91 percent of those in their 70s and 80s. It also reduces the risk of PHN by 86 percent, and it appears to be longer lasting than Zostavax, which starts to lose its protection after three years.

What makes Shingrix so much better is the inclusion of a substance called an adjuvant that boosts the body’s immune response to the vaccine. Another difference is that Zostavax contains a live, weakened virus, making it unsuitable for people with poor immunity, whereas Shingrix contains a nonliving virus particle and may eventually be approved for those with compromised immunity, who are especially susceptible to a severe case of shingles.

I should tell you that the new vaccine is not exactly a walk in the park. The shot itself is painful and can cause a sore arm for a day or two. Some people develop immune-related side effects like headache, fever or an upset stomach that last less than three days, according to the manufacturer, GlaxoSmithKline. My only reaction beyond local soreness was an acid stomach for a day or two.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This story compared the efficacy of the vaccine to a previous shingles vaccine. It also noted that the drug acyclovir is used to treat active cases of shingles.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A new study calls into question the value of removing blood clots from a patient's heart arteries during angioplasty, a procedure to open blocked arteries.

Although manually removing clots has become common medical practice, this study of more than 10,000 heart attack patients found no benefit in terms of reducing death, heart attack or heart failure in the six months after the procedure. Removing clots appears to have increased the risk of stroke in the month after clots were removed, the Canadian researchers report.

"There has been some controversy about removing blood clots during the treatment of heart attacks," said lead researcher Dr. Sanjit Jolly, an associate professor of cardiology at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.

A study in 2008 suggested that removing clots during an angioplasty might save lives, he said. "Guidelines changed based on this study," Jolly noted. Another trial in 2013, however, suggested that removing clots was not beneficial, he added.

In this latest trial, researchers found that routinely removing clots was not beneficial, Jolly said.

Jolly isn't sure why removing clots causes additional problems. It is possible that parts of the clot break off and travel elsewhere in the heart or brain, he said.

"This is an unexpected finding, and we want to confirm this in other studies," Jolly said.

Jolly said there are mechanical methods of removing clots, which were not tested in this study. Whether these methods would have produced better results isn't clear. "The jury is out on that. It needs to be tested in large trials," he said.

However, preliminary results from small trials of mechanical clot removal have not been promising, Jolly noted.

Jolly said the lesson from his team's trial is that clot removal should be used only as a rescue treatment when an angioplasty fails to clear an artery.

"As a routine therapy, clot removal is not beneficial and could have some significant downsides," he said.

The results of the study were published online March 16 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with a planned presentation of the findings at the American College of Cardiology's annual meeting in San Diego.

For the study, Jolly and colleagues randomly assigned 10,732 patients undergoing an angioplasty after a heart attack to have clots manually removed or to not have them removed.

Among all the patients, 6.9 percent who had clots removed, and 7 percent of those who didn't, died, had another heart attack or developed heart failure in the 180 days after the procedure.

In the 30 days after the procedure, 0.7 percent of the patients who had clots removed suffered a stroke, as did 0.3 percent of those who only had angioplasty, Jolly's team found.

Dr. Gregg Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said, "This is a very important and eagerly awaited clinical trial."

A number of studies have suggested a benefit from manually removing clots during an angioplasty, but this trial found no clinical benefits for doing so, he said.

"These findings will likely have important implications for clinical practice," Fonarow said.

Visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine for more on angioplasty.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternative here is clearly to do the angioplasty without clot removal. That is satisfactorily established. We wish the story had been a bit clearer about the different techniques available for clot removal, however. The story talks about “manual” vs. “mechanical” removal, but never explains what that means. The press release notes that with “manual” clot removal,”the surgeon uses a syringe to create suction to remove clots,” whereas mechanical removal “uses machinery to create the suction.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Mindfulness meditation may help older adults get a better night's sleep, a small study suggests.

Researchers found that among 49 older adults with sleep problems, those who learned mindfulness practices started sleeping better within six weeks. In fact, they did better than their counterparts who were given conventional lessons on good sleep habits, the study authors said.

Experts said the findings, published online Feb. 16 in the journal JAMA Internal Medicine, are encouraging.

On average, the effects of the mindfulness program were comparable to what's been seen in studies of sleep medications and "talk therapy," said study leader David Black, an assistant professor of preventive medicine at the University of Southern California, in Los Angeles.

According to Black, that means older adults can feel comfortable opting for "mind-body" practices as a way to address moderate sleep problems. But he also emphasized the structured nature of the program tested in his study.

"From our results, it is worth a try to engage in a structured mindfulness-based intervention led by a certified teacher with extensive experience," Black said.

In general, "mindfulness" practices encourage people to focus their attention on the present moment, instead of the past or future, and to take an objective look at their thoughts and emotions.

Sleep problems, Black explained, both affect and are affected by the mind. When people have difficulty sleeping, they often start to worry about it -- and that anxiety can worsen their sleep problems. On top of that, poor sleep itself can lead to psychological "distress," such as depression symptoms, Black said.

"There is a cyclical pattern here between wakefulness, sleep disruption, worry and mood," he said.

By learning "non-judgmental mindful awareness," Black said, people can begin to see their thoughts and feelings without reacting to them. In basic terms, it helps them relax -- a "necessary prerequisite" for sleep, Black noted.

For the current study, his team recruited 49 older adults with "moderate" sleep problems, based on their answers to a standard sleep-quality questionnaire. It asked a range of questions -- including whether the person had problems falling asleep or staying asleep, had difficulty breathing at night, or felt drowsy during the day.

Black's team randomly assigned the participants to six weekly sessions of either sleep "hygiene" education or mindfulness training.

The mindfulness group learned different meditation techniques, as well as how to eat and move with more attention. The program, Black said, did not specifically address sleep -- a topic that might only stir anxiety in people who are already worried about a lack of sleep.

By the end of the study, the mindfulness group was showing a significant improvement -- shaving about three points, on average, from their scores on the sleep-problem scale. The group that received standard education lowered their scores by an average of 1 point.

The mindfulness group also showed greater improvements in depression symptoms and daytime fatigue, the investigators found.

Black said the benefits of mindfulness training were on par with what's been found in studies of sleep medications and cognitive behavioral therapy -- a form of "talk therapy" that is often helpful for insomnia, for example.

"Cognitive behavioral therapy is highly effective," said Adam Spira, an associate professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health in Baltimore.

The problem, Spira said, is that behavioral therapy for sleep problems is not always easily found -- and even when it's available, the process takes some effort.

"What I found most interesting about this [mindfulness] approach is that it's a non-drug option, and it's accessible to the community at large," said Spira, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

Classes in meditation are available in many communities, and there are books, websites and CDs where people can learn mindfulness techniques. (The course Black's team studied is available online, at http://marc.ucla.edu.)

The caveat, according to Spira, is that this study tested that specific program. There is no guarantee that the course at your local senior center or a book would have the same chances of working.

Still, Spira said, it's a promising approach to older adults' sleep problems -- and one that's needed. "We definitely need a whole menu of treatment options," he said.

One major reason is that sleeping pills, the most common current treatment, are temporary fixes at best. Plus, Spira said, they can have side effects that are particularly dangerous for older people -- such as dizziness and balance problems that can lead to falls, and problems with attention and memory.

Then there's the fact that sleep issues become common as people age, Spira said. Studies suggest that about half of adults age 55 and up have insomnia or some other sleep disturbance -- and that can have consequences for their physical and mental health.

There are still plenty of questions about the effects of mindfulness meditation on sleep quality. A key one is whether the benefits last.

Spira said that with cognitive behavioral therapy, there is evidence that people's sleep keeps improving after their therapy sessions have ended. "It'll be interesting to see whether people can learn mindfulness techniques, then see durable effects," he said.

The National Sleep Foundation has more on sleep disorders.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This aspect of the story was great. In the fifth sentence, the story makes a comparison to alternatives, saying, that on “average, the effects of the mindfulness program were comparable to what’s been seen in studies of sleep medications and ‘talk therapy.’” it makes the same comparison in more detail later in the story and in discussing the availability of different therapies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Older adults who take college courses may increase their cognitive capacity and possibly reduce their risk for developing Alzheimer's disease or other forms of dementia, according to new research published by the American Psychological Association.

An Australian study called the Tasmanian Healthy Brain Project recruited 359 participants ages 50 to 79 who took a series of cognitive tests before completing at least a year of full-time or part-time study at the University of Tasmania. Participants were reassessed annually for three years following their studies. More than 90 percent of the participants displayed a significant increase in cognitive capacity, compared with 56 percent in a control group of 100 participants who didn't take any college courses.

"The study findings are exciting because they demonstrate that it's never too late to take action to maximize the cognitive capacity of your brain," said lead researcher Megan Lenehan, PhD. "We plan to follow these participants as they age to see if college studies could help delay the onset or reduce the debilitating effects of dementia."

Previous studies have examined how exercise, brain games and an active social life may boost cognitive capacity and possibly stem cognitive decline associated with aging. This study is the first to examine similar positive effects from college courses taken by older adults, said Lenehan, of the University of Tasmania.

The study participants, who were screened to exclude people who had dementia, completed a baseline series of tests to measure cognitive capacity, or an individual's ability to use brain networks efficiently in areas such as memory, information processing, decision making and planning. The participants in the college studies group took a wide range of courses, including history, psychology, philosophy and fine art. Most of the students took courses on campus, but some completed online classes. The researchers suspect that campus study may provide greater benefits in boosting cognitive capacity because of social interaction with professors and fellow students, but the study didn't analyze any differences between on-campus or online courses.

The participants completed the same cognitive tests each year during the four-year study, with 92 percent of the college-studies group displaying a significant increase in cognitive capacity, while the remaining 8 percent generally maintained their cognitive capacity. For the control group, 56 percent displayed a significant increase in cognitive capacity, while 44 percent had no change. The participants' age, gender, feelings of well-being or level of social connectedness didn't affect the findings. The research was published online in the journal Neuropsychology.

Prior research has shown that college study earlier in life may increase cognitive capacity, and it appears the same may be true for older adults, Lenehan said.

"It is possible that any mentally stimulating activity later in life may also enhance cognitive capacity, such as other adult-education classes or programs to increase social interaction," she said.

The control group was significantly older than the college studies group, but there were no significant differences in baseline cognitive capacity scores, the study noted. The researchers also didn't find any correlation between age and cognitive capacity scores at any point during the study. Some participants in the control group may have been doing crossword puzzles or other mentally stimulating activities that boosted their cognitive capacity, Lenehan said.

The participants who took college classes volunteered for the study so they probably had a greater interest in continuing education that the general senior population, the journal article noted. The study was too short to reveal any long-term effects so the researchers plan to follow the participants as they age to provide additional evidence of whether college studies may reduce the risk or delay the onset of dementia.

Article: "Sending Your Grandparents to University Increases Cognitive Reserve: The Tasmanian Healthy Brain Project;" Megan E. Lenehan, PhD, University of Tasmania-Launceston; Mathew James Summers, PhD, University of the Sunshine Coast; Nichole L. Saunders, PhD, Jeffery J. Summers, PhD, David D. Ward, PhD, and James C. Vickers, PhD, University of Tasmania-Hobart; and Karen Ritchie, PhD; Neuropsychology, published online Nov. 16, 2015.

Full text of the article is available from the APA Public Affairs Office and at

The American Psychological Association, in Washington, D.C., is the largest scientific and professional organization representing psychology in the United States. APA's membership includes more than 122,500 researchers, educators, clinicians, consultants and students. Through its divisions in 54 subfields of psychology and affiliations with 60 state, territorial and Canadian provincial associations, APA works to advance the creation, communication and application of psychological knowledge to benefit society and improve people's lives.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release refers to other studies including those that have utilized other methods not involving formal education.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Novo Nordisk’s (NOVOb.CO) top-selling diabetes drug Victoza cut the risk of heart attack, stroke and cardiovascular death by 13 percent in a closely watched study, but the result disappointed investors who had hoped for more.

The stock fell around 5 percent in Copenhagen on Tuesday.

Victoza is only the second diabetes drug to show such heart benefits, after Eli Lilly (LLY.N) and Boehringer Ingelheim’s pill Jardiance. Victoza’s effect was evident across risks.

“To me, the impressive thing about this trial is the consistency across clinical endpoints and its robustness,” said John Buse, professor of medicine at the UNC School of Medicine, who worked on the study.

He believes doctors’ approach to type 2 diabetes treatment will now start to shift to a greater focus on minimising overall risks, rather than simply cutting blood sugar levels.

Because about half of deaths in people with diabetes are caused by heart disease, reducing heart risk is considered essential to their care.

But investors had been anticipating a bigger effect. Jefferies analyst Jeffrey Holford said market expectations had been for a mid-to-high teens percent reduction in complications.

There was also concern that Victoza did not appear to lower heart risks in American patients monitored in the study, despite doing so in other parts of the world and producing a solid result globally.

Novo, the world’s biggest diabetes company, had said in March that Victoza cut heart risks “significantly” in the study but the scale of the benefit was only disclosed on Monday.

Researchers told the American Diabetes Association’s (ADA) annual meeting that 13.0 percent of patients on Victoza died from cardiovascular causes or suffered non-fatal heart attacks or strokes, against 14.9 percent of those on placebo.

Deaths from heart disease were 22 percent lower in the Victoza group.

The Jardiance trial last year showed a similar 14 percent overall relative risk reduction and a 38 percent reduction in cardiovascular deaths.

The Victoza trial, known as Leader, had been designed to show Novo’s drug did not increase heart risk, so its superiority is welcome news for the company, especially as Sanofi’s (SASY.PA) rival Lyxumia failed to show heart benefits in an earlier test.

Victoza, which had sales of $2.7 billion last year, is the biggest seller in a class of drugs known as GLP-1 analogues that stimulate insulin production.

“I think physicians will look to GLP-1s with greater enthusiasm,” Buse said in an interview.

Once-daily Victoza is typically prescribed as a third or fourth option after patients have first tried various oral medicines.

“The significance of this is that now we can start to change the conversation around diabetes management from one of ‘let’s manage your blood sugar’ to one of ‘let’s manage your risk of complications’,” Buse said.

Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen, Novo’s chief science officer, said the results should encourage doctors to use Victoza earlier, since they could now see it offered “life-expanding” treatment.

The findings, which involved following 9,340 patients for a median 3.8 years, were also published online in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Gastrointestinal upset was the biggest side effect with Victoza. There were fewer cases of pancreatitis, which has been viewed as a potential problem, but more cases of pancreatic cancer, although the difference was not statistically significant.

Since 2008, U.S. regulators have demanded studies for new diabetes medicines to show there is no increase in heart risk, opening a new battleground between different treatments. Lilly is conducting a similar large study to try and prove the heart benefits of its once-weekly GLP-1 drug Trulicity.

The Leader study was funded by Novo and the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: How Victoza performs in reducing severe cardiovascular events compared to rival drugs is mentioned numerous times. It is worth noting that there was no mention that the drug is given by injection. For individuals with diabetes reading the article, this oversight is important in that it may make them more inclined to oral medicines that are easier to take.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Most heart patients who take low-dose omega-3 fatty acid supplements don't appear to gain any additional protection against further cardiac trouble, new Dutch research cautions.

In fact, neither low doses of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), which are found in fish oil, nor of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), derived from nuts and several vegetable oils, provided any benefit to the vast majority of heart patients, the study showed.

The scientists focused on patients who were already taking medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and potential clotting. So, the researchers theorized that the poor performance of the supplements may simply reflect the overwhelming power of the medications.

Study author Daan Kromhout, from the division of human nutrition at Wageningen University in the Netherlands, is to present the findings Sunday at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Stockholm; the study will appear online in the New England Journal of Medicine simultaneously.

In the study, researchers focused on a group of more than 4,800 Dutch heart attack patients between the ages of 60 and 80, slightly more than three-quarters of whom were men.

All had experienced a heart attack at some point in the decade leading up to the study, and all were taking blood pressure medications, anti-clotting drugs and statins.

At the study's start, the patients were instructed to consume (over a period lasting a little over three years) one of four different types of margarines: one supplemented with omega-3 fatty acids; one supplemented with the plant-derived ALA; one supplemented with both omega-3 fatty acids and ALA; and one with no supplements.

The amount of supplementation added to the various margarines was deemed to be "low-dose." During the study, the patients consumed an average of 18.8 grams of margarine per day, which meant ingestion of an average of 226 milligrams of EPA combined with 150 milligrams of DHA omega-3 fatty acids and/or 1.9 grams of ALA.

By the study's end, almost 14 percent of the heart attack patients had experienced another "major cardiovascular event," with some cases ending in death.

None of the low-dose supplements seemed to stave off such events in most of the patients. One exception appeared to be among women ingesting ALA; researchers saw a 27 percent reduction in the risk for further cardiac complications, although that reduction did not quite reach statistical significance.

"The bottom-line finding of the Alpha Omega Trial is that [omega]-3 fatty acids did not reduce the primary endpoint major cardiovascular events," Kromhout said, noting that the ALA finding needs further confirmation.

Dr. Murray A. Mittleman, director of the cardiovascular epidemiology research unit at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said he was "not that surprised by these results."

"Other studies have shown no benefit from omega-3, other than specifically protecting against cardiac death linked to arrhythmia among patients who have just survived a heart attack," Mittleman noted. It is during this acute post-attack period, he explained, when patients are most vulnerable to a subsequent event.

"But here, in some cases the patients they looked at are years following their first heart attack when they start taking these supplements," he stressed. "So, that's a big difference in what kind of patient they're examining. And they're also not just looking at preventable fatalities but all heart-related events that follow. And on top of that, the supplement doses they use here are very low, much lower than those used in prior studies."

"So it might be big differences in study design that account for this new finding," Mittleman cautioned. "In any case, I would say this is absolutely worth further investigation."

Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, agreed.

"It is possible that improvements in other treatments for heart attack patients have made fish oil supplementation less important for reducing cardiovascular risk," he acknowledged. "But it's also possible that the different dosing used in this study relative to previous work made a difference in the outcome. The dosing here may have been just too low, whereas higher doses given immediately following an initial heart attack might have been protective."

"So I would say," Fonarow added, "that this is by no means the final word regarding omega-3s and cardiovascular health."

For more on omega-3 fatty acids, visit the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story addressed some other approaches albeit indirectly: "The scientists focused on patients who were already taking medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and potential clotting. So, the researchers theorized that the poor performance of the supplements may simply reflect the overwhelming power of the medications."
There was no discussion of other things that have been shown to lower the risk of future coronary events in those who have had a heart attack beyond taking medications. Even one line offering such context would have been helpful. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alzheimer's Redefined, But Changes Mean Little For Patients

The definition of Alzheimer's disease just got wider and deeper, but the expansion won't change how the vast majority of people are diagnosed. It also doesn't change the very limited treatment choices.

But the new criteria, which were developed by the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association, are almost guaranteed to prompt confusion, even in people who are thinking quite clearly.

The guidelines say, for instance, that newly developed "biomarker" tests, such as assays for proteins in spinal fluid, and some specialized brain scans can be used for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's. But, the guidelines say, the tests are to be used only for research, and not for diagnosing Alzheimer's in the general public.

The distinction is nothing to worry about for patients and their families. "You don't need a biomarker test" for everyday clinical practice, says David Knopman, a professor of neurology at the Mayo Clinic, who was co-chairman of the group that revised the dementia diagnosis. The existing tests for Alzheimer's are adequate, he says. And those biomarkers? "It's in the fine print, but it definitely says in multiple places that the biomarkers are for research purposes."

Why? Well, the biomarker tests and PET scans aren't yet accurate enough to reliably diagnose Alzheimer's, and haven't been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. And it's also because there are no treatments that can prevent, slow or stop early signs of Alzheimer's.

"For research, there's a lot of value," Knopman says. "For everyday clinical use, very very little."

About 5 million Americans have Alzheimer's. The hallmark signs are problems with thinking, learning, and memory. The current definition, created in 1984, describes Alzheimer's that way. But over the past few years there's been solid evidence that Alzheimer's starts damaging the brain years before a person starts having noticeable problems thinking. Scientists have been putting a lot of effort into trying to identify what starts the disease process, but have so far come up empty.

The new definitions, which were just published online by the journal Alzheimer's & Dementia, acknowledge this dimly understood early phase of Alzheimer's. Now there are two new pre-dementia phases: mild cognitive impairment and "preclinical Alzheimer's."

In mild cognitive impairment, a person's changes in thinking are noticeable to himself, friends, or family. They would show up on tests of memory and recall, but don't interfere with everyday activities. Alzheimer's is just one possible cause. Because there are no treatments to prevent or stop Alzheimer's, many people may not consider this diagnosis a blessing.

The second new phase, preclinical Alzheimer's, is much squishier. There's no list of symptoms that a doctor can whip out to say you've got it. Rather, the goal in creating this category is to see if scientists can define when the disease starts, and track it through biomarker tests, brain imaging, or other yet-to-be-invented tests. If that happens, it might someday lead to ways to prevent Alzheimer's. But for now this category is useful only to researchers.

The goal in all this, according to the Alzheimer's Association, is to increase opportunities for earlier diagnosis and treatment. The problem is that there aren't yet any reliable tools for earlier diagnosis and treatment. The new criteria are really a call for more research — and the money to fund it. That would be good for the Alzheimer's Association and the National Institute on Aging, which sponsored the work on the new criteria.

And it does leave one wondering if a lot more worry will be generated by the notion of "preclinical Alzheimer's," when science and medicine can't offer anything to ease those fears.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 


This story gives readers a sense that putting off evaluation for signs of early Alzheimer’s disease is a reasonable alternative, since not only are lab tests and brain scans not ready for regular clinical use, but there is limited value in getting a diagnosis since there are no treatments that can change the course of the disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About one in 20 men is estimated to have Peyronie’s, but figures are not precise because people with the condition tend not to discuss it publicly.

Although the company selling Xiaflex will be Auxilium Pharmaceuticals of Malvern, Pa., the F.D.A. approval was a belated triumph for the drug’s original developer, BioSpecifics Technologies of Lynbrook, N.Y., on Long Island. Founded in 1957, it struggled for decades to find uses for the product, almost going out of business before licensing the drug to Auxilium in 2004.

“It sort of proves to people that if you really believe in a drug you should never give up,” said Matthew Geller, a biotechnology investment banker who is a member of the BioSpecifics board.

Shares of BioSpecifics closed Monday at $27.61, up from $1 as recently as late 2006.

Some people treated with Xiaflex in clinical trials for the Dupuytren’s hand condition said it had made a big difference in their lives, and had allowed them to avoid painful surgery.

“When I looked down and saw my finger straightened out, I cried,” said Kenneth Nelson, 65, of Indianapolis. “It was to me just like a miracle.”

Xiaflex is an enzyme produced by a gangrene-causing bacterium, Clostridium histolyticum, which uses it to eat away the tissues of its victims. The enzyme, called collagenase, breaks down collagen, a major component of the body’s connective tissue that is found in skin, tendons, cartilage and other organs.

But collagenase by itself does not cause gangrene. And there are times doctors need to break down collagen, such as when an excess builds up in the hand or penis, causing Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. The ailments are named for French surgeons who described the conditions in the 18th and 19th centuries.

The enzyme was first extracted from the bacteria around 1950 by Ines Mandl, a young biochemist at Columbia University. Edwin H. Wegman, a Long Island entrepreneur, learned about Dr. Mandl’s work and set up a company called Advance Biofactures, which later became BioSpecifics, to turn collagenase into a drug.

In 1965, the company won approval of an ointment containing collagenase for use in removing dead tissue from skin ulcers and burns. The ointment, sold by licensees under the name Santyl, was a modest success, but the company never truly prospered.

So in the 1970s the company began developing what it thought would be a bigger money-maker, an injectable collagenase. It tested that drug for numerous uses, including herniated disks. Finally, in the early 1990s, two professors of orthopedics at the nearby State University of New York at Stony Brook suggested using the drug for Dupuytren’s.

The professors, Dr. Lawrence C. Hurst and Marie A. Badalamente, injected the drug into the tails of rats, as a stand-in for human fingers. They found they could dissolve the collagen in tendons, making the tails floppy, without harming nearby nerves and arteries. Then they organized clinical trials in patients and got federal grants to help pay for the work. The professors and Stony Brook will share a royalty of one half of 1 percent of sales of Xiaflex for use in treating Dupuytren’s.

But work was slowed by lack of money, and by 2004, BioSpecifics was about out of cash. In desperation, Ed Wegman’s son Mark, a top computer scientist at I.B.M., called a childhood friend, Laurence Korn, who had been the chief executive of a successful biotechnology company now known as PDL BioPharma.

With Dr. Korn’s help, BioSpecifics licensed the drug to Auxilium in a matter of weeks, receiving $5 million initially.

Auxilium was interested because of Peyronie’s disease. It already was selling a gel for men with low testosterone and had learned from urologists about the need for better treatments for bent penises.

“From talking with surgeons and patients who have Peyronie’s, neither of them wants to do the surgery,” said Will Sargent, a spokesman for Auxilium.

Two years ago, the drug giant Pfizer, which sells the erectile dysfunction drug Viagra, licensed the European rights to Xiaflex from Auxilium for an initial payment of $75 million. BioSpecifics got $6.4 million of that amount and will receive 8.5 percent of additional payments of up to $410 million that Pfizer might make.

Auxilium sought approval for treating Dupuytren’s first because it was easier to measure success in straightening fingers. But the company hopes to begin late-stage trials of Xiaflex for Peyronie’s disease later this year. In a midstage trial, injections of Xiaflex into the collagen plaque in the penis reduced the curvature. But the drug did not reduce pain or discomfort during intercourse by a statistically significant amount.

While collagenase itself is not patented, the companies do have patents on the use of the enzyme to treat Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. They are also shielded from competition for seven years under a federal law aimed at spurring development of drugs for rare, or “orphan,” diseases — even though newer estimates suggest these two diseases are not as rare as thought when the drugs were given orphan status.

Auxilium and BioSpecifics hope that the half-century-old collagenase might eventually become as versatile as Botox, another bacterial product. They are looking at uses that range from loosening up immobile “frozen shoulders” to eliminating fat bulges and cellulite.

With its belated success, BioSpecifics has sold off its ointment business. It now has only five employees and a business of collecting a roughly 11 to 12 percent royalty on sales of Xiaflex.

“We will be a cash machine going forward,” said Thomas L. Wegman, the president and the other son of the company founder. “We don’t have to pay for marketing. We don’t have to pay for manufacturing.”

The Wegman family — the two sons and the founder’s 75-year-old wife, Toby — controls about 25 percent of the company’s stock.

Ed Wegman, the company’s founder, did not live to see the F.D.A. approval, dying at age 87 in 2007. On Feb. 2, the day the drug was approved, one BioSpecifics director sent an e-mail message to the others saying, “Well done. Hope Ed is looking on.”

Meanwhile, Dr. Mandl, the biochemist who first isolated collagenase from the bacteria, is nearing 93. Last year, when BioSpecifics stock rose above $30, she sold the last 1,000 shares she had been given for serving as a consultant to the company over the years.

Unfortunately, she had sold most of her holdings years earlier for a relative pittance. “If I still had what I originally had,” she said. “I’d be very rich.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story compares costs and outcomes for Xiaflex with open surgery and needle aponeurotomy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Johns Hopkins Medicine specialists report they have developed a urine test for the likely emergence of cervical cancer that is highly accurate compared to other tests based on genetic markers derived directly from cervical tissue.

The new urine test, they say, is different because it analyzes not only multiple sources of human cellular DNA altered by precancerous changes, but also DNA from HPV that is sexually transmitted and causes virtually all cases of the disease.

In a proof-of-concept study, described online in Cancer Prevention Research on November 8, the investigators say their genetic markers test showed a "sensitivity" or accuracy rate of 90.9 percent in identifying so-called CIN2 lesions -- cervical lesions with abnormal cells likely to not only develop into cancer, but also to develop into cancers likely to spread. Additionally, they demonstrated that the DNA for all three human genes and one viral gene could be successfully extracted from urine, and they could identify such lesions with 75 percent sensitivity.

Two commercial tests based on markers of DNA chemical changes called methylation, released in Europe last summer, require Pap smears or swabs of cervical tissue, and show 64 percent sensitivity in identifying similar lesions, according to senior investigator Rafael Guerrero-Preston, Dr.P.H., M.P.H., assistant professor of otolaryngology-head and neck surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and member of the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center.

"If further studies confirm these findings, we see a significant use of urine screening as a way to quickly and inexpensively determine if a biopsy is warranted, or if physicians can use a 'watch and wait' approach before intervening," says Guerrero-Preston. Typically, he says, a woman who tests positive for HPV and has an abnormal Pap smear undergoes a biopsy to rule out cervical cancer using cells taken directly from cervical tissue. But previous studies suggest more than 50 percent of these biopsies are unnecessary and can result in pain, worry, infertility and higher health care costs.

"Our urine test would serve as a molecular triage," he says, "at times supplementing Pap test information. In developing countries that don't have the money, medical infrastructure or cultural approval for Pap test, our test could be used instead."

The new study builds on the Johns Hopkins team's previously published work, in which investigators identified three genes associated with cervical cancer or abnormal-looking cells known to become cancerous: FKBP6, INTS1 and ZNF516. As abnormalities progress, these genes were more likely to have a chemical methyl group attached to their DNA in certain spots.

The researchers tested the value of these genes as markers using 214 cervical cell samples collected from women undergoing Pap smears at Hospital Dr. Hernan Henriquez Aravena in Chile. The women ranged in age from 18 to 86. Among the test samples, 34 showed no abnormalities in their cervix; 87 showed one of three types of precancerous, abnormal tissue; and 90 showed clear evidence of cervical cancer.

Next, Guerrero-Preston's team isolated DNA from each cervical tissue sample and used advanced genetic sequencing methods to spell out the DNA makeup of cells in the cervical tissue samples. The researchers then compared the number of methyl groups attached to each gene in samples from the 34 healthy women to 53 samples with a specific subset of precancerous markers.

Using methylation as a value to diagnose malignancy, the three genes together showed a 90 percent sensitivity, meaning that their presence was able to predict a true positive cancer sample this percentage of the time. The test had an 88.9 percent specificity, meaning the percent of time the test correctly identified someone without the disease.

To further improve the accuracy of the test, the investigators added a new gene marker to the test. This time, rather than using a human gene, they used one from the virus, HPV16-L1, which also becomes methylated in human cells as cancer develops. They did the test again with the four-gene combination on a new population of women from the University of Puerto Rico. The 115 women ranged in age from 21 to 49; 41 participants had healthy cervical tissue, and 74 had one of three types of precancerous cells. Using all four genes, the test now had a sensitivity of 90.9 percent and a specificity of 60.9 percent.

"When developing a new cancer screening test, we want something in the range of 90 to 95 percent sensitivity, which is competitive with the effectiveness of tests developed and now marketed in Europe," says Guerrero-Preston.

The next step, the researchers report, was to verify that the four-gene test worked using freely circulating DNA from blood and urine, rather than DNA taken directly from cervical tissue.

For this experiment, they tested 40 samples of paired cervical tissue, blood and urine from a subset of the patients from Puerto Rico. Using the DNA from blood, they found the test had an 85.7 percent sensitivity and a 60.9 percent specificity. Using urine, they found a 75 percent sensitivity and an 83.3 percent specificity.

During the course of the study, the time to process cervical samples, blood or urine and get a test result took four days. They plan to continue modifying the test to improve the urine sensitivity to that of the cervical tissue samples.

According to World Cancer Research Fund International, 84 percent of cervical cancers occur in less developed countries, with the highest rates in Africa, Latin American and the Caribbean. In the United States, cervical cancer used to be the highest cause of cancer deaths among women, but that soon changed when the yearly Pap smear was introduced over 40 years ago. Countries without the infrastructure or cultural acceptance for regular Pap tests have not seen declining cancer rates.

Guerrero-Preston and his colleagues have a research agreement with Cepheid to develop a way to reduce the waiting time for a test result from a maximum of four days in the lab to under three hours in a Cepheid instrument using sealed cartridges to minimize sample handling and contamination.

Additional authors on the study include Blanca Valle, Anne Jedlicka, Nitesh Turaga, Oluwasina Folawiyo, Francesca Pirini, Fahcina Lawson, Angelo Vergura, Maartje Noorhuis, Amanda Dziedzic, Gabriela Perez, Marisa Renehan, Carolina Guerrero-Diaz, Bruce Trock Liliana Florea and David Sidransky of The Johns Hopkins University; Edgar De Jesus Rodriguez, Jose Rodriguez Orengo, Keimari Mendez and Josefina Romaguera of the University of Puerto Rico; and Teresa Diaz-Montes of the Institute for Cancer Care at Mercy.

The research was funded by National Cancer Institute grants (U01 CA084986, K01 CA164092 and U01 CA084986).
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The text does a good job of comparing this potential urine test to the traditional Pap smear and to two relatively new commercial tests based on a search for methylation in DNA.
From the data provided, this new test offers no advantages in developed countries where Pap/HPV rates are high and follow-up with colposcopy is available. The issues in developing countries are two-fold. One is whether a urine test could be used as an alternative to the Pap smear/HPV test as the first screen. A urine test would be a much easier screening test. But what they’re examining is when the Pap/HPV is abnormal, can you can eliminate the need for some colposcopies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 21 (HealthDay News) -- A skin patch for the treatment of migraines, and the intense waves of nausea that often accompany these debilitating headaches, has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

Called Zecuity, the patch contains sumatriptan, one of the most widely prescribed medications for migraines.

According to Dr. Fawad Khan, a neurologist with Ochsner Neuroscience Institute in New Orleans, few drugs are approved for the treatment of acute, symptomatic migraine. To complicate matters, many migraine sufferers can also experience severe bouts of nausea and vomiting.

Another expert described the problem this way.

"I've had some patients where the nausea and vomiting was so bad they couldn't even swallow a pill," said Nancy Waltman, a nurse practitioner with the University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Nursing, Lincoln Division.

A nasal spray is available, as is an injection, but many patients aren't comfortable with these options, Khan and Waltman noted.

Khan said the Zecuity patch is "simple, efficient and can deliver the exact amount of dosage with minimal variability."

The patch is attached to the upper arm or thigh, and when the patient pushes a button the drug is delivered through the skin. Zecuity, which is battery-operated, delivers 6.5 milligrams of sumatriptan over the course of about five hours and can relieve nausea, as well as reduce sensitivity to light and sound.

NuPathe Inc., which makes Zecuity, hopes to have the patch on the market later this year.

Research involving 800 patients ultimately led to the approval of Zecuity. One study found that 18 percent of patients using the patch were headache-free after two hours, compared with 9 percent of those using an inactive placebo. About half achieved a reduction in their headache after two hours, compared with 29 percent of those using the placebo.

And 84 percent of patients using the patch were relieved of their nausea, compared with 63 percent of those in the placebo group, according to a company news release.

The most frequent side effects were pain at the site of application along with tingling, itching, warmth and discomfort.

Patients with heart disease or who are using antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors should also be careful when taking sumatriptans, said Waltman, who added that she thought the patches "are wonderful."

One concern, though, is cost, Waltman cautioned.

It's not clear how much the patches will cost, but the class of medications known as triptans can be expensive, as much as $300 a month (although sumatriptan now has a generic version), Waltman said.

In general, though, "the more options that are available to migraine headache patients, the better," Waltman said. "Migraine patients tend to be underdiagnosed and undertreated and inappropriately treated."

NuPathe CEO Armando Anido told Bloomberg News, "We anticipate the product will be available for sale in the fourth quarter of this year."

The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more about migraines.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions alternative delivery systems for migraine medication, including pills, sprays, and injections (although as mentioned above, it doesn’t compare the efficacy of these different approaches). The story could have also mentioned that there are a variety of non-triptan drugs, including NSAID pain relievers, that can be effective for treating acute migraine attacks.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
P-Cure (P-Cure, Ltd.), a leading provider of Patient-Centric solutions for proton therapy, has received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for its patented upright imaging solution. The P-Cure system is based on a diagnostic-quality computed tomography (CT) enabling treatment planning, positioning and treatment delivery for cancer patients in a seated position.

The P-Cure Patient-Centric solution is a paradigm shifting change from the current method of treatment with the patient in the horizontal position.

“The benefits of treating patients in a seated position include greater patient comfort, less internal organ movement, better saliva drainage and a better position for breathing for asthmatic and other patients experiencing impaired breathing. It may also deliver less collateral radiation to sensitive organs while enabling greater accuracy in proton beam delivery,” said Michael Marash, Ph.D., founder and CEO of P-Cure.

Adult and pediatric patients who will initially benefit from this clinical breakthrough will be those treated for cancers of the lung, breast, chest, the head and neck, and lower torso.

In addition to the clinical benefits of P-Cure’s solution, there are also significant economic advantages to treating patients in a seated position. With P-Cure, oncologists can develop a compact, gantry-less proton center for significantly less capital and operating costs, essentially making proton therapy more widely available and attainable. 

Because of the high capital costs, proton therapy is currently only available to less than one percent of patients who could potentially benefit from it. The P-Cure gantry-less system significantly reduces many factors associated with proton therapy including the capital cost of equipment and construction, the size of a single room center or multi-room expandable center and the time from center planning to treatment.

“We are excited to receive FDA clearance for our upright imaging technology. We are looking forward to demonstrating the clinical benefits of our Patient-Centric approach for treatment planning, immobilization, adaptive therapy and motion management. The P-Cure team is committed to enabling all oncology centers and hospitals globally to establish cost-effective proton therapy services for the best possible care and cure,” said Dr. Marash.

P-Cure is the innovative provider of image-guided solutions for better clinical effectiveness of proton therapy at a fraction of the current capital and operating costs. P-Cure continues to develop advanced patient-centric solutions with a focus on adaptive therapy and real time motion management. P-Cure’s first product was cleared by the FDA in 2010. (http://www.p-cure.com). P-Cure works both with the existing and new cancer centers to establish advanced proton therapy capabilities.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The device is being compared to existing devices used to deliver proton beam therapy. As such, there is a comparison. although it’s a bit opaque. It points out that standard proton therapy may radiate healthy body parts inadvertently. It causes more discomfort. It costs too much. These statements could have been elucidated, preferably through quantification, to create a meaningful comparison for reporters and patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A team of researchers from the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine has shown that the I-Portal Neuro Otologic Test, which uses the head-mounted goggle that gauged eye movement through video cameras and computers, can successfully diagnose concussion with 95 percent specificity and 89 percent sensitivity. These findings illustrate how use of the I-Portal goggle can better identify oculomotor, vestibular and reaction time (OVRT) differences between those with mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) and non-affected individuals.

Mild traumatic brain injury is typically diagnosed through physical exam findings. However, to best manage mTBI, researchers have felt it critical to develop objective tests to substantiate the diagnosis. With these findings, it appears the I-Portal goggle may be a solution.

Michael Hoffer, M.D., an otolaryngologist and concussion expert at UHealth - the University of Miami Health System and lead investigator, has been using the goggle for two years, recruiting study participants from the emergency rooms of University of Miami Hospital and two military hospitals. Control subjects were recruited from volunteers at the locations where the study was being conducted.

Another benefit for this research was that "this next generation test has the considerable advantage of not requiring baseline testing," said study co-author Carey Balaban, Ph.D., of the University of Pittsburgh.

The goal was to identify OVRT performance metrics that differentiated between mTBI and control groups and to create a model that could accurately evaluate mTBI neurologic status in patients. The results of the trial met the expectations of Hoffer and his team of researchers.

"This is the first paper demonstrating an objective method of diagnosing mTBI that relies on physiologic parameters," said Hoffer, who is professor of otolaryngology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine. "This work opens the door for site of injury testing and access to physiologic tests for athletes of all ages."

Mild traumatic brain injury is a public health issue. Since the development of the goggle, researchers have hoped that the technology used by the goggle in a research setting could be translated to the sidelines of all sports - from professional leagues to amateur and little leagues. The research findings published by PLOS ONE help support their objective.

"It is not inconceivable that in the near future you will see the I-Portal goggle used on every sideline in America," Hoffer said. "With accurate and timely diagnosis, which is possible through this technology, patients could receive better treatment faster. It's one of many developments that are needed to begin to curb the concussion epidemic."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release says that mild traumatic brain injury is usually diagnosed through physical exam findings. One of the study authors adds the goggle does not require baseline testing — which includes assessments to gauge reaction time, memory capacity, speed of mental processing, and executive functioning of the brain, according to the Sports Concussion Institute.
It would have been interesting to compare the sensitivity/specificity numbers of the goggle to those of the physical exam (with baseline testing). Sure, 95 percent specificity sounds pretty good itself, but what accuracy can physicians achieve the traditional way (aka through the physical exam)?
Although the news release doesn’t address this, we feel it did a Satisfactory job here by mentioning the alternative.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
REHOVOT, Israel, Sept. 6, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Nucleix Ltd., a leading cancer detection company, announced today positive results from a clinical study designed to evaluate its innovative Lung EpiCheck™, a blood test for early detection of lung cancer. The results will be presented in a poster presentation titled Lung EpiCheck ™ - Results of the Training and Test Sets of a Methylation-Based Blood Test for Early Detection of Lung Cancer at the IASLC 19th World Conference on Lung Cancer hosted by the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer, to take place on September 22-26, 2018 in Toronto, Canada.

In the study, blood was prospectively collected from 20 centers and 3 biobanks in Europe and Israel. The samples were used for detection of lung cancer with the Lung EpiCheck blood test. Lung EpiCheck was validated on this independent test set comprising 181 lung cancer cases and 141 current or former smoker controls. Results show specificity of 91% and a sensitivity of 74% with an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 89%. These results demonstrated similar performance to the preceding training set results from 102 lung cancer cases and 265 current or former smoker controls.

In particular, in the non-small-cell lung carcinoma group (n=162), the most prevalent type of lung cancer affecting about 85% of lung cancer patients, Lung EpiCheck was able to identify correctly approximately 70% of patients. With a correct identification of 59% of stage I patients, 77% of stage II, 76% of stage III and 83% of stage IV patients.

In the small cell lung cancer group (n=13), Lung EpiCheck was able to identify correctly 92% of the patients, with a sensitivity of 100% in the limited stage, and 86% at the extensive stage.

"Lung cancer is the leading cause of death from cancer worldwide due to the high incidence of the disease, and the low rate of diagnosis at early and more curable stages," stated Prof. Mina Gaga, the President of the European Respiratory Society (ERS) and a lead investigator in the study. "Clearly, we must establish screening programs for lung cancer worldwide. At the moment, low-dose computerized tomography (LDCT) screening which has been shown to reduce mortality from lung cancer in the very large NLST study is only reimbursed in the US for high-risk individuals. LDCT screening is not reimbursed in Europe or most areas in the world while there is still a debate about its cost and safety. Screening is however necessary in order to identify lung cancer at early, operable, stages for the entire at-risk population so currently, not only CT screening but also methods of molecular screening are being tested. I am therefore very encouraged with the results of this study, showing that EpiCheck has the ability to identify both non-small-cell and small-cell lung cancer at early stages, with a high level of sensitivity and specificity. Such promising results combined with the simplicity of the test, could allow us to detect lung cancer at the early stages and hence improve 5-year survival from about 15% to about 50-70%. This will offer significant added value in the fight against lung cancer."

"We are very excited to present the best published clinically validated results of a blood test for the early detection of lung cancer," said Opher Shapira, PhD, CEO of Nucleix. "Furthermore, these results were validated prospectively in an independent cohort. Currently, early stage lung cancer can be detected either accidentally, when testing for other conditions, or by using low-dose CT scans, which are costly, carry associated risks such as high radiation, and are employed only for a very high-risk population. Early detection of lung cancer can be a game-changer in the fight against this devastating disease, and we are looking forward to begin extensive clinical trials in the US, Europe and China next year, in order to get the test to the market as soon as possible at an affordable price."

The Lung EpiCheck blood test is based on a proprietary molecular biomarker technology, which combines new biochemical assays and sophisticated algorithms. The technology is based on identification and analysis of subtle changes in DNA methylation patterns, a powerful tool for distinguishing between cancer and healthy cells and thus for detection of tumors in the body. Dying tumor cells release cell-free DNA (cfDNA) into the blood, where cancer-specific methylation changes can be detected at any disease stage. The Lung EpiCheck blood test detects changes in DNA methylation in 6 markers in cfDNA associated with lung cancer.

Lung cancer is the deadliest and most common of all cancer types. It is estimated that there are about 1.8 million new cases of lung cancer annually worldwide and about 1.55 million die from the disease each year. The reason for the high mortality rate is that currently most cases are detected when the patient becomes symptomatic, which is usually at late stages of the disease. To date, there is no adequate screening process for the early detection of lung cancer, bringing 5-year survival rate to approximately 15%. In addition, there is a well-defined risk group for developing the disease – mostly smokers and former smokers above the age of 50. In the US, low-dose CT is available for screening of individuals 55-79 years old who smoked at least 1 pack a day for 30 years, which represent less than half of the lung cancer population. Therefore, a screening test aimed at the entire risk group to assist in the early detection of the disease is highly needed and can dramatically increase lung cancer survival.

Nucleix Ltd. develops, manufactures and markets innovative, non-invasive, molecular cancer diagnostic tests. Its highly sensitive and specific tests are based on identification of subtle changes in methylation patterns. Nucleix's technology is based on a combination of a new biochemical assay in conjunction with sophisticated algorithms. The Company's pipeline includes CE Mark Bladder EpiCheck, for the non-invasive detection of bladder cancer based on a urine test; Lung EpiCheck, a screening diagnostic blood test for early detection of lung cancer; Liver EpiCheck, a blood test for liver cancer detection in patients with cirrhosis; and Pan Cancer EpiCheck, a molecular diagnostic tool for early detection of multiple cancer types in blood samples, all based on Nucleix's proprietary and innovative epigenetic platforms. Investors in the Company include OrbiMed and other leading investors. For further information, please visit www.nucleix.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes alternatives to the blood test include the standard CT scan.
Currently, early stage lung cancer can be detected either accidentally, when testing for other conditions, or by using low-dose CT scans, which are costly, carry associated risks such as high radiation, and are employed only for a very high-risk population.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration approved a second version of a groundbreaking treatment Wednesday that genetically alters patients' cells to attack cancer — this time, to fight aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

The treatment is for adults with certain types of large B-cell lymphoma who have not responded to or who have relapsed after at least two other kinds of treatment, such as chemotherapy and bone-marrow transplants. The group numbers about 7,500 patients a year in the United States.

The one-time infusion, known as CAR T-cell therapy, is made by Kite Pharma, which is based in Santa Monica, Calif., and recently was bought by Gilead Sciences for $11.9 billion. Kite announced Wednesday that the treatment's brand name will be Yescarta and its price will be $373,000.

In late August, the FDA cleared the first CAR T-cell therapy, which is designed for children and young adults whose leukemia doesn't respond to standard treatments. About 600 patients in the United States fall into that category every year. Kymriah, which costs $475,000, is manufactured by Novartis.

Biotech analysts had expected the Kite price to be lower than Kymriah's, in part because the number of eligible patients is larger and the response rates are lower. Even so, Yescarta's cost is likely to stoke the ongoing debate about high drug prices.

The FDA approval is the latest step forward for the fast-moving field of immunotherapy, which aims to bolster the immune system to attack malignancies. CAR T-cell therapies are among several approaches, along with treatments called checkpoint inhibitors and cancer vaccines, but they have recently grabbed much of the attention. Dozens of other companies also are working on them.

“Today, marks another milestone in the development of a whole new scientific paradigm for the treatment of serious diseases,” FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said in a statement, adding that the approval demonstrates “the continued momentum of this promising new area of medicine.”

A CAR T-cell therapy involves a complicated and customized procedure in which T cells — sometimes called the foot soldiers of the immune system — are removed from the patient. They are sent to a special lab and genetically modified to target a protein on the surface of the patient's cancer cells. Once the modified cells are returned to the patient, their numbers expand exponentially as they become an army of cancer fighters.

In 2015, Marie Miceli was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma at Siteman Cancer Center in St. Louis, which is jointly owned by Barnes-Jewish Hospital and Washington University School of Medicine. She received chemo and underwent a bone-marrow transplant. Neither worked.

“The doctors were saying, 'Go see an attorney and get your life in order,' " the 64-year-old Realtor recalled. Then they offered her a slot in Kite's clinical trial, a last-resort effort. “I could feel it when they put those T cells back in,” she said. “It was the craziest feeling in the world.” When she was checked a month later, she said, her cancer was gone. It hasn't returned.

Kite's “vein-to-vein” turnaround period — from cell extraction to reinfusion — is about 17 days, according to Frederick Locke, an oncologist at Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa and co-leader of the Kite trial.

The FDA said the safety and efficacy of Yescarta were established in a multi-center trial of more than 100 adults with large B-cell lymphoma. An independent review committee found that 72 percent of patients treated with a single infusion responded to therapy, including 51 percent who then showed no evidence of remaining cancer. Kite has said that at six months, 44 percent of patients were still responding, with 39 percent having no sign of cancer.

“This is not just an incremental benefit,” said David Chang, Kite's chief medical officer. “It raises the potential that a cure can be possible.” Some of the first patients who underwent treatment now have been in remission for three to five years, he said, although he cautioned that it's still too early to know whether those patients are cured.

Locke said about 13 percent of patients in the trial had a severe side effect known as cytokine release syndrome, which produces high fevers, low blood pressure and other flulike symptoms. Twenty-eight percent had neurological “events,” such as severe confusion; three patients died of complications caused by the treatment.

“These are patients who knew they were out of options,” he said, noting that lymphoma patients who relapse or don't respond to treatment have just a 50 percent chance of surviving for six months.

Because of the side effects, the treatment will carry a boxed warning, the FDA's most serious. In addition, the agency is requiring hospitals and clinics that dispense Yescarta to be certified after undergoing special training.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in adults. This type of cancer begins in the immune system and can be fast- or slow-growing, the FDA noted.

Kite's CAR T-cell product was developed years ago at the National Cancer Institute by pioneering scientist Steven Rosenberg and licensed to the company for commercialization.

Armin Ghobadi, an oncologist at Siteman who was an investigator in the Kite trial, said the new treatment is “just the first step” and that researchers are working to make it safer and more effective. He said the therapy already has been life-changing for many of his patients — and for him.

“There's nothing worse than telling patients, 'I'm sorry, we are done here, we don't have anything else to offer,' " he said.

FDA advisers urge approval for first gene therapy for inherited disease
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses other drugs on the market. The implication is that the patient has failed all other available treatments. For insurers this will be a major point. Given the cost of the treatment, insurers may require additional standard therapies that may be less effective but significantly less costly. Moreover, how this new therapy compares to others has not been directly tested. It doesn’t appear that any such head to head comparisons are in the near-term future.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A small study suggests that deep brain stimulation, which is currently being investigated as a treatment for general depression, may also help patients with bipolar disorder.

There are some caveats. The surgery necessary to allow deep brain stimulation is extremely expensive. And for now, the research is preliminary, so it's too early to know for sure if the treatment is appropriate to be used for any kind of depression.

Still, the study suggests that brain stimulation "not only just helps patients who haven't been able to recover from depression, but it seems to be associated with the absence of relapses. They're not only getting better, they're staying better," said study co-author Dr. Helen Mayberg, a professor in both the departments of psychiatry and behavioral sciences, and neurology, at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta.

In deep brain stimulation, surgeons insert wires into the brain that allows a specific region to be continuously hit with an electronic pulse. The level of stimulation is controlled by a pacemaker-like device implanted in the chest.

Deep brain stimulation has been around for more than 20 years, Mayberg said, and is commonly used to treat Parkinson's disease. The cost of the surgery is about $50,000, she said.

Previous research by Mayberg and others suggested that deep brain stimulation had potential as a treatment for depression. The St. Jude Medical Neuromodulation company, which has provided consulting fees to Mayberg and some of the other study authors, is currently recruiting patients for a study that could pave the way for its approval as a treatment for depression, Mayberg said.

The new study, which appears online Jan. 2 in the Archives of General Psychiatry, began with 10 patients with depression and seven with bipolar disorder -- a condition that causes severe mood swings and is also known as manic depression. They all received deep brain stimulation for 24 weeks after going through four weeks either with or without stimulation.

Most of the patients continued to receive the treatment over two years, although researchers temporarily turned it off in three of them as part of the study before realizing that doing so caused their depression to return.

The researchers found that 18 percent of patients went into remission after 24 weeks, 36 percent (of 14 patients) after one year. After two years, of the 12 patients still in the study, seven patients (58 percent) were in remission.

"The number of patients who got better increased over time, but it's not quite clear as to why," Mayberg said. The workings of deep brain stimulation as a whole are a mystery, although Mayberg said it may work by changing the brain's rhythms.

Dr. Samuel James Collier, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Austin, predicted that even if deep brain stimulation turns out to be an effective treatment for depression, it'll be far from the first line of defense.

"Medications and ECT -- electroconvulsive therapy -- are clearly safer, better tolerated, and do not embody a large surgical risk," Collier said. "I can't think of a scenario where deep brain stimulation would be considered even remotely before medications and ECT were exhausted."

Still, he said, it's important to note that "we seem to be making progress and hopefully those who are suffering the most can find solace in that and not give up hope."

For now, research continues. If patients are interested in deep brain stimulation treatment, they should try to get into the study that's ongoing, Mayberg said.

For more about deep brain stimulation, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story alludes to other treatment options, including medications and electroconvulsive therapy, and it quotes an outside expert saying that these are preferable.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Eating a type of powdered food supplement, based on a molecule produced by bacteria in the gut, reduces cravings for high-calorie foods such as chocolate, cake and pizza, a new study suggests.

Scientists from Imperial College London and the University of Glasgow asked 20 volunteers to consume a milkshake that either contained an ingredient called inulin-propionate ester, or a type of fibre called inulin.

Previous studies have shown bacteria in the gut release a compound called propionate when they digest the fibre inulin, which can signal to the brain to reduce appetite. However the inulin-propionate ester supplement releases much more propionate in the intestines than inulin alone.

After drinking the milkshakes, the participants in the current study underwent an MRI scan, where they were shown pictures of various low or high calorie foods such as salad, fish and vegetables or chocolate, cake and pizza.

The team found that when volunteers drank the milkshake containing inulin-propionate ester, they had less activity in areas of their brain linked to reward -- but only when looking at the high calorie foods. These areas, called the caudate and the nucleus accumbens, found in the centre of the brain, have previously been linked to food cravings and the motivation to want a food.

The volunteers also had to rate how appealing they found the foods. The results showed when they drank the milkshake with the inulin-propionate ester supplement they rated the high calorie foods as less appealing.

In a second part of the study, which is published in July edition of the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, the volunteers were given a bowl of pasta with tomato sauce, and asked to eat as much as they like. When participants drank the inulin-propionate ester, they ate 10 per cent less pasta than when they drank the milkshake that contained inulin alone.

In a previous research study by the same team, published in 2013, they found that overweight volunteers who added the inulin-propionate ester supplement to their food every day, gained less weight over six months compared to volunteers who added only inulin to their meals.

Professor Gary Frost, senior author of the study from the Department of Medicine at Imperial, said: "Our previous findings showed that people who ate this ingredient gained less weight -- but we did not know why. This study is filling in a missing bit of the jigsaw -- and shows that this supplement can decrease activity in brain areas associated with food reward at the same time as reducing the amount of food they eat."

He added that eating enough fibre to naturally produce similar amounts of propionate would be difficult: "The amount of inulin-propionate ester used in this study was 10g - which previous studies show increases propionate production by 2.5 times. To get the same increase from fibre alone, we would need to eat around 60g a day. At the moment, the UK average is 15g."

Claire Byrne, a PhD researcher also from the Department of Medicine explained that using inulin-propionate ester as a food ingredient may help prevent weight gain: "If we add this to foods it could reduce the urge to consume high calorie foods." She added that some people's gut bacteria may naturally produce more propionate than others, which may be why some people seem more naturally predisposed to gain weight.

Dr Tony Goldstone, co-senior author of the study from the Department of Medicine added: "This study adds to our previous brain imaging studies in people who have had gastric bypass surgery for obesity. These show that altering how the gut works can change not only appetite in general, but also change how the brain responds when they see high-calorie foods, and how appealing they find the foods to be."

Dr Douglas Morrison, author of the paper from the Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre at the University of Glasgow, commented: "We developed inulin-propionate ester to investigate the role of propionate produced by the gut microbiota in human health. This study illustrates very nicely that signals produced by the gut microbiota are important for appetite regulation and food choice. This study also sheds new light on how diet, the gut microbiome and health are inextricably linked adding to our understanding of how feeding our gut microbes with dietary fibre is important for healthy living."

The research was funded by the National Institute for Health Research Imperial Biomedical Research Centre and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that eating the amount of fiber to produce the same effects on the gut biome as the experimental supplement would be difficult, and notes that the average amount of daily fiber intake in the UK is just 15 grams, compared to the 60 grams that would be needed. As noted in the summary above, an alternative inulin-based product is already on the market. That would have been a useful addition to the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gone With A Shot? Hopeful New Signs Of Relief For Migraine Sufferers

Humans have suffered from migraines for millennia. Yet, despite decades of research, there isn't a drug on the market today that prevents them by targeting the underlying cause. All of that could change in a few months when the Food and Drug Administration is expected to announce its decision about new therapies that have the potential to turn migraine treatment on its head.

The new therapies are based on research begun in the 1980s showing that people in the throes of a migraine attack have high levels of a protein called calcitonin gene–related peptide, or CGRP, in their blood.

Step by step, researchers tracked and studied this neurochemical's effects. They found that injecting the peptide into the blood of people prone to migraines triggers migraine-like headaches, whereas people not prone to migraines experienced, at most, mild pain. Blocking transmission of CGRP in mice appeared to prevent migraine-like symptoms. And so a few companies started developing a pill that might do the same in humans.

Clinical trials of the first pills were effective against migraine but halted in 2011 over concerns about potential liver damage. So, four pharmaceutical companies rejiggered their approach. To bypass the liver, all four instead looked to an injectable therapy called monoclonal antibodies — tiny immune molecules most commonly used to treat cancer. Not only do these bypass the liver to block CGRP, but one injection appears to be effective for up to three months with almost no noticeable side effects.

Two manufacturers, Amgen (in collaboration with Novartis) and Teva Pharmaceuticals, have completed clinical trials and expect to hear from the FDA by June whether the therapies have been approved. Two more companies, Eli Lilly and Alder Biopharmaceuticals, plan to file for FDA approval later this year.

It's been a long time coming. Right now, the only available preventive treatments are accidental discoveries: A number of people prescribed medications for depression, high blood pressure and epilepsy discovered migraine relief, too. Now, many of those drugs, including propranolol and topiramate, have been tested and approved for migraine. But no one drug works for everyone, and side effects can prove intolerable or downright unpleasant.

Migraines are throbbing, one-sided headaches that can be accompanied by nausea as well as sensitivity to light, sound, smell, and movement. At their best, the headaches are an annoyance. At their worst, they can be completely debilitating. So for those of us who get numerous migraines each month, the prospect of a new approach feels almost life-changing.

According to one recent survey by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 10 percent of men and 20 percent of women in the U.S. reported having had a migraine in the last three months. And up to 2 percent of all Americans has at least 15 migraine days every single month. The toll such pain can take on health, morale, and productivity is substantial.

My own migraines started when I was 13. They struck a few times a week and I thought they were normal headaches. For a while, I tried the usual over the counter pain relievers but, one by one, they stopped working. By age 25, I started to wonder if there was something seriously wrong with my head. My general practitioner diagnosed me with migraines, gave me my first preventive medication — an antidepressant — then sent me to see a specialist.

Since that day more than 17 years ago, I have tried six preventive prescription medications. Not one helped. I alternated among four different, neurologist-recommended supplements, all to no avail. I received bi-monthly injections of magnesium and participated in one of the first clinical trials of Botox. And while Botox seemed to decrease my migraines by one or two per month, it wasn't enough to bother fighting about it with a new insurance company. I exercised regularly. I experimented with an elimination diet that left me eating nothing but broccoli and white rice, but still the migraines came. I averaged about 15 to 20 each month.

Still, I considered myself lucky. The headaches almost never came with nausea, and I had medications that typically ousted them within an hour or two. All told, I usually lost only a few hours of productivity a week.

When I grew older and had two children, my body changed and my migraines changed, too. I get them less frequently now, but when they come, they can stick around for a few days or even a week. Abortive medications still work, except when they don't. So when I heard about a new approach that was making its way through a number of pharmaceutical company pipelines, I began combing through the national clinical trials database to find a trial near me. I found one about 80 miles away, which didn't seem too far a trek considering the tantalizing reward of a migraine-free life. I made an appointment.

Neurologist David Dodick, at the Mayo Clinic in Phoenix, has been involved in multiple clinical trials with each of the four anti-CGRP antibody treatments in development. And, he admits, he's optimistic. He has good reason to be: Each of the therapies decreases migraine frequency by at least one to two days per month. "In a field where, over time, the progress and pace of research in understanding the underlying biology and mechanism of disease has been slow, this was very exciting," he says.

Because migraines are not life-threatening, most drugs have to pass a pretty high bar to be approved. And so far, patients on the experimental treatments report limited side effects that consist mostly of pain at the injection site. Unlike the current preventive medications, there is no nausea, no fuzzy thinking, no nerve pain, no weight loss or gain. And instead of remembering to take a daily pill, there is just a once-monthly injection.

Neurologists already have patients eager to test these therapies, especially when everything else they've tried hasn't worked. "There's a big hole to fill, both in prevention and acute therapies," says Alexander Mauskop, director of the New York Headache Center in New York City. (Disclosure: He's my former neurologist.) "If I have someone who's really suffering and can't find a solution, I tell them that in June I might have something new for them to try." Right now, he says, he has a list of about two dozen such patients.

Even if the new therapies are approved, however, patients may still have to jump through a number of hoops to get them. Biologic therapies like these are expensive, and treatment could reportedly range anywhere from $8,000 to $18,000 a year. At that price, Mauskop and other neurologists expect insurance companies to require patients to have tried just about everything else first.

The other hitch at this stage is a lack of long-term safety data. "If someone is well-controlled with Botox or another drug, I'd not suggest they switch," Mauskop says. "With Vioxx, it took 10 years before they discovered that it increased the risk of heart problems."

Side effects are a potential concern. Elizabeth Loder, chief of headache at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, points out that because CGRP constricts blood vessels, there may be potential long-term effects on blood pressure or other cardiovascular function. In women of childbearing age, who are the ones most prone to frequent migraines, "you can imagine that might have effects on fertility or placental function."

Right now, the longest patients have been on one of these new therapies is one to two years.

I ask Mauskop whether he'd recommend I enroll in a clinical trial, given my failure to respond to most everything else. He pauses, noting that he's no longer my neurologist and that he can't really give me any suggestions. But then he says that, since I'd previously shown some response to Botox, perhaps I might want to give it another try. I think about my two young children and my risk tolerance. Perhaps in 10 years I'll feel differently. For now, however, I pick up the phone and cancel my clinical trial appointment.

Lauren Gravitz is a science writer and editor in Hershey, Penn. Her work has appeared in Nature, The Economist, Aeon, Discover, The Oprah Magazine, and more. Find her at www.laurengravitz.com and @lyrebard.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story gives plenty of details:
A number of people prescribed medications for depression, high blood pressure and epilepsy discovered migraine relief, too. Now, many of those drugs, including propranolol and topiramate, have been tested and approved for migraine. But no one drug works for everyone, and side effects can prove intolerable or downright unpleasant.
The writer also describes her own quest for relief:
Since that day more than 17 years ago, I have tried six preventive prescription medications. Not one helped. I alternated among four different, neurologist-recommended supplements, all to no avail. I received bi-monthly injections of magnesium and participated in one of the first clinical trials of Botox. And while Botox seemed to decrease my migraines by one or two per month, it wasn’t enough to bother fighting about it with a new insurance company. I exercised regularly. I experimented with an elimination diet that left me eating nothing but broccoli and white rice, but still the migraines came. I averaged about 15 to 20 each month.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most angioplasties not necessary, study finds

NEW ORLEANS — More than half a million people a year with chest pain are getting an unnecessary or premature procedure to unclog their arteries because drugs are just as effective, suggests a landmark study that challenges one of the most common practices in heart care.

The stunning results found angioplasty did not save lives or prevent heart attacks in non-emergency heart patients.

An even bigger surprise: Angioplasty gave only slight and temporary relief from chest pain, the main reason it is done.

"By five years, there was really no significant difference" in symptoms, said Dr. William Boden of Buffalo General Hospital in New York. "Few would have expected such results."

He led the study and gave results Monday at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology. They also were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and will be in the April 12 issue.

Angioplasty remains the top treatment for people having a heart attack or hospitalized with worsening symptoms. But most angioplasties are done on a non-emergency basis, to relieve chest pain caused by clogged arteries crimping the heart's blood supply.

Those patients now should try drugs first, experts say. If that does not help, they can consider angioplasty or bypass surgery, which unlike angioplasty, does save lives, prevent heart attacks and give lasting chest-pain relief.

In the study, only one-third of the people treated with drugs ultimately needed angioplasty or a bypass.

"You are not putting yourself at risk of death or heart attack if you defer," and considering the safety worries about heart stents used to keep arteries open after angioplasty, it may be wise to wait, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic heart specialist and president of the College of Cardiology.

Why did angioplasty not help more?

It fixes only one blockage at a time whereas drugs affect all the arteries, experts said. Also, the clogs treated with angioplasty are not the really dangerous kind.

"Even though it goes against intuition, the blockages that are severe that cause chest pain are less likely to be the source of a heart attack than segments in the artery that are not severely blocked," said Dr. David Maron, a Vanderbilt University cardiologist who helped lead the new study.

Drugs are better today than they used to be and do a surprisingly good job, said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

"It may not be as bad as we thought" to leave the artery alone, she said.

About 1.2 million angioplasties are done in the United States each year. Through a blood vessel in the groin, doctors snake a tube to a blocked heart artery. A tiny balloon is inflated to flatten the clog and a mesh scaffold stent is usually placed.

The procedure already has lost some popularity because of emerging evidence that popular drug-coated stents can raise the risk of blood clots months later. The new study shifts the argument from which type of stent to use to whether to do the procedure at all.

It involved 2,287 patients throughout the U.S. and Canada who had substantial blockages, typically in two arteries, but were medically stable. They had an average of 10 chest pain episodes a week — moderately severe. About 40 percent had a prior heart attack.

"We deliberately chose to enroll a sicker, more symptomatic group" to give angioplasty a good chance to prove itself, Boden said.

All were treated with medicines that improve chest pain and heart and artery health such as aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins, nitrates, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers. All also were counseled on healthy lifestyles — diet, exercise and smoking cessation. Half of the participants also were assigned to get angioplasty.

After an average of 4 1/2 years, the groups had similar rates of death and heart attack: 211 in the angioplasty group and 202 in the medication group — about 19 percent of each.

Neither treatment proved better for any subgroups like smokers, diabetics, or older or sicker people.

At the start of the study, 80 percent had chest pain. Three years into it, 72 percent of the angioplasty group was free of this symptom as was 67 percent of the drug group. That means you would have to give angioplasties to 20 people for every one whose chest pain was better after three years — an unacceptably high ratio, Nissen said.

After five years, 74 percent of the angioplasty group and 72 percent of the medication group were free of chest pain — "no significant difference," Boden said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story touched on several different treatment options for non-emergency heart patients: angioplasty, drug therapy, stents, bypass surgery, and healthy lifestyle interventions (diet, exercise and smoking cessation).  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - When symptom-free people have heart scans to look for clogged arteries, they can end up with overtreatment and side effects, researchers said Monday.

In a study published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, they found people who had the scans were much more likely to be put on medications and undergo surgery than those who chose standard health screening.

The scans, called coronary computed tomography angiography or CCTA, produce a detailed image of the heart that reveals cholesterol buildups in the coronary arteries.

If they get big enough, such buildups may cut the blood flow and cause a heart attack. So in theory, treating them early on might help stave off some the more than 1.2 million heart attacks — a third of them fatal — that occur every year in the U.S.

Yet there’s no evidence that treating people based on heart scan results does any good, said Dr. John McEvoy, of Johns Hopkins Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease in Baltimore, who led the new study.

By contrast, it’s well known that the scans expose patients to a high dose of X-rays, which can increase their likelihood of developing cancer. And the dyes used to enhance the images cause kidney damage in a significant portion of people.

“Testing might lead to more harm than good,” McEvoy told Reuters Health, adding that heart scans may cost $600 or more.

His team looked at 1,000 Korean patients who chose to get a heart scan as part of a health screening program at Seoul National University Bundang Hospital.

The researchers compared those patients to closely matched individuals who opted to forgo the scans — not currently recommended by guidelines — and just get the standard health checkup.

More than a fifth of the patients who got scanned had cholesterol buildups in their arteries, also called atherosclerosis.

Three months later, these individuals were using cholesterol-lowering statins 34 percent of the time and blood-thinning aspirin 40 percent of the time. In those who tested negative for atherosclerosis or didn’t get scanned, less than 10 percent used the medications.

People who got scans also had more additional tests and major heart procedures.

The researchers expected that if the extra drugs and procedures were actually helpful, the treated people would have a lower rate of serious heart problems in the future.

But after another 18 months, there was no such difference. There was just one event in the 1,000 people who had CCTA (one case of hospitalization for chest pain) and one in the 1,000 people who didn’t (a heart-related death).

Currently, whether a patient gets statin or aspirin is based on risk factors such as their age, and how much cholesterol is in their blood. Both drugs have side effects, notably joint problems and bleeding ulcers.

Although the study can’t prove that getting a scan caused the extra medication use, the gap could not be explained by differences in risk factors for heart disease, such as cholesterol levels or smoking.

In an editorial, Dr. Michael S. Lauer of National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Maryland, said the new study serves as a reminder of the downsides of screening.

“Physicians cannot easily ignore diagnoses made with screening tests because it is impossible for them to determine whether their patients have real disease or pseudodisease,” Lauer notes. “Therefore, physicians prescribe tests, medications, procedures, or even surgical procedures, all of which carry inherent risks.”

McEvoy agrees. “With these new imaging techniques, we are left with the dilemma of what to do with the results,” he said.

Even when screening helps predict health problems down the road, Lauer adds, that doesn’t mean treatments are necessarily beneficial.

“Overdiagnosis is threatening to become an increasingly important public health problem because of the enthusiasm for and proliferation of unproven screening tests,” Lauer writes.

McEvoy said there have been several reports of doctors doing CCTA heart scans in healthy patients, although the practice is currently discouraged by the American Heart Association.

According to McEvoy, doctors should focus on patients’ lifestyle and traditional risk factors such as smoking and obesity.

SOURCE: bit.ly/lEEptL and bit.ly/kBzX6J Archives of Internal Medicine, online May 23, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story ends with the researcher saying “doctors should focus on patients’ lifestyle and traditional risk factors such as smoking and obesity.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - Screening smokers and former smokers for lung tumors using three-dimensional X-rays reduced their risk of dying from lung cancer by 20 percent, researchers said on Thursday.

The study sponsored by the U.S. National Cancer Institute is the first to show that people can be screened for lung cancer, akin to mammograms for breast cancer and tests for colon and prostate cancer.

“Nothing has ever shown a 20 percent decrease in mortality in this disease ever before. This is huge,” said Regina Vidaver, executive director of the National Lung Cancer Partnership.

The researchers said their findings could save thousands of lives. Lung cancer kills 1.2 million people a year globally and it will kill 157,000 people in the United States alone this year, according to the American Cancer Society.

The trial of more than 53,000 current and former heavy smokers, aged 55 to 74, found the “spiral” CT scans apparently catch tumors before they have spread.

“To me this is a game changer,” Vidaver said in a telephone interview. “We will have what breast cancer has now, which is a lot of survivors.”

The researchers have some caveats. They do not know whether the radiation from the CT scans may raise the risk of cancer, and they do not know what the study means for light smokers, younger people, or those who have never smoked.

It is also possible the scans will turn up tumors that would never have killed the patients, and that some people will undergo unnecessary surgery if they are screened.

It is not clear when or how guidelines for lung cancer screening could be drawn up, and until they are, insurers including government programs such as Medicare are unlikely to pay the average $300 cost of a scan.

For the study, the middle-aged and elderly smokers were scanned with either a spiral CT or a chest X-ray once a year for three years starting in August 2002. They were followed for five years.

The researchers waited until an independent panel could document a 20 percent reduction in cancer deaths, or could determine that there was no significant benefit.

As of last month, 354 people who got CTs had died of lung cancer, compared to 442 who got ordinary X-rays. This worked out to a 20.3 percent lower risk of dying for the spiral CT group, and researchers stopped the study.

Caught early, lung cancer can be cured surgically, but it causes vague symptoms and usually is not diagnosed until it has spread. Only 15 percent of lung cancer patients live 5 years or more.

“No one should come away from this announcement believing that it is safe to continue to smoke,” National Cancer Institute director Dr. Harold Varmus told a news conference.

“This screening does not prevent lung cancer and it does not protect the large majority of subjects from death by lung cancer,” Varmus said.

Dr. Bruce Johnson of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, who is on the board of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, said he doubted most people would see the findings as a green light to smoke.

“The majority of lung cancer diagnoses in the United States now are either in people who never smoked or in people who have quit,” Johnson said.

In 2006, Dr. Claudia Henschke of New York Presbyterian Hospital-Weill Cornell Medical Center caused a stir when she published a study saying that 80 percent of lung-cancer deaths could be prevented through widespread use of spiral CT.

Her ideas were controversial to start with and widely disregarded when other researchers found her work had been paid for by a tobacco company.

Almost all advanced CT scanners can perform a spiral CT, and about 60 percent of U.S. hospitals have such a machine. Makers include General Electric Co’s GE Healthcare Siemens AG, Toshiba Corp, Hitachi and Philips.

A fact sheet on spiral CT can be found here
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study compared spiral CT scanning to chest X-rays and did mention smoking cessation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Feb. 8, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- For people with celiac disease, everyday foods such as bread, pizza crust and muffins are potential enemies. But scientists anticipate that some day a simple pill could help prevent the digestive upsets caused by ingesting the gluten in wheat, rye or barley products.

The only current treatment for celiac disease is a gluten-free diet. A new study, however, offers some potential for hope. Researchers have re-engineered a naturally occurring enzyme, kumamolisin-As, to break down gluten in the stomach into much smaller protein pieces, called peptides. They say these are less likely to trigger the autoimmune response that can create a wide range of painful and irritating symptoms.

The re-engineered enzyme, named KumaMax, appears to be highly effective, at least in a test tube. It dismantled more than 95 percent of a gluten peptide that is thought to cause celiac disease, according to the study, which was published recently in the Journal of the American Chemical Society.

Ideally, the team could develop the enzyme into a food additive such as the gas remedies Beano or Gas-X and offer it without a prescription, said lead study author Justin Siegel, assistant professor of chemistry and biochemistry at the University of California, Davis. But this could take a few years to develop. If the researchers opt to make a prescription drug, the process of clinical trials and obtaining U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval could take a decade or more, he said.

An enzyme is a protein that performs a chemical reaction. Proteins are the workhorses in every cell of every living thing, and their function is defined by their shape and structure.

In this case, the researchers re-engineered the natural enzyme to recognize the peptide that triggers celiac disease and modified the protein in the laboratory so it would survive the acidic stomach environment. "We did the engineering to change the genes and sent that into standard microorganisms to create the protein," Siegel said.

The next step is to show that the enzyme is not toxic and functions as designed in animals. "It shouldn't be toxic; it's just a protein you're eating," Siegel said.

How effective might the enzyme be? "For some people, even flour in the air makes them stop breathing. Some are very sensitive, and in some it just upsets their stomach a little," Siegel said. "For those who are hypersensitive, this probably is not going to solve the problem, but it would allow them to go to dinner, and in case any gluten ended up in their meal, they wouldn't have to worry about it."

"For those less sensitive, they could pop one before each meal and eat anything they want," he added.

The process of identifying the precise trigger for a disease or condition and engineering a drug to circumvent the disease-causing process is part of what some call the personalized medicine revolution, Siegel said. "We can design a small molecule, a pill, that can be specific to an exact target and have few side effects, if any," he said.

Some experts identified limitations to the research.

"This is the earliest phase, and you now have to show that it actually breaks down the gluten peptides that trigger a response in the stomach at a speed that will protect the human," said Dr. Joseph Murray, a professor of medicine in the division of gastroenterology and the department of immunology at the Mayo Clinic, in Rochester, Minn. "Let's see how it goes with a whole slice of bread."

Murray said that dismantling 95 percent of the protein component that is thought to trigger celiac disease may still not be enough to provide celiac patients protection. "It will probably be helpful to someone who gets a low-level exposure [to glutens] by accident," he said.

But celiac disease is a common problem, with about 2 million to 3 million Americans suffering from it. "People need alternatives, and this is an example of the scientific community taking novel approaches to helping people with celiac disease," Murray said.

Learn more about celiac disease from the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: A gluten-free diet is the only effective alternative for celiac disease. The story makes this clear.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 10, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Offering your baby a special formula when weaning off breastfeeding may offer some protection against the development of the antibodies associated with type 1 diabetes, if you have a family history of the disease, new research suggests.

When Finnish researchers randomly assigned 230 babies at high risk of type 1 diabetes to receive either a regular infant formula, or one that was extensively hydrolyzed -- which means the proteins in the formula are already partially broken down and more readily available for digestion -- they found that the extensively hydrolyzed formula cut the rate of developing diabetes-linked antibodies in the blood by about half.

"We observed that early dietary intervention [with extensively hydrolyzed formula] decreased the frequency of diabetes-associated autoantibodies, which are markers of an ongoing disease process, by about 50 percent by the age of 10 years," said the study's lead author, Dr. Michael Knip, a professor of pediatrics at the Hospital for Children and Adolescents in Helsinki, Finland.

The results of the study were published in the Nov. 11 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease, which means the body's immune system mistakenly turns against healthy insulin-producing cells in the pancreas, instead of a foreign material, such as bacteria. No one knows for sure what causes this process to begin, but some research suggests that the initial autoimmunity may begin early in life.

Five immune system autoantibodies have been linked to type 1 diabetes. Having one of these antibodies isn't a guarantee that you'll develop type 1 diabetes, but it does indicate an increased risk for the disease. People who have two or more type 1 antibodies have between a 50 and 100 percent risk of developing type 1 diabetes, according to background information in the study.

Previous research has suggested that breastfeeding may offer some protection against the development of these antibodies, possibly because breastfeeding delays the introduction of infant formula, which contains complex proteins. Formula may somehow trigger the development of autoantibodies as these proteins are broken down for digestion.

The current study was randomized and double-blind (meaning neither the parents nor the researchers knew who was getting what), and compared regular baby formula to one that was made easier for babies to digest because the proteins were broken down (extensively hydrolyzed).

Babies were offered the formula during the first 6 to 8 months of life, any time breastfeeding wasn't available. They were then followed till they were about 10 years old, according to the study.

After adjusting the data to try to account for the duration of exposure to one of the study formulas, the researchers found that the extensively hydrolyzed formula reduced the risk of having one diabetes autoantibody by 49 percent, and the risk of having two or more autoantibodies by 53 percent.

How the highly hydrolyzed formula might reduce the risk of developing diabetes-predictive antibodies is unknown, but the researchers speculated that it might contribute to reduced gut permeability or changes in gut microflora, among other things.

According to Knip, the take-home message from the study is that "it is possible to reduce considerably the initiation of the diabetes disease process in at-risk children in a simple and safe way: weaning to an extensively hydrolyzed formula." He added that, "based on the current results, we think that it is justified to recommend weaning to a highly hydrolyzed formula for babies in families with a member affected by type 1 diabetes."

Not everyone agreed with that notion, however.

"The data in this study is not sufficiently strong to support recommending any changes for parents," said the author of an accompanying editorial, Dr. David Harlan, co-director of the Diabetes Center of Excellence at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center in Worcester.

"I think the authors designed this study to address their hypothesis that proteins present in non-hydrolyzed formula might incite an immune response, and by breaking them down, you might eliminate the immune response. But, there are quite a few steps between that and how the immune system or diabetes are triggered," added Harlan's editorial co-author, Dr. Mary Lee, a professor of pediatrics and cell biology and chief of the pediatric endocrine division at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center.

"I think this is an important study because we need to understand what causes type 1 diabetes," said Harlan, who added the caveat: "In this study, while there is an apparent signal, there are also some causes for withholding complete faith in the conclusion that the formula caused diabetes."

Both Lee and Harlan stressed that there is currently no definitive evidence to suggest that the use of standard cow's milk formulas leads to an increased incidence of diabetes compared to breastfeeding. The hydrolyzed formula is also considerably more expensive than standard formula, experts point out.

Learn more about type 1 diabetes from the American Diabetes Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There are many options when weaning an infant from breast milk.  The story discusses the NEJM study which compared extensively hydrolyzed formula with regular infant formula.  While the more expensive hydrolyzed forumula was associated with fewer cases of Type 1 diabetes antibodies in at-risk children, the story notes that there is not definitive evidence that cow’s milk formula will increase the risk of Type 1 Diabetes compared to other types of formular or breast feeding.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Experts have known for some time that light therapy can improve the mood of people who feel especially down when the days get shorter and gloomier. But now a study has found that light therapy also works in treating non-seasonal depression.

The research, published Wednesday in JAMA Psychiatry, is significant because major depression is one of the most common mental health disorders in the United States and one of the leading causes of disability worldwide.

Light therapy is cheap, easy to use and comes with few side effects compared to medication such as antidepressants, said lead author Raymond Lam, a professor of psychiatry at the University of British Columbia.

Previous research on light therapy for non-seasonal depression has been limited. This study "shows a new, proven-safe treatment of depression that is probably both more effective and less expensive than drug treatment or anything else," said Dan Kripke, a psychiatrist and professor emeritus at the University of California, San Diego, who has studied the topic but was not involved in the latest trial.

[It's 3 a.m. and you're depressed. How technology is transforming mental health care.]

The researchers said enough clinical evidence now supports mental health professionals recommending light therapy as a treatment for depression. Most people typically receive medication and psychotherapy — but medications don't work in all cases and there's a shortage of providers in many areas.

[Why it's so hard to find a mental health professional ]

Lam and his colleagues followed 122 patients and evaluated whether light therapy improved their mood when it was used both with and without fluoxetine, or Prozac, a commonly prescribed antidepressant. Over eight weeks, participants were exposed daily to 30 minutes from a fluorescent light box soon after waking up. Some participants were instead given placebo pills and placebo devices.

Although the light therapy helped many patients, it provided the most benefit to those who were also taking the antidepressant. About 60 percent of those using light therapy with the antidepressant reported feeling almost back to normal, Lam said.

Researchers have two main theories on why light therapy works. One is that it affects the biological clock in the brain. There's some evidence that depression, like jet lag, occurs when the biological clock is out of sync, and light helps to correct that, Lam said.

Light is also believed to affect neurotransmitters in the brain. Those are considered important for the development of depression and are the targets of most antidepressant medications.

Women more likely to have serious mental health problems than men, study says

NIH's mental health chief on why he's leaving for Google: Technology may hold key to better diagnosis

Most Americans will get a wrong diagnosis at least once in their lives
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Even in a short word count, this story did convey that there are alternatives, including antidepressants and psychotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Doctors can use a patient’s abdominal CT scans to also check for signs of the bone-weakening disease osteoporosis, according to a new study.

The researchers, who published their findings in the Annals of Internal Medicine on Monday, compared patients’ CT scans to their dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), which is traditionally used to diagnose osteoporosis.

“What we found is that there is pretty good correlation,” said the study’s lead author Dr. Perry Pickhardt, professor of radiology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The idea, say the researchers, is doctors can use patients’ CT scans that are ordered for another reason - such as looking for tumors - to also check for signs of osteoporosis. That may spare the patients from additional testing and additional costs.

In an editorial accompanying the study, however, experts wrote that using CT scans to gauge bone density could lead to some people being incorrectly diagnosed, particularly if people at low risk are tested.

In this study, the average age was about 59 years old - six years younger than the age at which the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a government-backed panel, recommends all women begin being screened for osteoporosis. The disease affects over 12 million Americans over 50.

The panel also suggests younger women at an increased risk for bone fractures should be screened, but there’s no recommendation for men of any age.

Despite DXA scans being safe and cost effective, Pickhardt and his colleagues say the test is underused. CT scans, however, are considered overused - with more than 80 million performed in the U.S. during 2011.

For the new study, the researchers analyzed test results from 1,867 patients, who had both types of scans performed within six months of each other over a 10-year period, to see if their CT scans showed osteoporosis as well as the DXAs.

Overall, about 23 percent of the people were diagnosed with osteoporosis, about 45 percent were diagnosed with some bone-weakening and about 32 percent were healthy based on their DXAs.

The researchers then found that their ability to accurately diagnose those same patients with osteoporosis from a CT scan depended on what threshold for bone density they used.

Dr. Sumit Majumdar, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new study, said a lower threshold for bone density would catch most cases of osteoporosis and limit “incidentaloporosis” - incorrect osteoporosis diagnoses “discovered” while doctors were looking for something else.

At the lower threshold, the researchers found 9 percent of those diagnosed with osteoporosis were misdiagnosed.

Pickhardt said the screenings would have to target the right groups of people to prevent overdiagnosis.

“Obviously it’s something we need to worry about, but if you apply it to a population that’s suitable for diagnosis you wouldn’t run that risk,” he said.

Majumdar, a professor of medicine at the University of Alberta in Canada, said CT scans are better tests, but stomach scans don’t include the hip - like a DXA would.

A DXA can cost a couple hundred dollars, while a CT scan can cost about $500. Both involve radiation.

Dr. Beatrice Hull, from the Center for Osteoporosis and Bone Health at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, told Reuters Health that she’d want her patients to have a DXA scan even with a diagnosis from a CT scan.

“I don’t think at this point this one test is going to prevent further testing. I think it will identify patients who are at a higher risk and need more testing,” said Hull, who wasn’t involved with the new research.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The entire frame of the story was a comparison of DXA tests to CT scans.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 23, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A popular nutritional supplement -- extract of bitter melon -- may help protect women from breast cancer, researchers say.

Bitter melon is a common vegetable in India, China and South America, and its extract is used in folk remedies for diabetes because of its blood-sugar lowering capabilities, according to the researchers.

"When we used the extract from that melon, we saw that it kills the breast cancer cells," said lead researcher Ratna Ray, a professor of pathology at Saint Louis University. But their work was done in a laboratory, not in humans, she noted.

The bitter melon extract killed only the cancer cells, not the healthy breast cells. "We didn't see any death in the normal cells," she said.

However, these results are not proof that bitter melon extract prevents or cures breast cancer.

"I don't believe that it will cure cancer," Ray said. "It will probably delay or perhaps have some prevention."

The report was published online Feb. 23 in advance of print publication March 1 in Cancer Research.

For the study, Ray's team treated human breast cancer cells with bitter melon extract, which is sold in U.S. health food stores and over the Internet.

The extract slowed the growth of these breast cancer cells and even killed them, the researchers found. The next step is to see if the team can repeat these findings in animals, Ray said. If so, human trials might follow.

Eating bitter melon could also have a beneficial effect, Ray said. "It has ingredients which are good for the health." Those ingredients include Vitamin C and flavonoids.

Marji McCullough, strategic director of nutritional epidemiology at the American Cancer Society, expressed interest in the findings.

"The results of this laboratory study are intriguing," McCullough said. "But before recommending bitter melon extract supplements for cancer prevention, we need appropriate clinical trials to establish its safety and efficacy in humans."

For now, the cancer society recommends getting nutrients through foods, not supplements, McCullough said.

This involves eating "a plant-based diet including a variety of vegetables and fruits," she said. "Many supplements have biologic activity, but before I recommend that people take isolated supplements they need to be tested in humans."

Current recommendations to prevent breast cancer include maintaining a healthy weight, limiting alcohol, exercising and eating a healthful diet, McCullough said.

For more information on breast cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story included the American Cancer Society expert’s recommendations for breast cancer prevention. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors have long debated the effectiveness of a relatively new class of blood pressure medicines known as angiotensin receptor blockers, or ARBs. Since they came on the market in 2000, they have been widely used by patients -- but usually only as a second-line therapy when older drugs had failed to work or when their side effects had become intolerable.

Now a large new analysis involving 250,000 patients shows that these medications may be as effective and safe as their older cousins, the angiotensin converting enzyme, or ACE inhibitors.

Sripal Bangalore, an associate professor of cardiology at NYU Langone Medical Center who is lead author of the new study, said in an interview that the previous studies comparing the two may have been misinterpreted due to what he called a "generation gap" in participants and changes in their health care and lifestyle choices.

The idea that ACE inhibitors are more effective than ARBs was based on comparing studies on ACE inhibitors going as far back as the 1980s and into the 1990s with newer studies on ARBs in the 2000s.

These studies appeared to show a larger difference between ACE inhibitors and placebos versus ARBs and placebos. Most significantly, research showed a significant effect in reducing the risk of death with ACE inhibitors but not with ARBS. That led many doctors and standards groups to conclude that ACE inhibitors were more effective than ARBs.

But some doctors and researchers were puzzled by the fact that in head-to-head comparisons between the two classes of drugs they appeared to equally safe and effective. If there really was such a big difference between the medications, why didn't it show up in these types of studies?

That inconsistency created a confusing split in the medical community. Most guidelines set forth by the major medical groups suggest starting a patient with an ACE inhibitor first, but the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC) considers ACE inhibitors and ARBs to be equal.

Bangalore noticed that one assumption made in comparing the placebo trials -- that the patients in the group were about the same -- was incorrect. During that time period there was a remarkable shift in cardiovascular health care in America -- with a greater emphasis on not smoking, more statin use for cholesterol, better management of diabetes, lower targets for blood pressure.

"The patients in the '80s and '90s were a higher-risk group than those in the 2000s," Bangalore explained. "If your risk is higher it's easier to show a benefit. If your risk is lower it's harder to show a benefit."

The new analysis, published in Mayo Clinic Proceedings on Monday, involves a second look at 106 randomized trials with 254,301 patients that took place after 2000 and shows that during this time period patient outcomes on the two medications were remarkably similar. The one difference they found was that ARBs tend to be better tolerated by patients, meaning that they have fewer side effects or result in fewer adverse events. ACE inhibitors are poorly tolerated by many patients because they can produce a bothersome dry cough, and some end up stopping medication as a result.

Bangalore said this is critically important because "compliance is big issue with our patients."

"With hypertension they are on these medications for decades, and it's important to choose one that will be the most tolerable," he said.

The other piece of good news regarding the medications is that ACE inhibitors, as well as many ARBs, are now generic -- meaning that the cost difference is minimal.

The study was limited to patients who did not have heart failure, and because it involved a retrospective analysis of trials it was unable to control for differences in the design or data gathering of the previous work.

Happiness won’t help you live longer (but unhappiness won’t kill you either)

Guinea is finally declared Ebola-free, but that does not mean the crisis is over

Most popular Washington Post health stories of 2015: A mother tells her story of how she lost her darling daughter a few weeks short of her 29th birthday when she stepped in front of a train in Baltimore.

Top health issues to pay attention to in 2016: The rise of personalized diets and medical treatments

For more health news, you can sign up for our weekly newsletter here.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Since the story involves the comparison of two classes of drugs for treating cardiovascular disease, there are obviously treatment options available.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 15, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- People with high-functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome were better able to "catch" social cues after inhaling the hormone oxytocin, new research shows.

Oxytocin,which is produced in abundance when a mother is breast-feeding her baby, is known as the "bonding" hormone.

Although there are many kinks to be worked out, experts feel the strategy holds promise to treat one of the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder.

"When you start thinking of a hormone that can actually encourage pro-social behavior, you're talking about potentially significant changes in quality of life," said Clara Lajonchere, a vice president of clinical programs at the advocacy group Autism Speaks and a clinical assistant professor at the Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California.

"In the absence of intellectual deficits, the areas where they have the greatest struggle is around social communication and social connectedness," she continued. "These people can't interpret other people's perceptions, they can't read social cues, they don't make eye contact."

While there are drugs for the secondary symptoms of autism, such as irritability and aggression, doctors have nothing yet for the core symptoms in the areas of language, social interaction and intellectual deficits.

Prior studies have shown a strong effect of oxytocin on people with autism, as well as on people who are not on the autism disorders spectrum. One study found that autistic people seem to have a lower sensitivity to oxytocin than people without the disorder.

"There's no doubt that oxytocin has a big effect on social interactions in anyone. It's almost like a designer drug, a drug which has a selective effect on a behavior in the normal range," said Keith Young, vice chairman of research in psychiatry and behavioral science at the Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine in Temple and the neuroimaging and genetics core leader at the VA Center of Excellence for Research on Returning War Veterans at the Central Texas Veterans Health Care System.

The new study, led by Angela Sirigu at the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience in Lyon, France, was published in this week's issue of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. It involved 13 adults, most of them men, aged 17 to 39. All had high-functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome.

Participants performed different tasks -- either after inhaling oxytocin or without using the hormone.

When observed playing a virtual ball game, individuals who had inhaled oxytocin were able to interact better with their virtual partners compared to untreated participants.

Also, after inhaling oxytocin, participants showed more alertness to socially important visual cues in pictures of human faces.

There were, however, wide variations in individual responses, the team noted.

"It's not clear whether this would be effective at all in children or in young adults who had intellectual problems," warned Young.

The long-term effects of the hormone are also uncertain.

"I really want to encourage clinical trials in this area because of its potential significance, but we have to be very careful in terms of safety data," Lajonchere said. "Safety data is really critical."

Also, scientists would need to come up with a different method of delivery, Young said.

"The nasal [inhaled] drugs only work for a few minutes. Potentially it would be very difficult to be using this drug once an hour or something. It doesn't make a whole lot of sense," he pointed out. "But it does point the way to the possibility of raising oxytocin levels with other kinds of compounds to increase oxytocin levels more generally over a longer period of time. I don't know whether this is a realistic therapy as we have it now but, potentially, in the future it could really help these people whose primary autistic symptoms are having to do with reduction in social activity."

For more on autism, visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does discuss the treatment of autism and that no drug therapies are currently available for the social dysfunction observed in people with Asperger syndrome and other forms of autism.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“These data support the vision that we have long had for fundamentally changing the treatment for hepatitis C,” Dr. Robert Kauffman, Vertex’s chief medical officer, said in a conference call with securities analysts.

The results also keep Vertex at the front of a crowded field that has made hepatitis C one of the fiercest battlegrounds in the pharmaceutical business. Merck is expected to announce late-stage trial results of a similar drug, boceprevir, this year. And numerous other companies, from pharmaceutical giants to small start-ups, are in hot pursuit.

Both Vertex’s telaprevir and Merck’s boceprevir block an enzyme known as protease that is made by the virus. Most of the other new drugs also work by blocking viral enzymes. This direct antiviral approach has been used with great success in treating H.I.V. and AIDS.

Vertex itself says it expects results from two additional Phase 3 trials of telaprevir in the third quarter and will then apply to the Food and Drug Administration for approval of the drug.

Some 2.7 million to 3.9 million Americans are estimated to have hepatitis C, and 12,000 die from it each year, according to a recent report by the Institute of Medicine.

The disease can cause cirrhosis, which is a scarring of the liver, as well as liver cancer. The virus is transmitted by blood, so most people who have hepatitis C either have injected illegal drugs or received blood transfusions or blood products before the early 1990s.

The existing treatment is a combination of alpha interferon, which is injected, and ribavirin, an oral drug. It is not quite clear how those drugs work.

For patients with the type of hepatitis most prevalent in the United States, which is called Genotype 1, the treatment lasts nearly a year and can cause side effects that include flulike symptoms, anemia and depression. It is so arduous that many patients opt not to get treated or drop out before completing the course.

But in Vertex’s trial, about 70 percent of those who achieved an effective cure were able to do so in 24 weeks, or about six months. That shorter time line, plus a higher chance of success, could entice more people to be treated, experts say.

“If you can promise them six months with a reasonable chance of a cure, that’s a meaningful advance,” said Dr. Scott L. Friedman, chief of the division of liver diseases at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York.

If approved, telaprevir would have to be used initially with the existing drugs to prevent the virus from evolving resistance. But experts hope that eventually several of the pills now in development could be used together, much as AIDS is treated, doing away with the need for interferon.

Vertex’s clinical trial enrolled 1,095 patients in the United States and abroad who had Genotype 1 hepatitis C and had not been treated previously. Patients got either 12 weeks or eight weeks of telaprevir or a placebo. The standard therapy of interferon and ribavirin was given for either 24 weeks or 48 weeks, depending on how the patients were faring after four weeks and 12 weeks.

Of those who got 12 weeks of telaprevir, 75 percent had a sustained viral response, meaning the virus was not detectable in their blood 24 weeks after completing treatment. That is seen as essentially a cure. The rate was 69 percent for those who got eight weeks of telaprevir.

The drug can cause a nasty rash and increases the rate of anemia. About 7 percent of the patients getting telaprevir dropped out of the trial, about double the figure for the control group.

Lorren Sandt, chairwoman of the National Viral Hepatitis Roundtable, an advocacy group, called the trial results impressive. But she added, “The community hopes that if telaprevir is approved by the F.D.A. that it will be accessible and affordable to everyone.”

Vertex, which is based in Cambridge, Mass., has not said what it would charge. But analysts expect the drug to cost tens of thousands of dollars for a course of treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The comparison could have been more detailed, but, you do get the picture that this new drug will simply be an add on to existing therapies, albeit with the potential for cutting down the treatment time considerably. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cooling babies deprived of oxygen at birth (perinatal asphyxia) can reduce the number of children who develop epilepsy later in childhood, according to a new study published in the journal Epilepsia.

The study has been led by Marianne Thoresen, Professor of Neonatal Neuroscience, from the Bristol Medical School: Translational Health Sciences at the University of Bristol.

It is known that newborn babies who suffer perinatal asphyxia may develop permanent brain injury resulting in cerebral palsy or other conditions, like epilepsy. Until recently, 20 to 30 per cent of these patients would develop epilepsy and many need regular antiepileptic treatment. The patients' cognitive performance, life quality and life expectancy is also affected by having the condition.

The research team has developed and delivered cooling treatment, known as therapeutic hypothermia, for newborns who suffer lack of oxygen during birth. For up to eight years, the researchers followed 165 infants who were born in the south west and who received cooling therapy at St Michael's Hospital, Bristol, part of University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust. The study examined how many babies were diagnosed with epilepsy and how many are on regular antiepileptic drug treatment at two and four to eight years of age.

The research found that babies, born after 2007, who received the cooling treatment, had much less epilepsy than before cooling treatment was introduced. At two years, seven per cent of the children had an epilepsy diagnosis, however, far fewer, only two per cent, were on regular antiepileptic drugs.

The study showed that more children had epilepsy when they reached the age of four to eight years with seven per cent on regular medication. However, these are very low numbers needing antiepileptic treatment compared to before cooling treatment was introduced as standard of care.

Before therapeutic hypothermia was introduced, poor outcome meaning death or moderate or severe disability was around 66 per cent (32 per cent death and 34 per cent surviving with disability).

In this cohort born after 2007, the number of children with poor outcome is lower at 34 per cent (11 per cent death and 23 per cent survived with disability). Also, the severity of cerebral palsy is milder and seven out of ten are able to walk. Even if a lesser severity of perinatal asphyxia is accounted for, cooling therapy has increased the number of healthy survivors and there are very few children with epilepsy needing drug treatment.

Professor Marianne Thoresen said: "Even if we account for a lesser severity of perinatal asphyxia, our research has shown that therapeutic hypothermia reduces the number of children who develop epilepsy later in childhood. Cooling treatment also reduces the number and severity of cerebral palsy and increases the number of patients who survive normally."

The research was funded by Sparks UK; University of Bristol's Alumni Foundation; The Laerdal Foundation for Acute Medicine, Norway; University of Oslo, and a private donation.

'Reduced infancy and childhood epilepsy following hypothermia-treated neonatal encephalopathy' by Xun Liu, Sally Jary, Frances Cowan and Marianne Thoresen in Epilepsia
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Therapeutic hypothermia is the only widely accepted preventative treatment for brain injury from neonatal asphyxia. Some researchers have experimented with antioxidants, and general improvements in care (such as adjusting ventilators to avoid too much oxygen) may help neurologic outcomes.
There are other treatment options that can be used in conjunction with induced hypothermia, but none that would be used as an alternative to induced hypothermia when it comes to mitigating potential neural damage. As such, even though it doesn’t list alternatives, we’ll rate this Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new test can accurately predict within minutes if an individual has Ebola Virus Disease (EVD), according to new research published in The Lancet. The study is the first to show that a point-of-care EVD test (ReEBOV Antigen Rapid Test; Corgenix) is faster than and as sensitive as a conventional laboratory-based molecular method used for clinical testing during the recent outbreak in Sierra Leone.

This new rapid diagnostic test (RDT) could cut back on the lengthy process usually required to confirm if a patient has EVD, help identify case contacts, and ultimately curb the spread of Ebola.

Currently, diagnosis of EVD requires a full vial of venous blood to be shipped to a laboratory with a high level of biosafety and staff expertise for testing by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). This method poses substantial risks to the healthcare workers responsible for blood collection, transport, and testing, and efforts to contain the Ebola epidemic in west Africa have been hampered by this slow and complex diagnostic test.

"Laboratory results can sometimes take days to return. Delays like this result not only in the failure to diagnose and treat Ebola-infected patients, but also in individuals without Ebola being admitted to holding units where they may be subsequently infected with the virus," [1] explains Dr Nira Pollock, senior author and Associate Medical Director of the Infectious Diseases Diagnostic Laboratory at the Boston Children's Hospital, USA.

"This new test, on the other hand, is capable of detecting the Ebola virus in just a small drop of blood tested at the bedside, and could help us in the fight against Ebola." [1]

In this study, the researchers compared the diagnostic accuracy of the new RDT against the benchmark RT-PCR test (altona Diagnostics) being used for clinical diagnosis in the field reference laboratory run by Public Health England at Port Loko in Sierra Leone.

106 suspected Ebola patients admitted to two treatment centres in Sierra Leone (run by the Ministry of Health and Sanitation of Sierra Leone and supported by the non-governmental organisation Partners In Health) during February 2015 were tested by both RDT (performed on a fingerstick blood sample at the point-of-care) and by standard RT-PCR (performed on plasma in the laboratory). Both RDT (on whole blood) and RT-PCR (on plasma) were also performed on 284 samples in the laboratory.

The RDT detected all confirmed cases of EVD that were positive by RT-PCR in both point-of-care (28/105 patients) and laboratory testing (45/277 patients), with sensitivity of 100% (identifying all patients with EVD as per the benchmark method), and a specificity of 92% (identifying patients who didn't have EVD).

Surprisingly, the findings also revealed that the standard altona RT-PCR test, under the conditions deployed in the field, was itself an imperfect reference standard. The altona RT-PCR assay failed to detect a small number of EVD cases that tested positive by both RDT and by an alternative RT-PCR test (Trombley), all with relatively low amounts of virus. Both the RDT and altona assays failed to detect a small number of EVD cases that tested positive by the Trombley test, all with very low amounts of virus. The authors caution that given the limitations of the performance of the altona RT-PCR reference test in patients with low levels of the virus in their blood, more research is needed to assess how the new RDT will perform in patients very early in the course of EVD.

According to co-author Dr Jana Broadhurst from Partners In Health, Boston, USA, "This test could have an immediate impact on patient care and infection control by reliably detecting patients well into their illness who are likely to be highly infectious. Earlier test results would improve triage of patients, enabling staff to focus on those most likely to have Ebola, and reducing the opportunity for infection of non-Ebola 'suspects'. Although the RDT requires refrigeration, this is already available in many health centres in endemic areas, particularly those that store vaccines and other medical products." [1]

Writing in a linked Comment, Dr Nahid Bhadelia from Boston University School of Medicine and Boston Medical Center, Boston, USA says, "[This study] validates the accuracy of the ReEBOV RDT in patients who are well into their illness...suggesting it could be used to triage this subset of patients if RT-PCR is not available, particularly in those with a high index of clinical suspicion for a differential diagnosis...the data presented provide crucial information about the point of-care function of this rapid diagnostic test, such as ease of use, quality of samples taken at the bedside, and the concordance with venous samples...the results raise caution regarding the performance of the widely used altona RT-PCR assay, which the authors suggest might have underperformed because of laboratory specific technical and performance factors."

This study was funded by a gift from the Abundance Foundation (Stephen Kahn). Corgenix provided the test kits.

[1] Quotes direct from authors and cannot be found in text of Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This is definitely a strong part of the release — the new test is compared to two manufacturers’ versions of the standard RT-PCR test. But the release doesn’t mention other diagnostic tests, including virus isolation and ELISA.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 22, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- In women who have had breast cancer, annual mammograms help detect second breast cancers, but they're not as effective in women who have never had the disease, new research suggests.

"Screening mammography does work well in women with a history of breast cancer, so they should continue to get their annual screening mammogram," said Diana Miglioretti, senior investigator at Group Health Research Institute in Seattle and a co-author of the new research. "But they also need to remain vigilant because they are at increased risk of cancers not detected on mammography that show up between mammograms."

In their study, published in the Feb. 23 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, Miglioretti and her colleagues found that false positives and interval cancers were both higher in women with a history of breast cancer than in those without such history. False positives are an initial finding of cancer that turns out to be benign based on additional testing. Interval cancers are those found between mammograms, either through additional tests or symptoms.

The researchers evaluated 12 years of data from 58,870 screening mammograms in 19,078 women with early-stage breast cancer and an equal number of mammograms in another 55,315 women who had never had breast cancer. The women were matched on such factors as age and breast density, a risk factor for cancer, with higher density increasing risk.

Within a year of the screening, 655 cancers were found in women with a breast cancer history and 342 in those without.

Mammograms had detected 76.5 percent of the cancers in women who had never had breast cancer and 65.4 percent in those who had previously had the disease. As for false positives, 1 percent of the women without a history of breast cancer were referred for biopsy but ended up being cancer-free, compared with 1.7 percent of those with a breast cancer history.

The interval cancer rate was 3.6 per 1,000 screenings in those with a history and 1.4 per 1,000 in those without, the investigators found.

Women with a history of breast cancer were also more likely to be called back for additional imaging or biopsies: 18 percent called back, compared with 8.3 percent of the others.

"I think it's mostly positive news," Miglioretti said. "Of the ones that are missed, most of them are early stage." It points to the need, she said, for women to remain vigilant about screening after their breast cancer treatment -- and to report any symptoms to their doctor immediately.

Dr. William Audeh, medical director of the Samuel Oschin Cancer Center and the Wasserman Breast Cancer Risk Reduction Program at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, described the findings as "not at all surprising." He reviewed the study but was not involved in it.

After surgery and radiation, he said, a woman's breasts have changed, and there is a greater chance that a radiologist will think that something is abnormal simply because of the changes. "That helps explain the false positives," Audeh said.

And though mammography did not catch all cancers in the women with a breast cancer history, the study still points out the value of the test, he said.

Robert Smith, director of cancer screening for the American Cancer Society, agreed.

"Despite poorer performance compared with women without a prior history of breast cancer, overall screening mammography was effective at detecting the majority of breast cancer in women with a [history] at an early favorable stage, with the majority of tumors being diagnosed as ductal carcinoma in situ or stage 1," Smith said.

A trend among cancer specialists, Audeh said, is to tailor follow-up for a woman who has had breast cancer. For those who have dense breasts and are younger than 50, for example, "we can alternate mammograms with breast MRIs," with one of the tests every six months, he said.

WomensHealth.gov has more on mammograms.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Satisfactory mostly because of the inclusion of the comments by Dr Audeh about MRI, which is really the only acceptable alternative to mammography for followup of breast cancer survivors, and it is still unclear how MRI and mammography should be used in concert.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have found evidence that a natural fruit extract is capable of dissolving calcium oxalate crystals, the most common component of human kidney stones. This finding could lead to the first advance in the treatment of calcium oxalate stones in 30 years.

Jeffrey Rimer, associate professor of chemical engineering at the University of Houston, was lead author of the study, published Aug. 8 in the online edition of Nature. The work offers the first evidence that the compound hydroxycitrate (HCA) is an effective inhibitor of calcium oxalate crystal growth that, under certain conditions, is actually able to dissolve these crystals. Researchers also explain how it works.

The findings are the result of a combination of experimental studies, computational studies and human studies, Rimer said.

Kidney stones are small, hard mineral deposits that form inside the kidneys, affecting up to 12 percent of men and seven percent of women. High blood pressure, diabetes and obesity can increase the risk, and the reported incidence is on the rise.

Preventive treatment has not changed much over the last three decades. Doctors tell patients who are at risk of developing stones to drink lots of water and avoid foods rich in oxalate, such as rhubarb, okra, spinach and almonds. They often recommend taking citrate (CA), in the form of potassium citrate, a supplement that can slow crystal growth, but some people are unable to tolerate the side effects.

The project grew out of preliminary work done by collaborator John Asplin, a nephrologist at Litholink Corporation, who suggested HCA as a possible treatment. HCA is chemically similar to CA and is also available as a dietary supplement.

"HCA shows promise as a potential therapy to prevent kidney stones," the researchers wrote. "HCA may be preferred as a therapy over CA (potassium citrate)."

In addition to Rimer and Asplin, authors on the paper include Giannis Mpourmpakis and his graduate student, Michael G. Taylor, of the University of Pittsburgh; Ignacio Granja of Litholink Corporation, and Jihae Chung, a UH graduate student working in Rimer's lab.

The head-to-head studies of CA and HCA determined that while both compounds inhibit the growth of calcium oxalate crystals, HCA was more potent and displayed unique qualities that are advantageous for the development of new therapies.

The team of researchers then used atomic force microscopy, or AFM, to study interactions between the crystals, CA and HCA under realistic growth conditions. According to Rimer, the technique allowed them to record crystal growth in real time with near-molecular resolution.

Chung noted that the AFM images recorded the crystal actually shrinking when exposed to specific concentrations of HCA. Rimer suspected the initial finding was an abnormality, as it is rare to see a crystal actually dissolve in highly supersaturated growth solutions. The most effective inhibitors reported in the literature simply stop the crystal from growing.

It turned out that Chung's initial finding was correct. Once they confirmed it is possible to dissolve crystals in supersaturated solutions, researchers then looked at reasons to explain why that happened.

Mpourmpakis and Taylor applied density functional theory (DFT) - a highly accurate computational method used to study the structure and properties of materials - to address how HCA and CA bind to calcium and to calcium oxalate crystals. They discovered HCA formed a stronger bond with crystal surfaces, inducing a strain that is seemingly relieved by the release of calcium and oxalate, leading to crystal dissolution.

HCA was also tested in human subjects, as seven people took the supplement for three days, allowing researchers to determine that HCA is excreted through urine, a requirement for the supplement to work as a treatment.

While Rimer said the research established the groundwork to design an effective drug, questions remain. Long-term safety, dosage and additional human trials are needed, he said.

"But our initial findings are very promising," he said. "If it works in vivo, similar to our trials in the laboratory, HCA has the potential to reduce the incidence rate of people with chronic kidney stone disease."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release provides a brief summary of common advice for kidney stone prevention, including drinking lots of water, avoiding certain foods, and often recommending citrate. The release does not discuss medical treatments for serious kidney stones, but then hydroxycitrate is being proposed only as an additional preventive treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She is among just a dozen patients with advanced leukemia to have received the experimental treatment, which was developed at the University of Pennsylvania. Similar approaches are also being tried at other centers, including the and in New York.

“Our goal is to have a cure, but we can’t say that word,” said Dr. Carl June, who leads the research team at the University of Pennsylvania. He hopes the new treatment will eventually replace bone-marrow transplantation, an even more arduous, risky and expensive procedure that is now the last hope when other treatments fail in leukemia and related diseases.

Three adults with chronic leukemia treated at the University of Pennsylvania have also had complete remissions, with no signs of disease; two of them have been well for more than two years, said Dr. David Porter. Four adults improved but did not have full remissions, and one was treated too recently to evaluate. A child improved and then relapsed. In two adults, the treatment did not work at all. The researchers were presenting their results on Sunday and Monday in at a meeting of the American Society of Hematology.

Despite the mixed results, cancer experts not involved with the research say it has tremendous promise, because even in this early phase of testing it has worked in seemingly hopeless cases. “I think this is a major breakthrough,” said Dr. Ivan Borrello, a cancer expert and associate professor of medicine at the School of Medicine.

Dr. John Wagner, the director of pediatric blood and marrow transplantation at the , called the Pennsylvania results “phenomenal” and said they were “what we’ve all been working and hoping for but not seeing to this extent.”

A major drug company, , is betting on the Pennsylvania team and has committed $20 million to building a research center on the university’s campus to bring the treatment to market.

Hervé Hoppenot, the president of Novartis Oncology, called the research “fantastic” and said it had the potential — if the early results held up — to revolutionize the treatment of leukemia and related blood cancers. Researchers say the same approach, reprogramming the patient’s immune system, may also eventually be used against like breast and .

To perform the treatment, doctors remove millions of the patient’s T-cells — a type of white blood cell — and insert new genes that enable the T-cells to kill cancer cells. The technique employs a disabled form of H.I.V. because it is very good at carrying genetic material into T-cells. The new genes program the T-cells to attack B-cells, a normal part of the immune system that turn malignant in leukemia.

The altered T-cells — called chimeric antigen receptor cells — are then dripped back into the patient’s veins, and if all goes well they multiply and start destroying the cancer.

The T-cells home in on a protein called CD-19 that is found on the surface of most B-cells, whether they are healthy or malignant.

A sign that the treatment is working is that the patient becomes terribly ill, with raging fevers and chills — a reaction that oncologists call “shake and bake,” Dr. June said. Its medical name is cytokine-release syndrome, or cytokine storm, referring to the natural chemicals that pour out of cells in the immune system as they are being activated, causing fevers and other symptoms. The storm can also flood the lungs and cause perilous drops in — effects that nearly killed Emma.

Steroids sometimes ease the reaction, but they did not help Emma. Her temperature hit 105. She wound up on a ventilator, unconscious and swollen almost beyond recognition, surrounded by friends and family who had come to say goodbye.

But at the 11th hour, a battery of blood tests gave the researchers a clue as to what might help save Emma: her level of one of the cytokines, interleukin-6 or IL-6, had shot up a thousandfold. Doctors had never seen such a spike before and thought it might be what was making her so sick.

Dr. June knew that a drug could lower IL-6 — his daughter takes it for . It had never been used for a crisis like Emma’s, but there was little to lose. Her oncologist, Dr. Stephan A. Grupp, ordered the drug. The response, he said, was “amazing.”

Within hours, Emma began to stabilize. She woke up a week later, on May 2, the day she turned 7; the intensive-care staff sang

Since then, the research team has used the same drug, tocilizumab, in several other patients.

In patients with lasting remissions after the treatment, the altered T-cells persist in the bloodstream, though in smaller numbers than when they were fighting the disease. Some patients have had the cells for years.

Dr. Michel Sadelain, who conducts similar studies at the Sloan-Kettering Institute, said: “These T-cells are living drugs. With a pill, you take it, it’s eliminated from your body and you have to take it again.” But T-cells, he said, “could potentially be given only once, maybe only once or twice or three times.”

The Pennsylvania researchers said they were surprised to find any big drug company interested in their work, because a new batch of T-cells must be created for each patient — a far cry from the familiar commercial strategy of developing products like or medicines, in which millions of people take the same drug.

But Mr. Hoppenot said Novartis was taking a different path with cancer drugs, looking for treatments that would have a big, unmistakable impact on a small number of patients. Such home-run drugs can be approved more quickly and efficiently, he said, with smaller studies than are needed for drugs with less obvious benefits.

But such drugs tend to be extremely expensive. A prime example is the Novartis drug Gleevec, which won rapid approval in 2001 for use against certain types of leukemia and gastrointestinal tumors. It can cost more than $5,000 a month, depending on the dosage.

Dr. June said that producing engineered T-cells costs about $20,000 per patient — far less than the cost of a bone-marrow transplant. Scaling up the procedure should make it even less expensive, he said, but he added, “Our costs do not include any profit margin, facility depreciation costs or other clinical care costs, and other research costs.”

The research is still in its early stages, and many questions remain. The researchers are not entirely sure why the treatment works, or why it sometimes fails. One patient had a remission after being treated only twice, and even then the reaction was so delayed that it took the researchers by surprise. For the patients who had no response whatsoever, the team suspects a flawed batch of T-cells. The child who had a temporary remission apparently relapsed because not all of her leukemic cells had the marker that was targeted by the altered T-cells.

It is not clear whether a patient’s body needs the altered T-cells forever. The cells do have a drawback: they destroy healthy B-cells as well as cancerous ones, leaving patients vulnerable to certain types of infections, so Emma and the other patients need regular treatments with immune globulins to prevent illness.

So far, her parents say, Emma seems to have taken it all in stride. She went back to school this year with her second-grade classmates, and though her grades are high and she reads about 50 books a month, she insists impishly that her favorite subjects are lunch and recess.

“It’s time for her to be a kid again and get her childhood back,” Mr. Whitehead said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions chemotherapy and bone marrow transplants as other treatment options for leukemia.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new form of therapy has for the first time been shown to improve the symptoms and behaviour of autistic children, offering a potential breakthrough in care for millions of families.

Six years after parents were trained to better understand and interact with their preschool children, researchers found that the therapy had moderated the behaviour of those who had been severely autistic, unresponsive or unable to speak.

A child who might have run around a supermarket squealing, heedless of their parent, putting objects in their mouth and pushing past shoppers to try to press the buttons at checkout, might instead wait in the queue and even help load the trolley, the research found.

The success of the preschool autism communication trial (Pact) has surprised even the researchers who designed it. There are no drugs to treat the condition, which typically sets in around the age of two, and many families have tried intensive training of their children by therapists, with mixed results. Pact instead trained the parents to help their children.

Prof Jonathan Green at the University of Manchester, who led the study published in the Lancet medical journal, said they had not found the cure for autism, but he and his team believed it had great potential and hoped it would be widely adopted.

“The advantage of this approach over a direct therapist-child intervention is that it has potential to affect the everyday life of the child,” he said. “Our findings are encouraging, as they represent an improvement in the core symptoms of autism previously thought very resistant to change.

“This is not a cure, in the sense that the children who demonstrated improvements will still show remaining symptoms to a variable extent, but it does suggest that working with parents to interact with their children in this way can lead to improvements in symptoms over the long term.”

The trial involved 152 children aged two to four. The families visited a clinic twice a week for six months, where parents were videoed with their children and a box of toys. Autistic children might not interact with their parents at all, but when eventually a child did offer a toy or made a noise that could be interpreted as a request, the incident was rerun on video and the parent encouraged to respond. If the child offered a toy, the parent reciprocated. If the child said a word, the parent repeated it and added something. The practice was repeated at home every day.

The therapy continued with the parents for the next six months with less intensity. At the end of the first year, the researchers could see the children had improved, but the most dramatic development was seen at the follow-up six years later. At the start of the trial, 50% of those in the control group who did not get the therapy and 55% of those who did were assessed as severely autistic. The children in the intervention group, though, got better. The proportion assessed as severe in the control group was 63% by the end of six years, compared with 46% in the intervention group.

Other experts applauded the work. “I can see why these researchers are excited,” said Dorothy Bishop, professor of developmental neuropsychology at the University of Oxford. “These results at follow-up are pretty consistent in showing the benefit of this early intervention for autism across a range of measures. My impression is that this is an intervention that reduces the severity of autistic symptoms, rather than curing autism. Nevertheless, for parents of children with autism, even a modest reduction would be worthwhile.”

Dr Max Davie, of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said it offered “a hugely cheering message for families”, while Uta Frith, emeritus professor of cognitive development at University College London, called it “a remarkably positive story, because the intervention itself was neither intensive nor invasive”.

The absence of any hope, as well as the very sudden regression in children’s behaviour, led many parents to believe in the discredited theory of Andrew Wakefield that the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine was the cause of autism.

“Parents commonly tell us that they fight for a diagnosis but when they finally get it the cupboard is bare, with little information or tailored support available to them,” said Dr James Cusack, director of science at the charity Autistica. “Too often, parents fall victim to the false claims of charlatans who prey on desperate families. These results look promising for the many thousands of parents who want to find early interventions for their children based on solid science.”

The researchers said children’s communication with their parents was improved at the end of the six years. The parents said there were also improvements in relations with other children, in social communication and in repetitive behaviours. But there was no change in child anxiety, challenging behaviours or depression in the autistic children and they would still need a lot of support while growing up.

About 1% of children and young people are affected by autistic spectrum disorder, which ranges from mild to severe. The lifetime costs to the UK, which include health, social care and education costs as well as productivity losses, are estimated at £1m to £1.5m per child and between $1.4m and $2.4m in the United States.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article noted that there are no cures or predictably effective treatments for severe autism, and that even a modest improvement in symptoms would be a boon. The training intervention is compared adequately to the traditional “direct therapist-child” type of treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A vaccine that blocks the high from heroin has just moved one step closer to reality.

The compound, created by chemists at the Scripps Research Institute, works in a way that’s similar to other vaccines. By introducing the immune system to a potential future enemy, antibodies against that invader are ready to attack when the time comes. In this case, the vaccine introduces a piece of the heroin molecule to the immune system. In response, this protective system manufactures antibodies to the drug, including the components that cause the high.

As a result, those molecules never reach the brain, preventing the euphoria that may have otherwise resulted. The absence of a high could help recovering heroin users resist the temptation to relapse, the researchers say.

The current study of the vaccine, published in the Journal of the American Chemical Society, follows eight years of laboratory research and studies in rodents that indicated the compound could neutralize heroin at different doses.

Here, the Scripps investigators, working with researchers at Virginia Commonwealth University, tested the vaccine on four rhesus monkeys. The animals were given three doses of the vaccine, which elicited a successful immune response that neutralized heroin given at varying doses. The high-blocking effects of the vaccine were strongest during the first month but continued for more than eight months. The researchers did not observe any harmful side effects from the intervention.

Related: Opioid epidemic and overdose deaths blamed on pharma in Ohio lawsuit

Two of the animals had been exposed to the vaccine seven months before for a similar pilot study. All four monkeys responded to the vaccine, but the two that were receiving it a second time had a stronger response, hinting that their immune systems were already primed with the “memory” of the compound.

Mark Thomas, who researches addiction at the University of Minnesota Health Sciences, says that a vaccine like this could help a former heroin abuser, “forge a path to abstinence.” Thomas, who was not involved with the study, explains that he was initially wary of the vaccine approach. He figured that a person who is dependent on drugs would find a replacement if heroin no longer caused a high.

“It’s not going to be a panacea,” says Thomas. But in light of the growing drug abuse epidemic, for which, he says, “we have so few tools,” adding a vaccine to the available treatments could help. “It’s an avenue that shows some promise.”

Although research on humans is not yet planned, study authors Kim Janda and Paul Bremer, chemists at the Scripps Research Institute, are encouraged about this next step. Other anti-heroin vaccines have proved ineffective for people, but this compound is the first to work in primates. “We believe this vaccine candidate will prove safe for human trials,” said Janda in a statement.

Importantly, this vaccine is designed to work against only heroin, not other opioids. Bremer and Janda now hope to find a company interested in conducting a human study so that the vaccine can become commercially available.

Related: CDC study finds opioid dependency begins within a few days of initial use
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The independent source’s quote explains that this would likely not become a panacea, and other treatment options would still be needed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Would a life without onions, garlic, apples and most bread be worth living?

For growing numbers of people suffering from digestive ills, the answer is "yes," at least for a while.

They are trying something called the low-FODMAP diet, an experimental eating plan developed in Australia and now getting some scientific backing and commercial buzz in the United States. The diet is aimed primarily at people with irritable bowel syndrome, a common condition in which abdominal pain and irregular bowel habits — with diarrhea, constipation or both — can wax and wane for years.

Followers are asked to eliminate, and then try to reintroduce, a long list of foods containing certain carbohydrates that might trigger gas, bloating, pain and diarrhea. FODMAP is an acronym for those carbohydrates: fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols.

The theory is that FODMAPs, found in many fruits, vegetables, grains, dairy foods and sweeteners, are poorly digested by susceptible people. The undigested carbohydrates can draw extra fluid into the digestive tract and end up in the colon, where they are “feasted upon” and fermented by gut microbes, leading to all sorts of misery, says Lauren Van Dam, a registered dietitian at the University of Michigan.

If giving up some foods might lessen that misery, many people are game, she says. “We have some patients that are literally housebound because they are worried they are going to have an accident or because they have terrible pain,” Van Dam says.

Barbara DeLancey, a 63-year-old registered nurse from Ann Arbor, says she was crippled by 10-times-a-day diarrhea when she agreed to try the diet a year ago. “I was resistant at first because it seemed so restrictive,” she says. She got teary-eyed at the grocery store, seeing all the food she could not have.

But eventually she learned she could tolerate and add back some favorites, including garlic and apples. She credits the diet, along with medication, with a big reduction in her symptoms, but says “it has not been a miracle cure.”

The diet has generated enough interest to prompt some food companies to introduce low-FODMAP products — hoping for a market surpassing that for gluten-free foods, according to some industry reports.

In 2014, IBS treatment guidelines from the American College of Gastroenterology said the diet showed promise, but that the quality of evidence was “very low."

Since then, several studies have strengthened the case for the diet, says guideline co-author Brian Lacy, a professor of medicine and chief of gastroenterology at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, N.H. Still, one study from Sweden showed no advantage over a less-restrictive dietary approach that eliminates fewer foods and stresses changes such as smaller, more frequent meals.

"The data are not overwhelming,” Lacy says. “But I think it’s a reasonable thing to try.”

The largest study so far, with 92 patients, was conducted at University of Michigan. It found that 52% of low-FODMAP patients and 41% of patients on a less-restrictive diet reported “adequate relief.” The difference was not statistically significant, says study co-author William Chey, a professor of gastroenterology. But low-FODMAP patients did get significantly better relief from pain and bloating and greater gains in mood, body image and overall quality of life, he says.

Medications, probiotics, fiber supplements and other approaches still have roles in treating IBS, and no one approach works for all patients, Chey and Lacy say.

It’s not known if the diet leads to any nutritional deficiencies or keeps working in the long run — especially for patients who get little support from doctors or dietitians.

“Physicians are largely administering the diet by giving patients sheets of paper with foods to exclude,” Chey says. Ideally, all would be referred to dietitians, Chey and Lacy agree. But few dietitians are trained in the diet, and insurers typically do not cover the visits, Lacy notes.

When patients do make their way to Kate Scarlata, a Boston area registered dietitian who specializes in the diet, the first thing she tells them is that it “is a dietary experiment. It’s a short-term learning diet.”

Van Dam does the same — explaining that after a few weeks she will help clients reintroduce foods one carbohydrate category at a time.

“Most are able to identify some high-FODMAP foods they can tolerate very well and some they can tolerate a little, but not in high portions every day,” she says. “Our goal is for them to be on the most varied, nutritious diet possible.”

The trickiest part is avoiding onions and garlic, the dietitians say. They teach clients strategies such as using (safe) garlic-infused oils, avoiding restaurant sauces and soups and topping salads with oil and vinegar.

High- and low-FODMAP food lists are updated frequently at websites and apps run by the University of Michigan and Monash University in Australia.

Here is a sampling from the Michigan site. (Note: the site receives funding from Nestle Health Science, which is marketing low-FODMAP products).

Foods to avoid

 Dairy: Milk, ice cream, yogurt, cottage and ricotta cheeses (except for lactose-free versions)

 Fruits: Apples, peaches, pears, watermelon, cherries, figs

 Vegetables: Garlic, onions, leeks, asparagus, cauliflower or large servings (more than ½ cup) of broccoli and Brussels sprouts

 Grains: Wheat (except in sourdough bread), rye, barley

 Legumes and nuts: Cashews, kidney beans, soy beans and soy milk

 Sweeteners: Honey, fructose, xylitol, agave syrup

Foods to include 

 Dairy and dairy substitutes: Kefir, almond milk, coconut milk

 Fruits: Bananas, blueberries, grapes, oranges, strawberries

 Vegetables: Carrots, green beans, bell peppers, potatoes, tomatoes

 Grains: Rice, oats, gluten-free bread (but check labels for high-FODMAP ingredients)

 Legumes and nuts: Peanuts, pecans, walnuts

 Sweeteners: Cane sugar, aspartame, stevia
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions a number of alternatives, including other existing diets that seem to compete favorably with the low-FODMAP diet, such as medication, probiotics, and fiber supplements. The story notes that these other strategies “still have roles in treating IBS”.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The new drugs are not without disadvantages. They cost much more than generic warfarin, roughly $8 a day instead of $1 or less. And Eliquis and Pradaxa require two pills a day, one in the morning and one in the evening, instead of the once-daily warfarin. The study included 18,201 people in 1,034 clinical sites in 39 countries and was consistent worldwide, the sponsors said. Although the study was financed by the drug makers, which raises the issue of bias, it met the gold standard for medical research as a randomized, double-blinded trial in which doctors and patients did not know who took which pill until the end. The drug acts on an enzyme that leads to blood clots.

Dr. Christopher B. Granger, the study’s lead author and a professor of medicine at Duke University, said, “I think this is a profound trial result that will have a major impact on the practice and management of patients with atrial fibrillation. It combines both greater efficacy in terms of prevention of stroke with a substantial reduction to bleeding risk, and that package is one that will be particularly compelling.”

Wall Street has high expectations, too. The companies’ stock soared after they released a brief statement about the stroke and bleeding benefits in June. Barclays Capital said the final results on Sunday were “perhaps the most anticipated R.&D. event of the year.”

“If everything checks out,” Jami Rubin of Goldman Sachs said in an interview, “that will confirm in our minds that Eliquis has potential to take a majority share of the $10 billion anticoagulation market.”

More than 2.6 million people have atrial fibrillation in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. As many as 12 million people will have it by 2020 because of an aging population with longer life expectancy. The arrhythmia in the left upper chamber of the heart can cause slow blood flow and clots, raising the risk of stroke by four to six times on average, the government says.

As many as half of people with the condition, however, are untreated, by varying estimates. Warfarin, a cheap 60-year-old drug sold generically under the brand name Coumadin, requires frequent blood tests to monitor its active level and interacts with some other drugs and foods, including leafy greens. There is great appeal and demand for new drugs that do not vary so much and deliver the same stroke-preventing benefits.

The first new drug, Pradaxa, from the German drug maker Boehringer Ingelheim, was introduced in the United States last fall. In the first seven months on market, about four in five cardiologists and two in five primary care doctors had prescribed it to more than 250,000 people, Wa’el Hashad, Boehringer’s vice president for cardiovascular marketing, said in an interview last week.

Pradaxa inhibits thrombin, an enzyme in clot formation. Other emerging drugs block a related enzyme known as Factor Xa.

Xarelto, from Bayer and Johnson & Johnson, approved by the F.D.A. in July to prevent clots in hip and knee replacement surgeries, goes to an F.D.A. review panel for atrial fibrillation on Sept. 8.

Eliquis is scheduled to be submitted for F.D.A. review later this year. Its New York-based makers are marketing powerhouses with the top two best-selling drugs in the world, Lipitor from Pfizer and Plavix from Bristol-Myers Squibb. Patents on those drugs expire in the next year, making Eliquis even more important to their businesses.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story compared the study drug with the long time treatment, warfarin, as well as mentioning a newly approved medication and another medication in the approval process.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers Say Common Test For Prostate Cancer May Not Work

More bad news on the prostate cancer front: A widely used test that's supposed to help doctors and patients predict the outcome of most prostate cancers is basically worthless.

That's according to a study just published in the journal CANCER.

The new study discrediting the test, coupled with persistent questions about how useful prostate screening is for most men anyway, add up to a whole lot of discussion points patients should take to their doctors.

The test in question is called "clinical staging." It relies on certain signs doctors use to classify how advanced an individual patient's cancer is – that is, what stage it's in. It includes criteria like whether the doctor can feel a nodule through rectal examination, and whether a tumor is detected through a test called trans-rectal ultrasound.

Ten years ago, the American College of Surgeons Commission on Cancer decreed that doctors should use these types of clinical staging tests to help decide how to treat cancers.

"Our findings question the utility of our current staging system for localized prostate cancer," says Dr. Adam Reese of the University of California at San Francisco, lead author of the study.

To begin with, doctors err in using this prostate test 35 percent of the time. When these errors occur, the study says, doctors most often conclude the cancer is less serious than it really is.

But even when researchers allowed for these errors, they found the test doesn't predict how patients ultimately do.

Dr. Gerald Andriole of Washington University, who was not involved in the study, told Shots he wasn't surprised by the results. Recently, he says, urologists "have begun to realize these criteria are not adequate. But this is the first study that quantifies the magnitude of the inadequacy."

Even so, Andriole says, the findings may not make too much difference in the real world. Before treatment recommendations are made, doctors put most prostate tumors through other tests, too, like the Gleason score, and they look at the percentage of biopsies that are positive for cancer cells.

"I use all those parameters to tell a patient what his chances of a good outcome are," Andriole says.

Still, both study author Reese and Andriole say the new study may serve as a wakeup call to those who are over-relying on the clinical staging system.

They say what's really needed is a set of tests that classify prostate tumors by what genes are turned on or off in the cells.

Once this is sorted out, doctors treating prostate cancer will be less like the blind men who try to guess what kind of creature they're dealing with when they grasp the elephant's trunk or tail.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story included one expert’s perspective that the new study questioning the value of clinical staging “may not make much difference in the real world” because other tests are used like the Gleason score and the percentage of biopsies that are positive for cancer cells.  So some attempt was made to put this into the context of other tests that are used.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dermatologists will soon get some high-tech help deciding which suspicious-looking moles should be removed and checked for melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer.

The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a first-of-its-kind device, called MelaFind, that makes detailed, digital images of skin growths and uses a computer to analyze them for signs of cancer, offering a sort of second opinion to doctors. The device is approved only for dermatologists and only for use on growths that don't have obvious signs of cancer but still have one or two worrisome traits.

The hope is to find more melanomas sooner. Nearly all patients diagnosed with early-stage melanoma can be treated and cured, but 85 percent of patients with late-stage melanoma die from it within five years.

More than 70,000 people in the U.S. will be diagnosed with melanoma this year, and 16 percent are diagnosed only after the disease has spread to other parts of the body, according to estimates from the National Institutes of Health.

To diagnose the disease, doctors decide which moles to remove and biopsy using an entirely visual set of guidelines involving size, shape and color. Most dermatologists easily spot late-stage lesions that have obvious signs of cancer, including irregular edges, uneven color and a width greater than 6 millimeters. But many others are tough calls.

"Every day patients come in with 20 moles on their back and the dilemma is, which ones are suspicious and need to be biopsied?" said Dr. David Pariser, former president of the American Academy of Dermatology. "The diagnosis of melanoma is the most serious one a dermatologist makes, and we have sleepless nights worrying about it," said Pariser, who consulted for the device's maker, Mela Sciences Inc. of Irvington, N.Y., on its presentation to FDA.

The device's handheld attachment, about the size of a blow dryer, emits light that penetrates below the surface of the skin, taking multicolored images that reflect the depth and shape of skin growths. A computer compares these to a database of 10,000 archived images and recommends whether a biopsy should be done.

In a company-sponsored study published last year involving around 1,300 patients, some with multiple growths, doctors reported that MelaFind correctly suggested biopsies on 125 of 127 melanomas that doctors had removed. MelaFind correctly identified about 10 percent of non-cancerous growths, which was better than doctors in the study who were correct less than 4 percent of the time, on average. The study was published in the Archives of Dermatology.

The company's study was not intended to show that screening with the device saves lives, only that it can help improve a doctor's ability to spot melanoma.

For now, experts say MelaFind will help dermatologists make better decisions on which moles to remove.

"There is no such thing as 100 percent certainty in medicine," said Dr. George Elias, a melanoma expert at Georgetown's Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center who had no ties to the company or the device.

"Ultimately it's the responsibility of the dermatologist to use his clinical judgment to make the best decision. This machine is there to help him, not replace him."

Elias voted with the majority of an FDA panel that narrowly endorsed the device last year.

Dermatologists say it's too early to tell whether MelaFind will lead to fewer unnecessary biopsies.

"A biopsy takes a few minutes in my hands, so if there's an issue with any lesion we will always biopsy, whether we have a MelaFind picture or not," said Dr. Leonard Goldberg, a dermatologist at the Texas Medical Center and vice president of the Skin Cancer Foundation, a disease awareness group that accepts donations from makers of sunscreen.

MelaFind underwent a contentious, years-long review by the Food and Drug Administration, which initially rejected the device and concluded it could "potentially cause more harm than good."

Regulators worried that the device could give physicians a false sense of certainty, leading to fewer biopsies. Another concern was that doctors could misinterpret the device's feedback, particularly error messages when a mole cannot be scanned. About 8 percent of growths scanned in the company study came back as "unevaluable."

At a meeting last fall, FDA scientists said Mela Sciences had not shown how its device would influence day-to-day decisions by doctors. The agency also worried about its use by general doctors not accustomed to identifying suspicious skin moles. Despite these concerns, the panel of advisers narrowly backed the overall safety and efficacy of the device in a 8-7 vote.

Regulators said this week that they ultimately approved the device after Mela Sciences agreed to limit its use to board-certified dermatologists who undergo a specialized training course.

"The device is only good for certain lesions, and that's why you have to be a dermatologist to be able to classify and categorize those lesions appropriately," said Christy Foreman, director of FDA's Office of Device Evaluation.

Foreman said an FDA-required follow-up study would help determine how much of a benefit MelaFind represents for patients.

"This device represents new technology. At the end of the day I don't know that this will be the best technology out there, but it is a step forward to allow continued innovation in this area," Foreman said.

Don't expect to see a MelaFind machine at your next doctor's appointment. The company plans to bring them next year to just 200 dermatologists on the East coast, all of whom must undergo company training before they can begin using the device.

Doctors will pay a one-time fee of $7,500 to lease and receive training on the device. Patients will pay $150 out of pocket for a MelaFind scan, which analysts say may limit use to more affluent patients who are willing to pay extra for the latest medical care. Mela Sciences does not plan to ask insurers to cover the device until several years from now, after it is more widely used.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story compares the device to clinicians throughout, and shows clearly that dermatologists are still the ones with the best authority in this area.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Blood test may identify gestational diabetes risk in first trimester

NIH analysis suggests early screening could allow for lifestyle changes before condition develops.

A blood test conducted as early as the 10th week of pregnancy may help identify women at risk for gestational diabetes, a pregnancy-related condition that poses potentially serious health risks for mothers and infants, according to researchers at the National Institutes of Health and other institutions. The study appears in Scientific Reports.

Gestational diabetes occurs only in pregnancy and results when the level of blood sugar, or glucose, rises too high. Gestational diabetes increases the mother’s chances for high blood pressure disorders of pregnancy and the need for cesarean delivery, and the risk for cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes later in life. For infants, gestational diabetes increases the risk for large birth size. Unless they have a known risk factor, such as obesity, women typically are screened for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.

In the current study, researchers evaluated whether the HbA1c test (also called the A1C test), commonly used to diagnose type 2 diabetes, could identify signs of gestational diabetes in the first trimester of pregnancy. The test approximates the average blood glucose levels over the previous 2 or 3 months, based on the amount of glucose that has accumulated on the surface of red blood cells. According to the authors, comparatively few studies have examined whether the HbA1c test could help identify the risk for gestational diabetes, and these studies have been limited to women already at high risk for the condition. The test is not currently recommended to diagnose gestational diabetes at any point in pregnancy.

The researchers analyzed records from the NICHD Fetal Growth Study, a large observational study that recruited more than 2,000 low-risk pregnant women from 12 U.S. clinical sites between 2009 and 2013. The researchers compared HbA1c test results from 107 women who later developed gestational diabetes to test results from 214 women who did not develop the condition. Most of the women had tests at four intervals during pregnancy: early (weeks 8-13), middle (weeks 16-22 and 24-29) and late (weeks 34-37).

Women who went on to develop gestational diabetes had higher HbA1c levels (an average of 5.3 percent), compared to those without gestational diabetes (an average HbA1c level of 5.1 percent). Each .1 percent increase in HbA1c above 5.1 percent in early pregnancy was associated with a 22-percent higher risk for gestational diabetes.

In middle pregnancy, HbA1c levels declined for both groups. However, HbA1c levels increased in the final third of pregnancy, which is consistent with the decrease in sensitivity to insulin that often occurs during this time period.

“Our results suggest that the HbA1C test potentially could help identify women at risk for gestational diabetes early in pregnancy, when lifestyle changes may be more effective in reducing their risk,” said the study’s senior author, Cuilin Zhang, Ph.D., of the Epidemiology Branch at NIH’s Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

Exercise and a healthy diet may lower blood glucose levels during pregnancy. If these measures are not successful, physicians may prescribe insulin to bring blood glucose under control.

The authors noted that further studies are needed to confirm whether measuring HbA1c levels in early pregnancy could determine a woman’s later risk for gestational diabetes. Similarly, research is needed to determine whether lowering HbA1c with lifestyle changes, either in early pregnancy or before pregnancy, could reduce the risk for the condition.

About the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD): NICHD conducts and supports research in the United States and throughout the world on fetal, infant and child development; maternal, child and family health; reproductive biology and population issues; and medical rehabilitation. For more information, visit https://www.nichd.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There currently is no standardized screening test for identifying gestational diabetes in the first trimester. Earlier research into the usefulness of HbA1c testing for gestational diabetes in early pregnancy have been limited to high risk groups.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — DALLAS – Feb. 25, 2016 – A 59-year-old heart patient with dangerously high levels of cholesterol that could not be adequately reduced by statin drugs now has near-normal cholesterol levels, thanks to a new class of drugs that grew out of work done by UT Southwestern Medical Center researchers.

Two of these drugs, in a category known as PCSK9 inhibitors, were approved by the Food and Drug Administration last summer for use by some individuals with extremely high cholesterol levels.

“If you take the core patients who are at highest risk, it makes you appreciate how important this drug class is,” said Dr. Amit Khera, Director of the Preventive Cardiology Program and Associate Professor of Internal Medicine at UT Southwestern.

Frank Brown of Dallas, grandfather of six and the owner of Frank’s Wrecker Service in Dallas, has familial hypercholesterolemia, an inherited condition that causes high levels of cholesterol, especially low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol or “bad cholesterol.” High levels of LDL cholesterol are strongly associated with heart disease.

Mr. Brown, with a history of two heart attacks, had been aggressively treated with multiple drugs to reduce his cholesterol levels, but they remained stubbornly high.

“When I first met Mr. Brown, he had a strong family history of heart disease, he had a cholesterol level that was ridiculously high with an LDL of 384, and he was having chest pains,” said Dr. Amit Khera, who is Mr. Brown’s cardiologist.

Dr. Khera, who holds the Dallas Heart Ball Chair in Hypertension and Heart Disease at UT Southwestern, was treating Mr. Brown with three cholesterol-lowering medications: a statin, which is a class of drugs that works by blocking a substance the body needs to make cholesterol; ezetimibe, a drug that blocks absorption of cholesterol in the intestine; and colesevelam, which sequesters bile acids. Even with this trio of medicines, Mr. Brown’s LDL cholesterol level hovered around 200.

The two PCSK9 inhibitors approved by the FDA last year were developed as a result of research done by UT Southwestern geneticists Dr. Helen Hobbs and Dr. Jonathan Cohen. Using data from the Dallas Heart Study, a population-based study that gathered extensive medical data on 6,000 Dallas residents, the two researchers showed that certain mutations to the gene that codes for the protein PCSK9 lead to low levels of cholesterol in the blood.

Further,Dr. Hobbs and Dr. Cohen found a woman who had inherited not one, but two of these mutations in the PCSK9 gene – one mutation from each parent. This woman had stunningly low levels of LDL cholesterol. While anything below 100 is considered good, her LDL cholesterol level was just 14. Crucially, this woman was in good health, suggesting that therapies aimed at blocking PCSK9 would not only be effective, but also safe.

Their research led to the development by drug companies of evolocumab and alirocumab, the two approved PCSK9 inhibitors, which are delivered by monthly or semimonthly injections.

Dr. Hobbs, Director of the Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, holds the Eugene McDermott Distinguished Chair for the Study of Human Growth and Development, the Philip O’Bryan Montgomery, Jr., M.D. Distinguished Chair in Developmental Biology, and the 1995 Dallas Heart Ball Chair in Cardiology Research. Dr. Cohen, Professor of Internal Medicine and with the McDermott Center, holds the C. Vincent Prothro Distinguished Chair in Human Nutrition Research. Mr. Brown had been part of a clinical trial testing the safety and effectiveness of one of the new PCSK9 inhibitors and, when the drugs were approved, Dr. Khera began working to get Mr. Brown approved by his insurance to be on the new regimen.

“In the world of cholesterol patients, most are well-controlled with statins, and they should stay on those,” said Dr. Khera. “But Mr. Brown is the perfect patient for PCSK9 inhibitors. We knew he could tolerate it because he’d been in a clinical trial, he knew how to administer the injections, and he was very high-risk. We’d exhausted the other options in trying to control his cholesterol.”

Two months after he started his biweekly injections of the new drug, Mr. Brown’s LDL cholesterol level was down to 111 – not quite normal, which is 100 or less – but an almost 50 percent reduction from the level it had been for years.

It’s a good sign for Mr. Brown, who looks forward to many more years of running his business, watching Dallas Cowboys games, and spending time with his grandchildren.

“There are many more Frank Browns out there – patients who can’t control their cholesterol with the standard drugs,” said Dr. Khera. “It’s wonderful to have this option to offer this special set of patients.” About UT Southwestern Medical CenterUT Southwestern, one of the premier academic medical centers in the nation, integrates pioneering biomedical research with exceptional clinical care and education. The institution’s faculty includes many distinguished members, including six who have been awarded Nobel Prizes since 1985. The faculty of almost 2,800 is responsible for groundbreaking medical advances and is committed to translating science-driven research quickly to new clinical treatments. UT Southwestern physicians provide medical care in about 80 specialties to more than 100,000 hospitalized patients and oversee approximately 2.2 million outpatient visits a year.

This news release is available on our home page atwww.utsouthwestern.edu/home/news/index.html

To automatically receive news releases from UT Southwestern via email, subscribe at www.utsouthwestern.edu/receivenews
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does mention three other drugs that are designed to reduce cholesterol levels. However, the release would have been stronger if it had also mentioned the importance of diet, exercise and other lifestyle factors that can significantly influence cholesterol levels.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lauren Pestikas sits as she receives an infusion of the drug ketamine during a 45-minute session at an outpatient clinic in Chicago on July 25, 2018. Pestikas struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before starting ketamine treatments earlier in the year. (AP Photo/Teresa Crawford)

CHICAGO (AP) — It was launched decades ago as an anesthetic for animals and people, became a potent battlefield pain reliever in Vietnam and morphed into the trippy club drug Special K.

Now the chameleon drug ketamine is finding new life as an unapproved treatment for depression and suicidal behavior. Clinics have opened around the United States promising instant relief with their “unique” doses of ketamine in IVs, sprays or pills. And desperate patients are shelling out thousands of dollars for treatment often not covered by health insurance, with scant evidence on long-term benefits and risks.

Chicago preschool teacher Lauren Pestikas long struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before trying ketamine earlier this year.

The price tag so far is about $3,000, but “it’s worth every dime and penny,” said the 36-year-old.

Pestikas said she feels much better for a few weeks after each treatment, but the effects wear off and she scrambles to find a way to pay for another one.

For now, ketamine has not received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treating depression, though doctors can use it for that purpose.

Ketamine has been around since the 1960s and is widely used as an anesthesia drug during surgery because it doesn’t suppress breathing. Compared to opioids such as morphine, ketamine isn’t as addictive and doesn’t cause breathing problems. And some studies have shown that ketamine can ease symptoms within hours for the toughest cases.

Its potential effects on depression were discovered in animal experiments in the late 1980s and early 1990s showing that glutamate, a brain chemical messenger, might play a role in depression, and that drugs including ketamine that target the glutamate pathway might work as antidepressants.

Conventional antidepressants like Prozac target serotonin, a different chemical messenger, and typically take weeks to months to kick in — a lag that can cause severely depressed patients to sink deeper into despair.

Ketamine’s potential for almost immediate if temporary relief is what makes it so exciting, said Dr. Jennifer Vande Voort, a Mayo Clinic psychiatrist who has used ketamine to treat depression patients since February.

“We don’t have a lot of things that provide that kind of effect. What I worry about is that it gets so hyped up,” she said.

The strongest studies suggest it’s most useful and generally safe in providing short-term help for patients who have not benefited from antidepressants. That amounts to about one-third of the roughly 300 million people with depression worldwide.

“It truly has revolutionized the field,” changing scientists’ views on how depression affects the brain and showing that rapid relief is possible, said Yale University psychiatrist Dr. Gerard Sanacora, who has done research for or consulted with companies seeking to develop ketamine-based drugs.

But to become standard depression treatment, he said, much more needs to be known.

Last year, Sanacora co-authored an American Psychiatric Association task force review of ketamine treatment for mood disorders that noted the benefits but said “major gaps” remain in knowledge about long-term effectiveness and safety. Most studies have been small, done in research settings and not in the real world.

When delivered through an IV, ketamine can cause a rapid increase in heart rate and blood pressure that could be dangerous for some patients. Ketamine also can cause hallucinations that some patients find scary.

“There are some very real concerns,” Sanacora said. “We do know this drug can be abused, so we have to be very careful about how this is developed.”

Dr. Rahul Khare, an emergency medicine specialist in Chicago, first learned about ketamine’s other potential benefits a decade ago from a depressed and anxious patient he was preparing to sedate to fix a repeat dislocated shoulder.

“He said, ‘Doc, give me what I got last time. For about three weeks after I got it I felt so much better,’” Khare recalled.

Khare became intrigued and earlier this year began offering ketamine for severe depression at an outpatient clinic he opened a few years ago. He also joined the American Society for Ketamine Physicians, formed a year ago representing about 140 U.S. doctors, nurses, psychologists and others using ketamine for depression or other nonapproved uses.

There are about 150 U.S. ketamine clinics, compared with about 20 three years ago, said society co-founder Dr. Megan Oxley.

Khare said the burgeoning field “is like a new frontier” where doctors gather at meetings and compare notes. He has treated about 50 patients with depression including Pestikas. They’re typically desperate for relief after failing to respond to other antidepressants. Some have lost jobs and relationships because of severe depression, and most find that ketamine allows them to function, Khare said.

Typical treatment at his clinic involves six 45-minute sessions over about two weeks, costing $550 each. Some insurers will pay about half of that, covering Khare’s office visit cost. Patients can receive “booster” treatments. They must sign a four-page consent form that says benefits may not be long-lasting, lists potential side effects, and in bold letters states that the treatment is not government-approved.

At a recent session, Pestikas’s seventh, she leaned back on a reclining white examining-room chair as a nurse hooked her up to a heart and blood pressure monitor. She grimaced as a needle was slipped into the top of her left palm. Khare reached up with a syringe to inject a small dose of ketamine into an IV bag hanging above the chair, then dimmed the lights, pulled the window curtains and asked if she had questions and was feeling OK.

Pestikas listened to music on her iPhone and watched psychedelic videos. She said it was like “a controlled acid trip” with pleasant hallucinations. The trip ends soon after the IV is removed, but Pestikas said she feels calm and relaxed the rest of the day, and that the mood boost can last weeks.

Studies suggest that a single IV dose of ketamine far smaller than used for sedation or partying can help many patients gain relief within about four hours and lasting nearly a week or so.

Exactly how ketamine works is unclear, but one idea is that by elevating glutamate levels, ketamine helps nerve cells re-establish connections that were disabled by depression, said ketamine expert Dr. Carlos Zarate, chief of experimental therapies at the National Institute of Mental Health.

A small Stanford University study published in August suggested that ketamine may help relieve depression by activating the brain’s opioid receptors.

Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Allergan are among drug companies developing ketamine-like drugs for depression. Janssen leads the effort with its nasal spray esketamine. The company filed a new drug application in September.

Meanwhile, dozens of studies are underway seeking to answer some of the unknowns about ketamine including whether repeat IV treatments work better for depression and if there’s a way to zero in on which patients are most likely to benefit.

Until there are answers, Zarate of the mental health institute said ketamine should be a last-resort treatment for depression after other methods have failed.

The Associated Press Health & Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned conventional antidepressants that “target serotonin, a different chemical messenger, and typically take weeks to months to kick in — a lag that can cause severely depressed patients to sink deeper into despair.”
It also quoted an expert who said “ketamine should be a last-resort treatment for depression after other methods have failed.”
The story could have mentioned other medications to treat depression as well as psychotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 5, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Scientists report another step in the use of stem cells to help treat people with debilitating heart failure.

In an early study of 27 patients, Japanese researchers used patients' own muscle stem cells to create a "patch" that was placed on the heart.

Over the next year, the patients generally showed small improvements in their symptoms -- including the ability to walk without becoming breathless and fatigued.

However, experts cautioned that while the results are encouraging, there's a lot of work left ahead before stem cells can be used to treat heart failure.

"They've shown that this approach is feasible," said Dr. Eiran Gorodeski, a heart failure specialist at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio.

But it's not clear whether the stem-cell tactic was actually effective, said Gorodeski, who was not involved in the study.

That's because the study didn't include a comparison group that did not receive stem cells.

So it's possible, Gorodeski explained, that the "modest" symptom improvements would have happened anyway. All of the patients were on standard medications, and some had heart devices implanted.

Stem cells are primitive cells that mature into the various cells that make up the body's tissues. In the past 15 years or so, scientists have tried to use the cells to help repair some of the damage seen in heart failure.

Heart failure is a progressive disease where the heart muscle is too damaged to efficiently pump blood throughout the body. It often arises after a heart attack.

Symptoms of heart failure include fatigue, breathlessness and swelling in the limbs. The condition cannot be cured, although medications and implantable devices can treat the symptoms.

In the new study, the researchers used stem cells from the patients' own thigh muscle to create a patch they placed on the heart.

That's in contrast to many past studies, where researchers have injected stem cells -- often from patients' bone marrow -- into the heart.

The patch tactic could have some advantages, said senior researcher Dr. Yoshiki Sawa, of Osaka University.

He said animal research suggests that cells in sheet form survive for a longer period, compared to injections.

To test the safety of the approach, Sawa's team recruited 27 patients who had debilitating symptoms despite standard heart failure therapies. The scientists extracted stem cells from each patient's thigh muscle, then cultured the cells so that they formed a sheet.

The sheet was placed on each patient's heart.

The tactic appeared safe, the researchers said, and there were signs of symptom improvements over the next six months to a year.

Why would stem cells from the thigh muscle affect the heart? It's not clear, Sawa acknowledged.

The stem cells don't grow into new heart muscle cells. Instead, Sawa explained, they seem to produce chemicals called cytokines that can promote new blood vessel growth in damaged areas of the heart. The theory, he said, is that "hibernating" cells in the heart muscle can then function better.

Still, it's too soon to know what the new findings mean, said Gorodeski.

This type of trial, called phase 1, is designed to look at the safety and feasibility of a therapy, Gorodeski said. It takes later-phase trials -- where some patients receive the treatment, and others do not -- to prove that a therapy actually works.

Those trials are underway, Sawa said.

Other studies are further along. Last year, researchers reported on a trial testing infusions of stem cells taken from the bone marrow of patients with severe heart failure.

Patients who received the therapy were less likely to die or be hospitalized over the next year, versus those given standard treatment only. But the study was small, and the stem cells had only a minor impact on patients' heart function.

So it's not clear why the stem-cell patients fared better, Gorodeski said.

For now, he stressed, all stem-cell therapies for heart failure remain experimental.

"There's no cell therapy that we can offer patients right now," Gorodeski said.

The message for patients, he added, is that heart failure can be treated, and researchers are looking for "innovative" ways to improve that treatment.

The study was published April 5 in the Journal of the American Heart Association.

The American Heart Association has more on heart failure.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This is a close one. The story doesn’t discuss alternative treatments, but it does make clear that the people who participated in the study “had debilitating symptoms despite standard heart failure therapies.” In other words, it makes clear that this was done after standard-of-care therapeutic options had been exhausted. That’s enough to merit a pass here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Larry Holzman — avid mountain-biker, skier and guitarist in a band — plays hard. And he didn't want to give it all up due to a "spot of pain" in his elbow. "This wasn't a traumatic injury," explains Holzman. It came on gradually and escalated from annoying to excruciating over the course of a couple months.

His physical therapist quickly diagnosed it as tennis elbow. Turns out, lots of people who develop tennis elbow haven't played the game in years. And some have never even picked up a racket.

"If you're having pain on the elbow on the outside of your elbow when you grip a coffee mug or pick something up with your hands — that is almost always tennis elbow," says Barton Bishop, a physical therapist at Sport & Spine Rehab in Rockville, Md.

Pain from repetitive overuse of the tendons and muscle that run from the wrist to the elbow can come from all sorts of activities. It usually happens when people grip things too hard or too long.

In addition to tennis players, Bishop sees the injury in gardeners with their shovels and trowels; painters with brushes; and golfers with clubs. In Larry's case, it was a combination of all his hobbies: from squeezing the handlebars on his bike, to lifting weights and playing in a band.

"Gripping guitars and base drums ... can really affect people's elbows," says Bishop.

When Holzman came to Sport & Spine for help, Bishop put him through a series of traditional treatments including ultrasound, strengthening and stretching exercises, cross-friction massage, heat and ice.

He also added a series of eccentric wrist exercises using a rubber bar called the Thera-Band FlexBar — ideal for the injured muscle in tennis elbow. The exercises enable the muscle to lengthen and contract simultaneously. And the FlexBar makes it simple to do this kind of stretch.

"He's actually getting his muscle to work," says Bishop. "It's a perfect exercise."

Bishop says the benefit of the FlexBar, which costs between $16 and $33, over traditional hand weights is that it helps people strengthen without recreating the symptoms. He says weights can overwork the muscle and sometimes leads to more pain.

A study by researchers at the Nicholas Institute of Sports Medicine and Athletic Trauma, Lenox Hill Hospital in New York demonstrated this benefit. They found that adding the eccentric wrist extension exercises using the FlexBar was effective at improving strength and decreasing pain in patients with tennis elbow. (Performance Health Brands, maker of Thera-Band, provided the FlexBars for the study but did not fund it.)

Not all physical therapists are sold on the FlexBar. "There's a variety of methods you can use to achieve the strengthening technique," says Jason Grandeo, a physical therapist at Body Dynamics, Inc. in Arlington, Va.

But he understands the appeal: The FlexBar is easy to use and you can do it at home.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions other treatment approaches to tennis elbow, including ultrasound, strengthening and stretching exercises, cross-friction massage, heat and ice.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO — Insulin pumps are used by tens of thousands of teenagers worldwide with Type 1 diabetes, but they can be risky and have been linked to injuries and even deaths, a review by federal regulators finds.

Parents should be vigilant in watching their children’s use of the pumps, researchers from the Food and Drug Administration wrote. They didn’t advise against using the devices. But they called for more study to address safety concerns in teens and even younger children who use the popular pumps.

The federal review of use by young people over a decade found 13 deaths and more than 1,500 injuries connected with the pumps. At times, the devices malfunctioned, but other times, teens were careless or took risks, the study authors wrote.

Some teens didn’t know how to use the pumps correctly, dropped them or didn’t take good care of them. There were two possible suicide attempts by teens who gave themselves too much insulin, according to the analysis.

The pumps are popular because they allow young people to live more normal lives, giving themselves insulin discreetly in public. And they’re a growing segment of diabetes care, with $1.3 billion in annual sales worldwide, said Kelly Close, a San Francisco-based editor of a patient newsletter. She said 100,000 teenagers might be using them.

The pumps are used for those with Type 1 diabetes, which accounts for about 5 to 10 percent of all diabetes cases and used to be called “juvenile diabetes.” The more common form is Type 2, which is often linked to obesity and more often affects adults.

In the FDA study, appearing in the May issue of the journal Pediatrics, the reports of adverse events and deaths in adolescents using the pumps occurred from 1996 to 2005.

While some teenagers want to switch from insulin injections to pump therapy to gain more flexibility in their lives, doctors said device problems such as a blocked tube can lead quickly to dangerous episodes of high blood sugar.

Dr. Christina Luedke of Children’s Hospital Boston said she carefully screens teenagers and their families before prescribing a pump. She has refused it for some young patients.

“Without appropriate glucose monitoring, the pumps can increase the risk of getting sick more quickly compared to injections,” Luedke said. However, she said, proper use can improve glucose control.

Teenagers also have problems keeping their diabetes under control with multiple daily insulin injections, doctors and manufacturers said.

“It is a constant struggle for a patient who is an adolescent to stay in control of any therapy,” said Steve Sabicer, a spokesman for Minneapolis-based Medtronic Inc., which makes the top-selling insulin pump. The company stands behind the product’s safety and “the many years of clinical evidence that support the benefits of insulin pump therapy,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Multiple daily insulin injections, the standard most widely used treatment option for Type I diabetes, is appropriately referenced. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Individuals who have heart disease are often advised to take a low-dose aspirin every day to prevent blood clots that cause heart attacks and most strokes.

Some healthy men and women should take aspirin every day to ward off heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer. That’s the final recommendation from the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) after more than a year of study and lively public comment. The recommendations were published Monday in the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Aspirin has been used for more than 100 years to ease fever and relieve pain. Many people with heart disease are advised to take a low-dose aspirin every day to prevent blood clots, the cause of heart attacks and most strokes. That’s called secondary prevention. Whether healthy individuals should do the same thing, a strategy called primary prevention, is controversial.

The FDA is against taking aspirin for primary prevention, arguing that the risks, including bleeding in the brain and stomach, outweigh the benefits. The USPSTF recommends it for men and women aged 50 to 59 who are at risk of heart attack or stroke. The dueling recommendations kicked off a lively debate in the medical community.

Despite the clashing opinions, experts agree on two things: Aspirin should be just one part of an overall strategy to prevent heart attack and stroke that includes weight control, healthy eating, exercising, and not smoking. And don’t take aspirin without talking with your doctor.

Beyond that, here’s a sample of expert opinions.

Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo: Task force says some will benefit

Charles H. Hennekens: Balance between benefits and harms still hazy

Deepak L. Bhatt: No easy way to identify who will benefit or be harmed

Cynthia Boyd and Milo Puhan: Add personal preferences to the equation

Freek W.A. Verheugt: Even doctors are confused

By Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo: Taking aspirin is easy, but deciding whether or not to take aspirin for prevention is complex. Aspirin can help prevent heart attacks, strokes, and colorectal cancer, but it also increases the risk of bleeding.

The US Preventive Services Task Force found that the benefits of taking low-dose aspirin daily clearly outweigh the harms for people who are 50 to 59 years old, who have increased risk of cardiovascular disease, and who are not at increased risk for bleeding. People who are 60 to 69 can also benefit from taking aspirin, but the risks for bleeding are higher in this age group. Some older individuals may be less likely to benefit from aspirin’s ability to prevent colorectal cancer because it takes about 10 years of daily aspirin for it to affect this risk.

It is important to note that this draft recommendation applies to people who are not at increased risk for bleeding, have at least a 10-year life expectancy, and are willing to take low-dose aspirin daily. Also, it is meant for people who do not already have cardiovascular disease.

Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, MD, is vice-chair of the US Preventive Services Task Force. She is also professor of medicine and of epidemiology and biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco.

By Charles H. Hennekens: After more than 25 years of research on aspirin for primary prevention, we are not much further along than we were after the landmark findings from the Physicians Health Study in 1988. We know that taking aspirin will prevent a first heart attack and a first stroke, but we also know that aspirin can cause serious bleeding, mainly in the gastrointestinal system and, more rarely, in the brain.

In a meta-analysis of the six major randomized trials of aspirin for primary prevention, among more than 95,000 participants, serious cardiovascular events occurred in 0.51 percent of participants taking aspirin and 0.57 percent of those not taking aspirin. That corresponds to a 20 percent relative reduction in risk. At the same time, serious bleeding events increased from 0.07 percent among non-aspirin takers to 0.10 percent among those taking aspirin, or a 40 percent relative increase in risk.

Although the totality of evidence is incomplete, it appears that aspirin has net benefits when the absolute 10-year risk of having a cardiovascular event is greater than 10 percent. Unfortunately, fewer than 5,000 of the trial participants have been in that risk category. (Individuals can calculate their 10-year risk using a relatively simple calculator from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute or a more complex one from the American Heart Association.)

These calculators don’t tell the whole story. Clinicians should evaluate additional risks and benefits. For example, some individuals are at higher risk of bleeding, such as those with a history of ulcers. Others are at higher risk of having a cardiovascular event because they are obese, physically inactive, or have a family history of such events.

Several ongoing trials will provide information on aspirin’s benefit-to-risk ratio. This information is essential for making rational guidelines for aspirin in primary prevention.

Charles H. Hennekens, MD, is professor of medicine at Florida Atlantic University. He was the principal investigator of the Physician’s Health Study, which was the first to demonstrate that aspirin prevents a first heart attack in men, and the Women’s Health Study, which was the first to demonstrate that aspirin prevents a first stroke in women.

By Deepak L. Bhatt: The use of aspirin for primary prevention is one of the most complex issues in medicine today. That’s ironic because aspirin is ubiquitous and most patients perceive it to be safe and harmless. After all, it is sold over the counter.

Here’s the problem: The lower an individual’s risk of a future heart attack or ischemic stroke, the less he or she will benefit from taking daily low-dose aspirin. Yet the odds that aspirin will cause a problem, such as bleeding, remain relatively steady. That means for some low-risk individuals, taking daily aspirin could do more harm than good.

If there was a foolproof way to identify individuals at high risk for a future heart attack or stroke, as well as those at high risk for developing complications, we would know who should be taking aspirin for primary prevention and who should not. Unfortunately, no such tool exists.

Many patients — and many health care providers — believe that the aspirin-for-primary-prevention issue is settled. Not so. In fact, several clinical trials now underway are looking at this very question. These include the ASCEND, TIPS-3, and ASPREE trials.

The data on aspirin for preventing colorectal cancer are provocative, but are even less robust than for primary prevention of cardiovascular events.

Deepak L. Bhatt, MD, is executive director of interventional cardiovascular programs at Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart and Vascular Center and professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School.

By Cynthia Boyd and Milo Puhan: Combining guidelines for the use of aspirin to prevent three different conditions — heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer — into a single recommendation makes good sense for patients. But making such recommendations is difficult because they must take into account so many factors.

Personal preferences are one very important factor. Say your mother had a disabling stroke, and you are willing to do everything you can to prevent having a stroke, even if it puts you at risk of bleeding. This might tip the balance in favor of taking aspirin. In contrast, someone who isn’t worried about having a cardiovascular event or developing colorectal cancer might want to stay away from aspirin to avoid bleeding.

With an international team of colleagues, we created an online tool that calculates whether the benefits of aspirin for primary prevention (preventing heart attack, ischemic stroke, and cancer) are greater than the harms (severe hemorrhagic stroke and severe gastrointestinal bleeds). The tool is based on research we recently published in BMC Medicine.

To use the tool, an individual enters his or her age group and sex and uses sliders to show how worried he or she is about six outcomes:

Green, orange, and red boxes represent the benefit-harm balance corresponding to the user’s information.

For now, this tool is for research purposes only. It must be verified before it is ready for prime time. But it suggests a direction for decision aids that can help individuals choose whether to adopt preventive strategies like aspirin that come with potentially harmful side effects.

Cynthia M. Boyd, MD, is associate professor of medicine at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Milo A. Puhan, MD, is director of the Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute and professor of epidemiology and public health at the University of Zurich.

By Freek W.A. Verheugt: Who should take aspirin to prevent a first heart attack or ischemic stroke is a complex issue — even for cardiologists. A recent report with data on 120 medical practices serving 69,000 patients found huge variation in doctors’ approaches. In some practices, 70 percent of patients were inappropriately taking aspirin. Part of my job, and that of other cardiologists and clinicians, is to help our patients make good choices about aspirin, guiding those at high risk toward aspirin use and those at low risk away from it.

It is important to keep in mind that other therapies, such as statins, have also been proven to decrease the risk of cardiovascular events. These are often used in combination with aspirin. As I showed in a commentary in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, when combined with a statin, aspirin’s net benefit in primary prevention is almost completely lost.

Freek W.A. Verheugt, MD, is professor of cardiology at the Heart-Lung Centre of the University Medical Centre of Nijmegen and is in the department of cardiology at Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis in Amsterdam, both in the Netherlands.

An earlier version of this article was published on Dec. 11, 2015.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Alternatives are mentioned (smoking cessation, eating a balanced diet, getting sufficient exercise), and that’s sufficient to rate as Satisfactory. The piece would be strengthened by comparing the relative benefits of the other options.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Dupixent (dupilumab) injection to treat adults with moderate-to-severe eczema (atopic dermatitis). Dupixent is intended for patients whose eczema is not controlled adequately by topical therapies, or those for whom topical therapies are not advisable. Dupixent can be used with or without topical corticosteroids.

“FDA’s approval of Dupixent demonstrates our commitment to approving new and innovative therapies for patients with skin disease,” said Julie Beitz, M.D., director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “Eczema can cause significant skin irritation and discomfort for patients, so it is important to have a variety of treatment options available to patients, including those patients whose disease is not controlled by topical therapies.”

Atopic dermatitis, a chronic inflammatory skin disease, is often referred to as “eczema,” which is a general term for several types of inflammation of the skin. Atopic dermatitis is the most common of the many types of eczema; onset typically begins in childhood and can last through adulthood. The cause of atopic dermatitis is a combination of genetic, immune and environmental factors. In atopic dermatitis, the skin develops red, scaly and crusted bumps, which are extremely itchy. Scratching leads to swelling, cracking, “weeping” clear fluid, and finally, coarsening and thickening of the skin.

Dupixent is administered as an injection under the skin. Dupixent’s active ingredient is an antibody (dupilumab) that binds to a protein [interleukin-4 (IL-4) receptor alpha subunit (IL-4R )], that causes inflammation. By binding to this protein, Dupixent is able to inhibit the inflammatory response that plays a role in the development of atopic dermatitis.

The safety and efficacy of Dupixent were established in three placebo-controlled clinical trials with a total of 2,119 adult participants with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis not adequately controlled by topical medication(s). Overall, participants who received Dupixent achieved greater response, defined as clear or almost clear skin, and experienced a reduction in itch after 16 weeks of treatment.

Dupixent can cause side effects such as serious allergic reactions and eye problems, such as pink eye (conjunctivitis) and inflammation of the cornea (keratitis). If patients experience new or worsening eye symptoms such as redness, itching, pain or visual changes, they should consult a health care provider. The most common side effects include injection site reactions; cold sores in the mouth or on the lips; and eye and eyelid inflammation, including redness, swelling and itching.

The safety and efficacy of Dupixent have not been established in the treatment of asthma. Patients who also have asthma should not adjust or stop their asthma treatment without talking to their physicians.

The FDA granted the application for Dupixent Priority Review and Breakthrough Therapy designation.

The FDA granted the approval of Dupixent to Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The Agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release gets a borderline satisfactory for mentioning topical corticosteroids as an alternative treatment for eczema but neglects to mention that other pharmaceuticals are also now available for treating it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eating tomatoes in your daily salad or regularly enjoying a healthy red sauce on your spaghetti could help reduce your risk of stroke, according to research published this week in the journal Neurology.

Tomatoes contain a powerful antioxidant that is good for brain health, the researchers say, and cooked tomatoes seem to offer more protection than raw.

"This study adds to the evidence that a diet high in fruits and vegetables is associated with a lower risk of stroke," says study author Jouni Karppi, of the University of Eastern Finland in Kuopio. "A diet containing tomatoes... a few times a week would be good for our health. However, daily intake of tomatoes may give better protection." 

 

 Karppi says it's the chemical lycopene that gives tomatoes and other fruits/vegetables their rich red color, that is helping to protect the brain. Tomatoes are particularly high in the powerful antioxidant that acts like a sponge, soaking up rogue molecules called free radicals that if left unchecked can damage cells.

Researchers tested the level of lycopene in the blood of more than 1,000 Finnish men aged 46 to 65, starting in 1991. Scientists then followed the men on average for more than a decade to record the number who had strokes.

The scientists found that those with the highest levels of lycopene were 55% less likely to have a stroke than those with the lowest amounts in their blood.

Though the study looks promising, experts say that we can't necessarily give all of the credit to lycopene.

"It's a compelling study and it fits with other data that we have about risk of stroke and vegetable and fruit consumption," explains Dr. Daniel Labovitz, director of the Stern Stroke Center at Montefiore Medical Center in New York. "But it's not proof that if you eat tomatoes you're going to have less risk of stroke."

Labovitz also points out that the group of men who had fewer strokes were younger, had lower blood pressure and smoked less than the group more prone to stroke. Though the researchers tried to take these lifestyle factors into account when calculating their findings, it may be that these things influenced the outcomes.

In other words, perhaps better health habits - not necessarily just the lycopene - lead to fewer strokes.

Lycopene has attracted a lot of attention in recent years because it's such a powerful antioxidant. If we don't eat enough lycopene-packed foods, experts suspect too many free radicals get left in the body, damaging blood vessels by helping to form fatty deposits. When these deposits build up, a blockage forms. If that vessel is in the brain, the blockage can cause a stroke.

But the foods we eat are complex and filled with many nutrients, making it tough to prove what is really providing benefits.

"Eating tomatoes is a good thing, but we don't know if there is really anything unique about tomatoes apart from other fruits and vegetables that reduce stroke risk," explains Dr. Walter Willett, chair of the Department of Nutrition at Harvard School of Public Health in Boston, Massachusetts.

Tomatoes could contribute to reducing stroke in other ways, Willett says, because they are a good source of potassium, which is known to reduce blood pressure. Elevated blood pressure is major risk factor for stroke.

So are lycopene packed tomatoes really the magic fruit? It seems the jury is still out, but researchers suggest we eat healthy as they continue to search for answers.

"This is one more reason to consume fruits and vegetables - at least 5 a day - and it's good to include tomatoes in that mix," Willett said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story suggests that we consume a mix of fruits and vegetables every day, because, as one expert put it: “…we don’t know if there is really anything unique about tomatoes apart from other fruits and vegetables that reduce stroke risk.”
The story could have mentioned other controllable factors associated with stroke risk, including tobacco use, obesity, and heavy alcohol consumption.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many migraine sufferers could have fewer, less severe headaches if they took preventive medicines, but few eligible patients do, say doctors releasing updated treatment guidelines Monday.

The guidelines list seven prescription medicines and one herbal remedy backed by strong evidence, and include many other treatments that might work for some patients.

"Migraine is one of the most disabling conditions known to man, but patients need to know that there is hope," says Stephen Silberstein, a neurologist at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia and lead author of the guidelines from the American Academy of Neurology and the American Headache Society. They were presented at an academy meeting and published in the journal Neurology.

Medicines backed by the strongest evidence include anti-seizure drugs (divalproex sodium, sodium valproate and topiramate), blood pressure drugs (metoprolol, propranolol and timolol) and, for menstrual-related migraines, a medicine called frovatriptan, the guidelines say. They also cite strong support for the herbal remedy butterbur and include a longer list of prescription and non-prescription therapies patients can consider.

These preventive treatments usually are used daily. The guidelines do not look at the options patients have once symptoms begin.

Not everyone with migraines needs prevention medicine. But nearly 40% have headaches that are so frequent (at least once a week), severe or hard-to-treat that they qualify, Silberstein says. Studies find that just 3% to 13% use the treatments.

Why so few? One reason is that it's hard to persuade people to take medicines on days when they feel fine, says Elizabeth Loder, a neurologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. Silberstein adds that some patients have not been properly diagnosed or made aware of their options. Still others try the treatments and decide they don't work or have unacceptable side effects.

"You have a lot of gun-shy patients because of a lot of bad experiences," says Michael John Coleman, founder of the patient group MAGNUM, also known as the National Migraine Association. Many spend months or years taking medicines that don't work and make them miserable, he says.

That's what happened to Emily Guzan, 26, a lawyer from Pittsburgh who was diagnosed with migraine in 2008. She was given a prescription for Topamax (topiramate), and it "was a real nightmare," she says. She kept having headaches bad enough to land her in an emergency room once a month and suffered nightmares, an altered sense of taste, an unwanted 30-pound weight loss and memory problems — all of which she attributes to the drug.

She tried some other medications, but for now, she's given up on all of them and says she's getting better results with diet, yoga and other lifestyle changes.

Finding the right medication for the right patient can take a lot of trial and error and careful dosing, Silberstein says. But about 80% will get relief, he says — defined as a headache reduction of at least 50% — after trying three or four drugs, alternative remedies and lifestyle changes.

Even hard-to-treat patients may eventually respond to something, Loder says, so she urges frustrated patients to keep trying.

"The life toll that poorly controlled headaches take is really underappreciated," she says. "You don't get back the time you lost at work or the time you lost with your children."

Coleman, of Alexandria, Va., also urges fellow sufferers to keep working with their doctors: His own migraines took 40 years to control. "This is not a cookie-cutter disease and there is no magic bullet, but there is hope."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story is mainly about medications, but it does note that avoidable triggers can play a role in promoting migraines in some people.  It also quotes a patient who says she’s getting better results with diet, yoga and other lifestyle changes than with medications. We’ll call it satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 7, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Using an artificial breath-sensor system dubbed the "electronic nose," Italian researchers were able to spot more cases of asthma than with traditional diagnostic tools.

The electronic nose detected nearly 90 percent of people with asthma compared to about 70 percent who were accurately diagnosed in the traditional way with lung function tests, according to new research published in the April issue of the journal Chest.

When combined with another test, called the fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) test, the electronic nose did an even better job at detecting asthma, the study found.

"The electronic nose discriminates between patients with asthma and healthy subjects and its performance is increased when combined with FENO," wrote the Italian team led by Dr. Paolo Montuschi of the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Rome.

The device works by identifying volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in exhaled breath. These VOCs produce a unique smell print for each individual and specific patterns are seen in people with asthma.

The new study included 27 people with intermittent or mild persistent asthma and 24 healthy people. None of the study volunteers had a history of smoking. Those with asthma had a history of allergies, and none had been treated with corticosteroids for at least four weeks prior to the start of the study.

Currently, asthma is diagnosed "based on your medical history and symptoms, and with spirometry (lung function testing) and exhaled nitric oxide," said Dr. Thomas Leath, director of allergy and immunology at Scott & White Healthcare in Round Rock, Texas.

The Italian researchers wanted to compare the electronic nose to the other commonly used tests -- spirometry and FENO -- to see which test was best at confirming a diagnosis of asthma.

To do this, all of the study volunteers were given all three tests. Each test is non-invasive, requiring only the use of exhaled air.

The electronic nose was able to correctly differentiate healthy people from those with physician-diagnosed asthma in 87.5 percent of the cases. FENO was able to correctly identify asthma in 79.2 percent of the study volunteers and lung function testing (spirometry) discerned just 70.8 percent of the people with asthma.

When the electronic nose and FENO were combined, the two tests together correctly identified almost 96 percent of the asthma cases.

"This is potentially a great tool. It could be used for screening if it's affordable or for seeing the effect of anti-inflammatory medicines. But, it definitely needs more research," said Leath.

"This device is interesting and warrants a further look, but it still needs to be perfected and the researchers need to figure out its niche," said Dr. Jennifer Appleyard, chief of allergy and immunology at St. John Hospital and Medical Center in Detroit. "We need to know if it's good for diagnostics or for measuring improvements after treatment. In some diseases, you use blood markers to monitor treatment response. Could you use this to see if patients are responding? We also need to know if it's good for diagnosing all types of asthma."

Dr. David Rosenstreich, director of the division of allergy and immunology at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City, added: "An objective and fast test for diagnosing asthma would be helpful, and this test seems to be a non-invasive way of sampling for the underlying problem. This test seems relatively easy for patients and it does have potential, but they've only looked at a very narrow collection of people who have allergic asthma."

Both Appleyard and Leath noted that cost might initially limit the use of an electronic nose.

Learn more about how asthma is currently diagnosed from the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses current methods for diagnosing asthma including the physical exam, spirometry, and nitric oxide tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Tammy Wade knew she had to try something else to lose weight when she stepped on the scale and saw the number: 203 pounds.

Wade, 50, of McCalla, Ala., is only 5 feet 3 inches tall. She had tried everything. Nothing worked.

"I had problems with my feet and ankles, and they were saying I was borderline diabetic," Wade says. "I'm like, well, I gotta do something, you know. So, I needed, really did need to lose the weight."

So Wade volunteered to help test Qnexa, an experimental drug pending before the Food and Drug Administration. She quickly noticed a big difference.

"I didn't feel ravenous, and I didn't want to snack all day long," she says.

Over the next year, Qnexa helped Wade slowly drop about 40 pounds, and keep it off for another year. "It makes you feel so much better," Wade says. "Your back don't hurt, your feet don't hurt."

But the FDA rejected Qnexa in 2010 because of concerns about side effects, especially possible heart problems and birth defects.

Qnexa's rejection came amid a flurry of failed attempts by drug companies to win approvals of new weight-loss drugs. The setbacks put a spotlight on how the FDA handles these drugs.

Even though obesity is at epidemic levels, the FDA hasn't approved any new weight-loss medicines since 1999.

"We have two-thirds of all Americans who are overweight or obese, and the costs are nearing $150 billion a year," says Christine Ferguson, a health policy professor at George Washington University. "The sheer magnitude of the problem really requires us to address it more aggressively and thoughtfully than we have."

Ferguson has been helping to organize a series of meetings involving public health experts, anti-obesity advocates, government officials and others to try to figure out what the FDA should do.

"We actually have this huge gap," says Joe Nadglowski of the Obesity Action Coalition, who has been participating in the meetings. "We go from Weight Watchers to bariatric surgery. And the fact that there isn't ... medical treatments for obesity, including pharmaceuticals, really is a challenge, considering how big the problem is in this country."

Part of what's going on is that the FDA has gotten a lot more cautious about approving new drugs in general after some serious drug-safety problems, such as heart problems linked to the painkiller Vioxx.

The FDA has been especially tough on weight-loss drugs because of previous problems with those drugs, such as the diet drug cocktail fen-phen.

"There's been a long history with obesity drugs that we've had to take off the market. You recall the fen-phen episode where a significant number of people got heart-valve defects," says Janet Woodcock, a top FDA official.

Woodcock argues that the agency has to be extra-careful with weight-loss drugs, because chances are it won't just be obese people taking them.

"When you're talking about a drug where it could go into literally tens of millions of Americans, there has to be attention to safety," Woodcock says.

What might look like a rare problem now could turn into another public health disaster, she says.

But some say the agency's aversion to accepting any risks is outdated. They say the FDA wrongly still tends to view weight-loss drugs as diet pills — something frivolous and used primarily for cosmetic purposes.

"We are not talking about medications to help someone lose five pounds to fit into their prom dress or wedding dress. We're talking about medications to help those who are struggling with the health impact of obesity," Nadglowski says.

So Nadglowski and others are pushing the FDA to take into consideration whether the risks of new drugs may be outweighed by their benefits beyond weight loss, such as reducing the risk for heart disease, diabetes and other complications of obesity.

Woodcock says officials realize they may have to think about things differently.

As the FDA works through this, many are watching how the agency handles Qnexa. An FDA advisory panel is scheduled to review Qnexa again on Feb. 22.

Barbara Troupin of Vivus, the company that is developing Qnexa, says the drug appears to do a lot more than just help people lose weight.

"We see decreases in blood pressure. We see decreased rates of progression to diabetes. We see improvements in sleep apnea. We see improvements in quality of life. Pretty much all of our data shows significant benefits," she says.

Vivus hopes the FDA will agree that those benefits will outweigh some of the risks, including the concerns about birth defects. The company is submitting new data it says show that the risk is lower than had been feared. Vivus also has a plan to minimize the chances that pregnant women will take it.

Some see Qnexa as a test of the FDA trying to recalibrate how it weighs risks and benefits for weight-loss drugs.

For her part, Wade just wants to be able to start taking it again. She's gained back half of the weight she lost.

"I need to lose 20 more pounds again," she says. "And I need the help."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: One source quoted captured some of the dilemma regarding alternatives:  “”We go from Weight Watchers to bariatric surgery. And the fact that there isn’t … medical treatments for obesity, including pharmaceuticals, really is a challenge, considering how big the problem is in this country.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Allergy treatments haven’t advanced much in decades, even as hundreds of millions around the world suffer from wheezing, itches, and rashes — and in severe cases, risk death — from exposure to allergens ranging from eggs to pollen to dog dander.

But hope may be on the way.

Scientists who study the immune system are beginning to understand the root cause of allergies — and are starting to work on next-generation therapies that could stop allergies in their tracks, rather than simply treating symptoms. Private investors and corporations are pouring money into the field.

Sean Parker, the internet mogul of Napster fame, donated $24 million to set up an allergy research center at Stanford University. Nestlé this month invested $145 million in a startup aimed at tackling peanut allergy. And the Broad Institute of Cambridge, Mass., recently launched a new initiative to unravel the basic biology of food allergy.

The potential market is huge: It’s estimated that 50 million Americans have allergies. As many as 10 percent of children suffer from hay fever, nearly 12 percent have skin allergies, and 5 percent have food allergies, most commonly peanuts, dairy, and shellfish, according to the 2014 National Health Interview Survey.

“I foresee that a lot of allergy therapies will become more and more specific and targeted, and more customizable to the individual patient,” said Andrew Long, the lead investigational drug pharmacist at Stanford’s Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy & Asthma Research.

The experimental treatment that may be closest to market is also one of the simplest. Bay Area startup Aimmune, backed in part by Nestlé with that $145 million investment, is creating a methodical peanut desensitization pill that slowly weans patients away from allergy.

The company has identified the peanut proteins that trigger allergic reaction and is filling little capsules with the stuff. Patients start out by taking half a milligram of peanut protein, and gradually work their way up — over the course of about six months — to the equivalent of eating a single peanut.

“The people who need it the most are the people who have the most profound and potentially life-threatening reaction,” said Dr. Daniel Adelman, chief medical officer of Aimmune.

The capsules are science’s answer to previous efforts from allergists, who would concoct “home brews” of peanut protein to desensitize patients under the table. Aimmune’s peanut powder is in Phase 3 trials — and, despite its relative simplicity, is still considered something of a trailblazer in allergy science.

Researchers at Stanford University are building on the concept of desensitization.

One of the drugs Long is excited about: omalizumab, a biologic drug made by Genentech under the trade name Xolair.

To understand how it works, you have to back up and look at why you get all itchy and wheezy when you encounter an allergen. Such responses make sense from an evolutionary standpoint: They initially came into being to protect our bodies against toxins, like snake venom, or to ward away parasites. But they can be deadly in the modern era.

Two types of immune cells — called mast cells and basophils — are the biggest culprits behind allergic reactions. When a person encounters an allergen, let’s say peanut protein, a type of antibody called immunoglobulin E, or IgE, gets activated. This stimulates the mast cells and basophils to release a storm of chemicals that provoke an allergic response to help exorcise peanut protein from the body.

Genentech’s drug is an engineered antibody that binds to human IgE, blocking it from triggering that chemical storm.

It was approved by the FDA in 2003 to treat a form of asthma often triggered by allergens, but Stanford researchers are now testing it on patients with food allergies — and finding that it might help speed along classic allergy desensitization therapy, in which patients are slowly introduced to escalating quantities of the allergen, via allergy shots or those “home brew” concoctions.

“Right now, the process of immunotherapy is painstakingly long — it takes not just weeks or months, but years, to treat a single allergy this way,” said Dr. Toshi Kawakami, a researcher at the La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology.

This timeline becomes untenable for patients with multiple allergies — and about 70 percent of people who have an allergy to one type of food will also be allergic to another, Long said.

So Stanford has paired Xolair with desensitization therapy to treat up to five different food allergens at any given time. Instead of taking years to gird a patient’s body against peanuts, they’re able to help her control her reactions to, say, hazelnuts, fish, dairy, and wheat as well.

Looking at IgE from a different angle, Harvard statistical geneticist Liming Liang has been hunting for new drug targets that might modulate how, exactly, the antibody is expressed. In a paper published last year in Nature, Liang’s team found 30 genes that are involved in kicking off the allergic response.

“We think we’ll be able to identify a potential drug target here for allergy reaction — but, of course, it’ll take quite a long time to turn that into a medicine used by patients,” Liang said.

Another compelling approach is being taken by Japan’s Astellas Pharma, which is developing a DNA vaccine meant to protect the body from cedar pollen. (Hay fever has been called a “national affliction” in Japan, affecting a quarter of the population.)

The underlying research, from Immunomic Therapeutics and Johns Hopkins University, involves attaching a fragment of DNA from, say, cedar pollen to a template vaccine that can embed itself inside the cell. Once there, it revs up an aggressive immune response and imprints an “immunological memory,” which means the immune system will respond even more quickly to future exposures to the allergen.

The idea is to create resistance to an allergen without ever having to expose the patient to that substance. If it works, it’d be fairly easy to swap out the cedar pollen DNA for a different allergen — for instance, the genetic material that codes for peanut or cat antigens — and tack it onto this vaccine template.

“The beauty of this is that, unlike food desensitization or skin patches, patients aren’t exposed to the circulating antigen,” Long said. “That hypothetically decreases the risk for adverse events.”

For all the research on allergies, none of the drugs in the pipeline is a sure thing.

For a cautionary tale, look no further than Circassia Pharmaceuticals, which has been working on an experimental immunotherapy drug to forestall cat allergies. Interest in Circassia had been sky-high — the small biotech’s market value had shot up to $1 billion earlier this year on speculation that its drug would prove effective.

But in a Phase 3 study, it turned out that the placebo effect was as effective as the drug itself. The company’s stock plummeted on that news this past June.

It’s not just that solving allergies is hard. Current medications — such as Benadryl, Claritin, and epinephrine (best known for powering the EpiPen) — do a decent job controlling symptoms in most patients, so there’s little incentive to innovate.

“There’s a dearth of new allergy products because antihistamines work so well,” said Dr. Todd Brady, CEO of Aldeyra Therapeutics, a startup in Lexington, Mass., that’s developing a drug to reduce eye irritation from allergies.

“They’re generic, they’re cheap, they’re safe, and easy to use — but unfortunately, a lot of patients suffer because of that phenomenon, because not everyone responds to antihistamines,” Brady said.

Another reason for the hesitancy: liability concerns. It’s a risky proposition to give patients the foods they’re deathly allergic to — inducing anaphylactic reactions simply to test drugs in clinical trials.

“At the end of the day, it’s a fairly 19th-century approach,” said Dr. Wayne Shreffler, a researcher at Massachusetts General Hospital who is working on the Broad Institute’s Food Allergy Science Initiative. “There’s really no doubt that there have been cold feet in the industry about this issue.”

But investigators around the world have shown they can carry out these “food challenge” trials safely — which could help hasten the development of new drugs.

“In school, we didn’t learn anything about allergy treatment, except antihistamines and epinephrine,” Long said. “But now, we’re seeing this whole new spectrum of treatments. It’ll be interesting to see how this translates into making it into a pharmacy, and into the hands of patients.”

Correction: A previous version of the story misstated some aspects of Aimunne’s work on peanut allergies.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There is acknowledgment of the possibility that the new treatments may not work any better than older ones for many patients. The story would have been stronger if it had done more head-to-head comparisons of effectiveness.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Targeted magnetic pulses to the brain were shown to reduce craving and substance use in cocaine-addicted patients. The results of this pilot study, published in the peer-reviewed journal European Neuropsychopharmacology, suggest that this may become an effective medical treatment for patients with cocaine addiction, although a larger trial is needed to confirm the initial findings.

Cocaine use is widespread in the Western World. Last year, 2.3 million young Europeans (aged 15 to 34) used cocaine, and the US National Institute on Drug Abuse estimates that 1.4 million Americans suffer from cocaine addiction1. There is no effective drug treatment for cocaine addiction, with behavioural therapies being the main element of any treatment regime. Now a group of researchers working in Italy and the USA have shown in a preliminary clinical study that cocaine use can be reduced by treatment with rTMS (repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation).

As author, Dr Antonello Bonci (Scientific Director, National Institute on Drug Abuse, and Adjunct Professor, John Hopkins University, Baltimore) said:

"Despite the fact that more than 20 million people worldwide suffer from cocaine use disorders2, there are no effective neurobiological treatments for patients with this devastating condition".

The practical work was conducted by team of scientists led by Dr Luigi Gallimberti, from the University of Padova Medical School, Italy, who enrolled 32 patients who were seeking treatment for cocaine addiction at the hospital clinic. The participating patients were randomized to receive either rTMS or standard symptom-relieving medications.

The experimental group received one rTMS session per day for five days, and then once a week for the following three weeks, for a total of 8 TMS sessions over 29 days. Those in the control group received pharmacological treatment for symptoms associated with cocaine addiction (such as depression, anxiety and sleep problems). The study indicated the safety of rTMS in patients with cocaine addiction. There was significantly less craving and there were a significantly higher number of cocaine-free urine drug tests in the rTMS compared to the control group. In addition, 69% (11/16) patients) in the experimental group showed no relapse to cocaine use, whereas only 19% (3/16) patients) in the control group showed a similar positive result (the results are adjusted for patients who dropped out of the trial).

Dr Bonci said: "rTMS is a non-invasive and very safe therapeutic approach which is used with other mental health and neurological conditions, such as depression and neuropathic pain. Our study suggests that rTMS may also represent a new treatment for patients with cocaine use disorder".

At the end of the first 29 days of the experiment, the experimental group was given the option of continuing the treatment, whereas those in the control group were given the possibility of receiving the same rTMS treatment as the experimental group for 63 days. Results further confirmed the beneficial effects of rTMS in helping patients to maintain abstinence from cocaine.

Dr. Bonci continued: We consider this study promising but preliminary. We need to replicate the work in a bigger group of patients using sham-TMS as the control condition. As far as we know, this work represents the first clinical report indicating that rTMS treatment results in significant reduction in cocaine use. It is also important to emphasize that, in this study patients were seeking treatment for their cocaine addiction in a hospital setting: the group studied, albeit small, was a "real world" sample. We have continued to follow patients from the trial, and the improvement seems to be sustained over time, up to 12 months, although we don't have any hard data on that yet. It is important that this is taken forward to a larger trial.

We decided to target an area of the brain involved in decision making, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DL PFC). This was because previous animal studies from our lab had shown that compulsive cocaine-seeking was associated with hypoactivity in the prelimbic cortex, which is a brain area that shares similar behavioural roles to the DL PFC. Importantly, we had found that increasing the activity in the prelimbic cortex could significantly reduce cocaine self-administration".

"This study represents a creative approach to a disorder that is notoriously difficult to treat in the real world. These pilot data also show that biological treatments nowadays reach far beyond medications and that new neuroscience methods may be used for targeted changes in brain regions relevant for complex mental disorders".
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release states, “There is no effective drug treatment for cocaine addiction, with behavioural therapies being the main element of any treatment regime.” The medicinal drugs used on members of the control group were intended to treat accompanying symptoms brought on by cocaine use. In addition, addiction specialists have found that some drugs do offer some small benefits clinically, but they are not FDA approved for cocaine addiction treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You might not want to rush into knee surgery. Physical therapy can be just as good for a common injury and at far less cost and risk, the most rigorous study to compare these treatments concludes.

Therapy didn't always help and some people wound up having surgery for the problem, called a torn meniscus. But those who stuck with therapy had improved as much six months and one year later as those who had arthroscopic surgery right away, researchers found.

"Both are very good choices. It would be quite reasonable to try physical therapy first because the chances are quite good that you'll do quite well," said one study leader, Dr. Jeffrey Katz, a joint specialist at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School.

He was to discuss the study Tuesday at an American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons conference in Chicago. Results were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine.

A meniscus is one of the crescent-shaped cartilage discs that cushion the knee. About one-third of people over 50 have a tear in one, and arthritis makes this more likely. Usually the tear doesn't cause symptoms but it can be painful.

When that happens, it's tough to tell if the pain is from the tear or the arthritis — or whether surgery is needed or will help. Knee surgery for a torn meniscus is done about half a million times each year in the U.S.

The new federally funded study compared surgery with a less drastic option. Researchers at seven major universities and orthopedic surgery centers around the U.S. assigned 351 people with arthritis and meniscus tears to get either surgery or physical therapy. The therapy was nine sessions on average plus exercises to do at home, which experts say is key to success.

After six months, both groups had similar rates of functional improvement. Pain scores also were similar.

Thirty percent of patients assigned to physical therapy wound up having surgery before the six months was up, often because they felt therapy wasn't helping them. Yet they ended up the same as those who got surgery right away, as well as the rest of the physical therapy group who stuck with it and averted an operation.

"There are patients who would like to get better in a 'fix me' approach" and surgery may be best for them, said Elena Losina, another study leader from Brigham and Women's Hospital.

However, an Australian preventive medicine expert contends that the study's results should change practice. Therapy "is a reasonable first strategy, with surgery reserved for the minority who don't have improvement," Rachelle Buchbinder of Monash University in Melbourne wrote in a commentary in the medical journal.

As it is now, "millions of people are being exposed to potential risks associated with a treatment that may or may not offer specific benefit, and the costs are substantial," she wrote.

Surgery costs about $5,000, compared with $1,000 to $2,000 for a typical course of physical therapy, Katz said.

One study participant — Bob O'Keefe, 68, of suburban Boston — was glad to avoid surgery for his meniscus injury three years ago.

"I felt better within two weeks" on physical therapy, he said. "My knee is virtually normal today." He still does the recommended exercises several times a week.

Robert Dvorkin had both treatments for injuries on each knee several years apart. Dvorkin, 56, director of operations at the Coalition for the Homeless in New York City, had surgery followed by physical therapy for a tear in his right knee and said it was months before he felt no pain.

Then, several years ago, he hurt his left knee while exercising. "I had been doing some stretching and doing some push-ups and I just felt it go 'pop.'" he recalls. "I was limping. It was extremely painful."

An imaging test showed a less severe tear and a different surgeon recommended physical therapy. Dvorkin said it worked like a charm — he avoided surgery and recovered faster than from his first injury. The treatment involved two to three hour-long sessions a week, including strengthening exercises, balancing and massage. He said the sessions weren't that painful and his knee felt better after each one.

"Within a month I was healed," Dvorkin said. "I was completely back to normal."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The focus of the story was a study comparing alternative treatment approaches.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Vitamin D, in combination with calcium, is good for your bones. You should consume modest amounts in your diet, if possible (and for most people that is quite possible), or in the form of supplements if you can't get enough via food and drink.

We know this. But somehow we've arrived at a point when some physicians are prescribing large doses of Vitamin D supplements for their patients in the hope of preventing cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, autoimmune disorders and other maladies, despite a lack of evidence that this works, according to a new commentary in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Other people are loading up on Vitamin D on their own.

"Clinical enthusiasm for supplemental vitamin D has outpaced available evidence on its effectiveness," JoAnn E. Manson and Shari S. Bassuk of the Division of Preventive Medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston wrote last week in the journal's online version.

This practice isn't totally harmless. You should be consuming 600 international units daily if you're between the ages of 1 and 70, and 800 IU each day if you're 71 or older, according to the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academcy of Sciences. (For a chart with a little more detail, see here.) These amounts are enough for 97.5 percent of U.S. and Canadian residents, according to the IOM. (Sunlight stimulates production of vitamin D for people in sunnier climes.)

Go above 4,000 IUs, unless there's a specific reason that you need that amount, and you risk kidney stones, calcification of blood vessels and possibly the very cardiovascular disease you were seeking to prevent, Manson said in an interview.

So how did we get here? "I think there's been a disconnect between the observational studies and the randomized clinical trials to date," Manson said. Over the past 15 years, those studies "have looked promising, and very often they've been reported by the media as suggesting that vitamin D has these benefits. I think there's a general perception that if some is good, more is better. I think it's important to understand that more is not necessarily better."

Manson is leading the most extensive clinical trial of vitamin D use ever, an examination of 25,875 people across the United States to determine whether vitamin D is helpful against cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, depression, infection, autoimmune disorders and other conditions. The results are expected in late 2017 or early 2018.

In the meantime, how much vitamin D should you be consuming? The recommended dietary allowance works out to three or four servings each day of "fortified" foods such as milk, yogurt, soy beverages, orange juice or cereal, plus fatty fish twice a week, according to Manson's commentary.

She also called on physicians not to overscreen patients for vitamin D deficiencies, a practice that can lead to overprescribing it.

"Large trials of other widely used supplements have sometimes found benefits," Manson wrote, "but in other cases--such as with high doses of beta carotene, vitamin E and selenium--have disproven some health claims for these supplements and identified health risks that may not have otherwise been detected."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story lays out what constitutes a healthy amount of vitamin D, how people can get that amount of vitamin D through their diet (or sunlight), and that some supplements may be needed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hematology researchers have used a single injection of gene therapy to correct a rare bleeding disorder, factor VII deficiency, in dogs. This success in large animals holds considerable potential for a safe, effective and long-lasting new treatment in humans with the same bleeding disorder.

"Our finding has great clinical relevance for patients with factor VII deficiency," said study leader Paris Margaritis, D. Phil., a hematology researcher at the Raymond G. Perelman Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics (CCMT) at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). "These dogs have the type of mutation found in the majority of patients with this disorder, so this approach could lead to a sustained gene therapy in people."

The Margaritis team collaborated with University of North Carolina (UNC) scientists, led by Tim Nichols, M.D., professor of Medicine and Pathology at the UNC School of Medicine.

Factor VII deficiency is rare, found in about one in 300,000 to one in 500,000 people. Because a gene mutation impairs normal production of a blood clotting factor, patients may suffer excessive bleeding in the central nervous system or GI tract, or after surgery or an injury. Female patients may suffer excessive menstrual bleeding.

Factor VII (FVII) deficiency has a range of severity, with about 40 percent of patients having severe disease. They are most commonly treated with regular infusions of clotting factor. Unlike hemophilia, a better-known bleeding disorder that predominantly affects males, factor VII deficiency strikes males and females equally.

Gene therapy proposed for bleeding disorders involves introducing DNA carrying the code to produce the specific clotting factor lacking in patients. Researchers at CHOP and elsewhere have bioengineered an adeno-associated virus (AAV), which does not cause disease, as a vector to deliver DNA into cells where it can express enough factor to make the blood clot normally. Over the past 15 years, CHOP hematology researchers have performed clinical trials of gene therapy for hemophilia B that have helped define efficacy and dosing levels in humans.

The CCMT at CHOP houses a clinical-grade laboratory that manufactures gene therapy vectors, including the AAV vectors used in the current study. Margaritis, a member of the CHOP group long engaged in hemophilia research, currently leads a laboratory focused on factor VII deficiency as well as hemophilia.

"We developed a unique animal model of this disease after identifying dogs with naturally occurring factor VII deficiency," said Margaritis. "Our investigations enabled us to design the corrective gene to insert into our virus vector in the current study."

The CHOP team collaborated with scientists at UNC who have a long-established colony of dogs for hematology research. Based on previous work by Margaritis, the UNC team identified dogs for this gene therapy study.

Nichols, the director of UNC's Francis Owens Blood Research Laboratory, characterized factor VII deficiency in four individual dogs. Using the AAV vectors supplied by Margaritis, Nichols injected the dogs with varying dosages and monitored their health outcomes and biological markers over several years.

The treated dogs had expressed levels of clotting factor VII that would be therapeutic in humans, with long-term stability. In one dog, the effects persisted nearly three years. Based on kidney function, liver function, and blood measurements in the dogs, the treatment was safe, and did not elicit unwanted immune responses.

The current study sets the stage for clinical trials in humans. This gene therapy may especially benefit young children with severe bleeding from factor VII deficiency, such as patients receiving care in CHOP's hematology program.

"This work is very exciting and promising," said Nichols, who added, "The FVII-deficient dogs tolerated the initial gene therapy infusions very well and have had no adverse side effects over several years of follow up. In other related studies in dogs with hemophilia B, similar positive findings have translated to people with hemophilia B." Both Nichols and Margaritis agreed: "The table is now set to propose clinical trials that would treat people who suffer from FVII deficiency."

The National Institutes of Health (grants HL064190 and HL63098), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Pennsylvania Department of Health supported this study. In addition to his CHOP position, Margaritis is a faculty member at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

"Sustained correction of FVII deficiency in dogs using AAV-mediated expression of zymogen FVII," Blood, published online Dec. 23, 2015.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release tells us that this rare clotting disorder is currently treated by infusions of clotting factors. The release could have done a better job of explaining how difficult that therapy is for patients. Is the disorder regulated well by that method? We aren’t given any information or what those costs are vs. what a one-time gene therapy might cost.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 7, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Evidence is mounting that a marijuana-derived oil might benefit some children with epilepsy whose seizures aren't controlled by approved medications, two new studies show.

Cannabidiol (CBD) significantly reduced seizures in as many as half of children with epilepsy, researchers planned to report Monday at the American Epilepsy Society's annual meeting, in Philadelphia.

But experts say these positive findings may have been influenced by a "placebo effect." All participants in these studies knew they were taking the oil, which could have affected reports of its effectiveness.

"We know that our placebo rates can be as high as 30 percent, and sometimes higher," said Dr. Amy Brooks-Kayal, American Epilepsy Society president, who wasn't involved in the studies.

"We don't know the real effect of the cannabidiol, and we won't until we complete the studies that are ongoing that are placebo-controlled and blinded," added Brooks-Kayal, who is also a professor of pediatrics, neurology and pharmaceutical sciences at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.

There also are concerns that cannabidiol may interact badly with some anti-seizure medications approved for epilepsy treatment, according to another study scheduled for presentation at the meeting.

Cannabidiol is a major chemical component of marijuana, said Dr. Orrin Devinsky, a neurologist at NYU Langone Medical Center's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center in New York City and co-author of one of the studies.

CBD doesn't produce intoxication like pot's other major chemical compound, THC. But, researchers believe it may interact with a brain receptor that plays a role in the development of seizures, Devinsky said.

"This receptor has several effects, but one of them may be to modulate the calcium inside and outside the neuron, which is very much related to the excitability of nerve cells," he explained.

Previous studies have shown some benefit in adults, and word has spread. Families with adults and children with epilepsy have flocked to states where medical marijuana is legal to seek treatment, Brooks-Kayal said.

"There is a fairly active and vocal group of families in Colorado who are using cannabidiol oils that are made artisanally," she said.

To see whether children with epilepsy would benefit from cannabidiol treatment, Devinsky led a study involving 261 people, mostly children, whose seizures had not been controlled using current anti-seizure medications. The average age of the participants was 11.

Everyone received a British-made cannabidiol oil called Epidiolex, which was administered as a drop on the tongue, Devinsky said. This was in addition to their current drug therapy.

After three months, seizure frequency declined by an average 45 percent in all participants. Almost half experienced a 50 percent or greater reduction in seizures, and about one of every 10 patients became seizure-free, the study found.

"This was a very, very treatment-resistant group, and the response was very promising," Devinsky said.

A second study from the University of California, San Francisco, explored the long-term effectiveness of cannabidiol for children with epilepsy, by adding the marijuana-derived oil to the regular drug regimen of about 25 kids for one year.

The study found that after a year, the treatment resulted in a 50 percent reduction in seizures for 10 participants -- about 40 percent of the group. One child remained seizure-free, but 12 of the initial participants dropped out of the study because the cannabidiol didn't seem to do them any good.

Although he said he would prescribe CBD to people with uncontrolled seizures, Devinsky said he is "very anxious" to see the results of ongoing randomized, controlled clinical trials. The results of one major trial are expected in the first quarter of 2016, he added.

If CBD proves effective in controlled trials, it could be two to five years before the drug is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Devinsky noted.

Federal regulators also will have to weigh potential interactions of cannabidiol with other anti-seizure drugs. Another study scheduled for presentation at the meeting found that CBD appeared to enhance the effects of the epilepsy medication levetiracetam (Keppra), when given to lab mice.

However, the oil appeared to interact negatively with two other drugs, clobazam (Onfi) and carbamazepine (Tegretol), the University of Utah researchers found.

Data and conclusions presented at meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more on medical marijuana, visit the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The interest in marijuana constituents as possible treatments arose because existing alternatives—anti-seizure drugs—do not work with some patients. So a premise of this story is that existing alternatives are unsuccessful in this group of paitents.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists at the University of Waterloo have developed a new tool to protect women from HIV infection.

The tool, a vaginal implant, decreases the number of cells that the HIV virus can target in a woman's genital tract. Unlike conventional methods of HIV prevention, such as condoms or anti-HIV drugs, the implant takes advantage of some people's natural immunity to the virus.

HIV infects the body by corrupting T cells that are mobilized by the immune system when the virus enters a person's body. When the T cells stay resting and do not attempt to fight the virus they are not infected and the HIV virus is not transmitted between people. When the T cells stay resting, it's referred to as being immune quiescent.

"We know that some drugs taken orally never make it to the vaginal tract, so this implant could provide a more reliable way to encourage T cells not to respond to infection and therefore more reliably and cheaply prevent transmission," said Emmanuel Ho, a professor in the School of Pharmacy at Waterloo. "What we don't know yet is if this can be a stand-alone option for preventing HIV transmission or if it might be best used in conjunction with other prevention strategies. We aim to answer these questions with future research."

Ho's implant was inspired by previous research involving sex workers in Kenya. In Kenya, Ho and research partner Keith Fowke of the University of Manitoba, observed that many of these women who had sex with HIV positive clients but did not contract the virus. They later found the women possessed T cells that were naturally immune quiescent.

"Observing this, we asked ourselves if it was possible to pharmacologically induce immune quiescence with medication that was better assured of reaching the point of infection," said Ho. "By delivering the medication exactly where it's needed, we hoped to increase the chances of inducing immune quiescence."

The implant is composed of a hollow tube and two pliable arms to hold it in place. It contains hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) which is disseminated slowly through the porous material of the tube and absorbed by the walls of the vaginal tract.

The implants were tested in an animal model and the team observed a significant reduction in T cell activation, meaning that the vaginal tract was demonstrating an immune quiescent state.

The article recently appeared in the Journal of Controlled Release.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release briefly mentions “conventional methods of HIV prevention, such as condoms or anti-HIV drugs.”
Given the preliminary nature of this experimental device it’s unlikely the authors can conclude how effective this vaginal implant is in comparison to these well-studied, conventional approaches. But mentioning how effective condoms and anti-HIV medications are might have been helpful context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the past several decades, Alcoholics Anonymous and the 12 steps have dominated addiction treatment in America — boasting millions of adherents and turning into the standard option within most addiction treatment programs in the US.

A new study has found, however, that AA, the original 12-step program, and others like it don’t have to be the only answer for people seeking out mutual help groups to deal with alcohol addiction.

The study, in short, looked at how people’s self-reported outcomes with AA and 12-step programs compare with the three biggest alternative mutual help groups — Women for Sobriety, SMART Recovery, and LifeRing. It concluded that these other groups perform about as well as 12-step programs.

“This study suggests that these alternatives really are viable options for people who are looking for recovery support and don’t like AA for whatever reason,” Sarah Zemore, lead author of the study, told me.

The research is by no means the last word on this question — Zemore characterized the study as the beginning of a deeper evaluation into AA alternatives.

But this is important. There has been a good amount of research into AA and the 12 steps over the years, broadly finding that about a third of people maintain recovery from alcohol addiction due to 12-step treatment, another third get something out of the treatment but not enough for full recovery, and another third get nothing at all.

Researchers have long suspected, though, that the benefits found in 12-step treatment programs are not exclusive to the 12 steps. As Zemore told me, “The benefits of 12-step groups are not driven by the 12 steps’ specific philosophy or adherence to the 12 steps. It’s really more about general mechanisms like abstinence motivation and social support for abstinence. Presumably, you could get those by participating in alternatives to AA.”

In other words, these alternatives could help the one-third to two-thirds of people who don’t get anything or much out of AA. That would help deal with a big public health issue: Based on federal data, more than 20 million people in the US have a substance use disorder, and within that group, more than 15 million have an alcohol use disorder. Excessive drinking alone is linked to 88,000 deaths each year. So finding the right solutions for this problem is literally a matter of life or death.

The study, conducted by the Alcohol Research Group at the Public Health Institute in California and published last month in the Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, surveyed more than 600 people with alcohol use disorder (AUD), who were divided by which mutual help group they primarily participated in. Researchers followed up at six months then 12 months, measuring involvement in the groups and various substance use outcomes, including abstinence from drinking and alcohol-related problems.

After controlling for several factors, the researchers concluded that “[Women for Sobriety], LifeRing, and SMART are as effective as 12-step groups for those with AUDs.”

“Essentially, that’s the story,” Zemore said. “We were really interested in whether the effects of involvement on recovery outcomes depended on which group [participants] were in. And we found that they did not.”

There were some differences in the data. People who reported SMART as their primary group seemed to have worse substance use outcomes, and there were lower odds of total abstinence among LifeRing members.

That might have something to do with differences in recovery goals. For example, AA really emphasizes total abstinence from drinking as the solution to alcohol addiction. Groups like SMART and LifeRing, meanwhile, can be friendlier to the idea of members moderating their drinking but not quitting altogether. That could affect substance use outcomes — and especially abstinence outcomes.

The study’s survey data suggests this is in fact what was going on: When researchers controlled for people’s recovery goals — meaning, whether they wanted to commit to lifetime total abstinence or not — the differences between the 12-step groups, SMART, and LifeRing went away.

“That suggests that people with less commitment to lifetime total abstinence are more likely to participate in SMART and LifeRing than they are to participate in 12-step groups,” Zemore said. “That’s why you’re seeing these associations between SMART and LifeRing affiliation at baseline and worse recovery outcomes when you control for involvement.” She added, “But I want to emphasize that these go away when you control for recovery goals.”

Again, the study is not the final word. John Kelly, an addiction researcher at Harvard Medical School who was not involved in the study, told me that the study is “good news, in general,” but pointed out that it’s limited by its methodology: It’s based on an online survey, not the kind of randomized trial that’s typically the gold standard in research. That may have led to some potentially biased results — perhaps participants in specific groups were less likely to report bad outcomes, for instance.

And since it’s only one study, it’s possible that the results were biased in some other way. So it’s up to future research to verify the findings.

One tricky thing with this line of research is you can’t really force people to participate in certain groups — so studies that randomly assign participants to AA, SMART, LifeRing, or Women for Sobriety may not be easy to do. But there are ways that researchers could get around these problems, such as only using participants who are willing to try different groups and actively following up with them to make sure they are actually participating.

Another big research question: figuring out why, exactly, these groups might work to help people stay alcohol- or drug-free. There’s good research into how AA works, but it’d be good to figure out if SMART, LifeRing, and Women for Sobriety work in a similar way. That, Zemore said, will be one of her goals in future studies.

Why we need alternatives

In discussions about addiction treatment, AA and the 12 steps tend to prompt polarizing reactions — some people swear by the programs, others absolutely hate them.

There’s a good explanation for that: While the research shows that 12-step treatment can be as effective as professional treatment modalities like cognitive behavioral therapy, the research also shows that the 12 steps don’t work for everyone.

As one example, a prominent complaint about 12-step programs is the spiritual aspect. This is a big part of the 12 steps, with the final step even invoking “a spiritual awakening.” For people who aren’t religious or spiritual, this can be a big turn-off; that’s one reason SMART and LifeRing exist to begin with — they’re meant to be secular alternatives to the 12 steps.

The good news is that the research suggests the spiritual aspect doesn’t fully explain why the 12 steps are effective for some people. Instead, it seems other traits are just as, if not more, important — such as the social support that AA meetings provide and the lessons that participants can pick up at meetings.

That’s long led researchers to suspect that alternative mutual help groups could work. If so, that would let some people go to AA meetings if they prefer the 12 steps, while others could find SMART, LifeRing, Women for Sobriety, or something else that works for them. Basically, everyone could find a workable solution.

Providing these alternatives would essentially move addiction treatment closer to other kinds of medical problems. As Keith Humphreys, a drug policy expert at Stanford University, previously told me, “We don’t have anything that works for everybody. There’s very few places in medicine where you do.” So there need to be as many alternatives as possible.

The US is far from that at the moment. Most treatment facilities in America are, according to the survey data and research, at least partly based on the 12 steps — making it the only option for many people. While alternatives like SMART or LifeRing do exist, they’re not nearly as available as AA — and they certainly aren’t built into professional treatment programs in the same way as the 12 steps.

As Albert, a pseudonym for an AA member in Georgia, previously told me, “There’s just not a lot of widely advertised options available.” AA and 12-step treatment are “the most well-known and most recommended option, so that’s kind of where you tend to go.”

Zemore’s study begins to peel away at this problem. By showing that there really might be other effective options out there, the research provides hope that there may be a better — or at least more complete — solution out there for alcohol addiction.

For more on the research into AA and the 12 steps, read Vox’s explainer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story’s main focus is to compare popular 12-step programs with their alternatives. And it explains why alternatives are necessary, since many people object to the spiritual component of AA. It would have been useful to also include outcomes associated with medication for alcohol use disorder, as well as outcomes when there is no formal treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago (CNN) -- For the first time, patients with the deadliest form of skin cancer have two new treatment options that prolong survival, according to new research presented at a cancer conference in Chicago on Sunday.

One drug specifically targets a mutated gene that tells a cancer cell to grow, the other boosts a patient's immune system in the fight against the disease. Both drugs cause tumors to shrink and prolong survival for patients with melanoma that has spread to other parts of the body, but neither is a cure.

"This is an unprecedented time of clinical options -- it is truly practice-changing," said Dr. Lynn Schuchter, who heads the Melanoma Center at the University of Pennsylvania and is not involved with the research.

MayoClinic: Find out more about melanoma

One study presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's (ASCO) conference on Sunday focused on the experimental drug vemurafenib. About half of all melanoma patients have a mutated BRAF gene. This mutation tells the cell to continue to grow.

"It's like the on-switch is stuck," said Dr. Paul Chapman, from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Center in New York and lead author of the study. Vemurafenib blocks the mutated gene, which kills the cancer cell and shrinks tumors.

Researchers compared this new drug, which comes in pill form, to the only FDA-approved chemotherapy drug for melanoma, dacarbazine: It has been used to treat melanoma patients since 1975, but is only effective in about 10% of patients.

Nearly 90% benefited from this new targeted drug, Schuchter said.

In a large, phase 3 study involving 675 people worldwide, patients on vemurafenib did much better than those on chemotherapy. Forty-eight percent of patients on vemurafenib had substantial tumor shrinkage that lasted for more than a month, compared to 5.5% of patients in the chemotherapy group.

Those taking vemurafenib had a 63% reduced risk of death compared to those on chemo. Patients on vemurafenib saw the drug work within 72 hours and 84% of the patients were still alive after six months, compared with 64% of patients getting dacarbazine.

"These are truly striking results" ASCO president Dr. George Sledge said.

Patient advocates like Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation, are thrilled because "the incidence of melanoma is going up all over the world and the treatment landscape has been terrible."

Drugs that treat breast cancer found to prevent it, too

Sledge and other cancer experts are confident that based on these study results, vemurafenib will almost certainly will get FDA approval this year.

A second study showed that the recently approved drug Ipilimumab, sold under the name Yervoy, also extends survival for melanoma patients with advanced disease.

It doesn't target a specific part of the cell. Instead, it stimulates the patient's immune system to allow it to better fight the cancer. Patients with and without the BRAF mutation were eligible to participate.

Among 502 patients enrolled in this clinical trial, half were given Yervoy plus dacarbazine and the other half were given a placebo and chemotherapy.

"Twenty-one percent of (the Yervoy) population was alive after three years," lead study author Dr. Jedd Wolchok said, compared to 12% who got the placebo and chemo. Wolchok, also an oncologist from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said patients taking Yervoy saw the drug work for them for 19 months, compared to only eight months in patients in the chemo group.

Schuchter says melanoma patients are celebrating this moment because there are now two good treatment options for patients, when there really were none before.

"I've been doing this for 25 years, and we've not had drugs that extended survival. That is what is so remarkable here," Schuchter said.

While patients taking vemurafenib do very well, Schuchter said the drug stops working after about nine or 10 months. But in many cases that are nine or 10 months they otherwise would not have had.

Yervoy takes a while to work, and some patients may not have that time, study author Chapman said. He also points out that both drugs do have side effects so patients have to be monitored.

Doctors and researchers will now explore how to best use these drugs -- give one before the other, or simultaneously.

Wolchok says manufacturers of both drugs (Genentech's vemurafenib and Bristol-Myers Squibb's Yervoy), which also funded these studies, have agreed to work with researchers to study how these drugs are tolerated by patients when taken together, giving doctors even more possible treatment options. This is very unusual in the world of drug development, he said.

According to the American Cancer Society, melanoma is one of the most common cancers in young adults today. More than 68,000 people were diagnosed with melanoma last year and about 8,700 died.

Not all melanomas can be prevented, but limiting exposure to strong sunlight and other sources of UV light like tanning beds can significantly reduce the risk of getting this very deadly cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Adequate job reporting the comparisons seen in the trials of the two drugs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Rydapt (midostaurin) for the treatment of adult patients with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML) who have a specific genetic mutation called FLT3, in combination with chemotherapy. The drug is approved for use with a companion diagnostic, the LeukoStrat CDx FLT3 Mutation Assay, which is used to detect the FLT3 mutation in patients with AML.

 

AML is a rapidly progressing cancer that forms in the bone marrow and results in an increased number of white blood cells in the bloodstream. The National Cancer Institute estimated that approximately 19,930 people would be diagnosed with AML in 2016 and 10,430 were projected to die of the disease.

“Rydapt is the first targeted therapy to treat patients with AML, in combination with chemotherapy,” said Richard Pazdur, M.D., acting director of the Office of Hematology and Oncology Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and director of the FDA’s Oncology Center of Excellence. “The ability to detect the gene mutation with a diagnostic test means doctors can identify specific patients who may benefit from this treatment.”

Rydapt is a kinase inhibitor that works by blocking several enzymes that promote cell growth. If the FLT3 mutation is detected in blood or bone marrow samples using the LeukoStrat CDx FLT3 Mutation Assay, the patient may be eligible for treatment with Rydapt in combination with chemotherapy.

The safety and efficacy of Rydapt for patients with AML were studied in a randomized trial of 717 patients who had not been treated previously for AML. In the trial, patients who received Rydapt in combination with chemotherapy lived longer than patients who received chemotherapy alone, although a specific median survival rate could not be reliably estimated. In addition, patients who received Rydapt in combination with chemotherapy in the trial went longer (median 8.2 months) without certain complications (failure to achieve complete remission within 60 days of starting treatment, progression of leukemia or death) than patients who received chemotherapy alone (median three months).

Common side effects of Rydapt in patients with AML include low levels of white blood cells with fever (febrile neutropenia), nausea, inflammation of the mucous membranes (mucositis), vomiting, headache, spots on the skin due to bleeding (petechiae), musculoskeletal pain, nosebleeds (epistaxis), device-related infection, high blood sugar (hyperglycemia) and upper respiratory tract infection. Rydapt should not be used in patients with hypersensitivity to midostaurin or other ingredients in Rydapt. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding should not take Rydapt because it may cause harm to a developing fetus or a newborn baby. Patients who experience signs or symptoms of lung damage (pulmonary toxicity) should stop using Rydapt.

Rydapt was also approved today for adults with certain types of rare blood disorders (aggressive systemic mastocytosis, systemic mastocytosis with associated hematological neoplasm or mast cell leukemia). Common side effects of Rydapt in these patients include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, swelling (edema), musculoskeletal pain, abdominal pain, fatigue, upper respiratory tract infection, constipation, fever, headache and shortness of breath.

The FDA granted this application Priority Review, Fast Track (for the mastocytosis indication) and Breakthrough Therapy (for the AML indication) designations.

The FDA granted the approval of Rydapt to Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. The FDA granted the approval of the LeukoStrat CDx FLT3 Mutation Assay to Invivoscribe Technologies Inc.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The new medication was used in combination with standard chemotherapy. That tells us the alternative was standard chemotherapy alone, an important comparison.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PITTSBURGH, June 2, 2016 - Surgery to remove the primary tumor in women diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer, followed by the standard combination of therapies, adds months to the patients' lives, compared with standard therapy alone, an international clinical trial led by a University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute (UPCI) professor revealed.

The results of the phase III randomized, controlled trial will be presented Saturday at the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) annual meeting in Chicago. The study was selected for the society's "Best of ASCO," an effort to condense the research "most relevant and significant to oncology" into a two-day program to increase global access to cutting-edge science.

"Our findings will change the standard of care for women newly diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer," said principal investigator Atilla Soran, M.D., M.P.H., clinical professor of surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, and breast surgical oncologist with UPMC CancerCenter. "We've shown that surgery to remove the primary tumor--either through lumpectomy or mastectomy--followed by standard therapy, is beneficial over no surgery."

Dr. Soran began the trial in 2007, ultimately recruiting a total of 274 women newly diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer from 25 institutions. Half the women received standard therapy, which avoids surgery and consists of a combination of chemotherapy, hormonal therapy and targeted therapy, while the other half first had surgery to remove their primary breast tumor, followed by the standard therapy.

At about 40 months after diagnosis, the women who received the surgery plus standard therapy lived an average of nine months longer than their counterparts who received standard therapy alone. Nearly 42 percent of the women who received surgery lived to five years after diagnosis, compared with less than 25 percent of the women who did not receive surgery.

The trial also showed that surgery in younger women with less aggressive cancers resulted in longer average survival than in women with more aggressive cancers that had spread to the liver or lungs.

"Our thinking is similar to how you might approach a battle against two enemies," said Dr. Soran. "First you quickly dispatch one army--the primary tumor--leaving you to concentrate all your efforts on battling the second army--any remaining cancer."

This research was primarily funded by the Turkish Federation of Societies for Breast Diseases. The study received scientific advisement from UPMC and assistance with statistical analysis from epidemiologists at the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health.

As the only NCI-designated comprehensive cancer center in western Pennsylvania, UPCI is a recognized leader in providing innovative cancer prevention, detection, diagnosis, and treatment; bio-medical research; compassionate patient care and support; and community-based outreach services. Investigators at UPCI, a partner with UPMC CancerCenter, are world-renowned for their work in clinical and basic cancer research.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does not adequately compare surgery with alternatives, although it does mention them:
“Half the women received standard therapy, which avoids surgery and consists of a combination of chemotherapy, hormonal therapy and targeted therapy,”
How did surgery compare? We aren’t told. notes that “At about 40 months after diagnosis, the women who received the surgery plus standard therapy lived an average of nine months longer than their counterparts who received standard therapy alone.” 
[Editors note: This rating has been revised to reflect that this criteria is satisfactorily addressed in the news release.]
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Train The Brain: Using Neurofeedback To Treat ADHD

Katherine Ellison's son was 12 when he was diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, or ADHD.

"He was getting into fights. He wasn't doing his homework. He was being very difficult with his little brother. And he was just melting down day after day," Ellison says. "So I decided to devote a year to trying out different approaches to see if we could make it any better."

In recent years, more people have been trying an alternative approach called neurofeedback, a type of therapy intended to teach the brain to stay calm and focused. Neurofeedback is expensive, time consuming and still scientifically unproved. But, there's growing evidence that it can help.

Ellison says the idea appealed to her immediately.

"Because I was always wary about using meds as a single approach or for very long, it seemed to be an interesting alternative. It's really like meditation on steroids," says Ellison, a journalist who won a Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting -- and who has ADHD herself.

Ellison has written a book about living with ADHD called Buzz: A Year of Paying Attention. And one chapter of the book is devoted to neurofeedback.

Ellison says she tried meditation, but her mind kept wandering. Neurofeedback is better for people with ADHD, she says, because it provides constant feedback during a session, which is usually done in a therapist's office.

People usually sit in a chair facing a laptop screen. The laptop is connected to electrodes applied to the scalp. Special software monitors the electrical activity in your brain. In particular, it measures rhythmic patterns known as theta and beta waves.

Proponents of neurofeedback say these patterns reveal when the brain is in a focused and attentive state. So the computer software looks for desirable brain wave patterns and changes the image on screen to let people know how they are doing.

The image that worked best for Ellison showed a field.

"When my brain responded the way that it was supposed to, the field would burst into color. I'd hear bird song and beautiful flowers would bloom," she says. "But when I got distracted or when I got a little bit more sped up, the flowers would wilt. It would turn gray, and I'd know that I needed to work a little bit harder."

At first, people can't control their brain wave patterns, at least not consciously. But over time, their brains become conditioned to associate certain patterns with pleasant images or sounds -- a reward for good behavior. And our brains like rewards.

This sort of brain training can take 40 sessions or more, and typically costs thousands of dollars.

Even though there are studies now showing that neurofeedback works for ADHD, all of these studies have serious limitations, researchers say. So the approach remains promising but unproved, says David Rabiner, a researcher at Duke University who writes a newsletter about treatments for ADHD.

"Parents do need to know that relative to treatments like medication treatment, to behavior therapy, at this point, the research base is not as extensive," Rabiner says.

On the other hand, Rabiner says, neurofeedback may offer something other treatments can't.

"The hope for neurofeedback is that after training ends, the benefits that resulted from training will persist -- that in some sense there's been more enduring change in the child's ability to focus and attend and to regulate their behavior," he says.

But it will take better research to figure out whether neurofeedback can live up to that promise, Rabiner says.

"There has been a need for some time to have the kind of carefully controlled study that would provide more definitive answers for parents and for the field," he says.

And that research appears to be on the way.

A team at The Ohio State University has nearly completed a pilot study of neurofeedback for ADHD that was funded by the National Institute of Mental Health.

The team had hoped to announce results last week at a scientific meeting in New York, but Gene Arnold, one of the scientists in charge of the study, says they had to delay that announcement because "we weren't able to get the results analyzed in time," he says.

The results should be out within a few weeks, Arnold says. In the meantime, he says, the study has shown that it is possible to do neurofeedback research that involves a placebo.

The study used a video game involving race cars. For kids who got neurofeedback, he says, "The ability to speed up the car and steer it was contingent on maintaining your brain waves in a more favorable ratio."

But other children got a placebo -- a race car that paid no attention to their brain waves.

Until a large study comes along using this sort of approach, parents and consumers will have to decide for themselves whether neurofeedback is worth the time and effort. Katherine Ellison says that for her and for her son, it was.

"What I noticed in my son was not necessarily that he'd stop losing things at school or do his homework better," she says. "The improvement I saw was that he was easier to live with."

But brain training might not be the only reason, Ellison says. She says it might have been because she and her son spent so much time going to all those sessions together, and had pizza together afterward.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes a researcher who says that two other approaches — medication and behavior therapy — have a more extensive research base supporting their use for ADHD compared with neurofeedback.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
That wouldn’t be surprising. The mineral found in popular supplement pills — and in dairy foods, leafy greens and many fortified foods — is unquestionably good for your bones. But in recent years, doctors have raised concerns that calcium supplements might be over-used and bad for hearts.

Recently, two new studies made headlines. One found a link between the supplements and a build-up of calcium in arteries, a possible precursor to heart attacks and strokes.

A second, wider-ranging study found no heart risks and was the basis of new guidelines from two medical groups saying that calcium supplements should be considered heart safe.

“The public has been receiving very confusing and alarming messages about calcium supplements,” says JoAnn Manson, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and chief of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.

About 35% of U.S. adults take calcium supplements, alone or in multivitamins, according to a recent report in the medical journal JAMA.

So here’s what all those people need to know.

Concerns about heart risks may be fading.

Over the past decade, some studies have raised the possibility that calcium, from supplements but not from food, might raise heart risks.

Most recently, researchers at Johns Hopkins University tracked nearly 3,000 adults and found that those who took calcium supplements at the study outset were 22% more likely to show artery calcification 10 years later. Those who got the most calcium from food had a decreased risk. But the study, published in the Journal of the American Heart Association, was not designed in a way that could prove the supplements caused the artery changes.

And its findings were quickly refuted by a larger review of 31 previous studies, including some with more rigorous designs. Taken together, those findings suggest healthy adults face no increased heart risks from calcium, in food or supplements, in amounts of up to 2,000-2,500 mg a day, researchers reported in the Annals of Internal Medicine. The review was funded by the non-profit National Osteoporosis Foundation, with support from Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, which makes calcium supplements.

“If you look at the overall totality of the evidence, there’s a lack of association between supplement use and heart attack and other cardiovascular events,” says Manson, who co-wrote an editorial accompanying the review.

The review “is really reassuring,” says Clifford Rosen, senior scientist at the Maine Medical Center Research Institute at the University of Maine. He was not involved in the research.

Also reassured: The osteoporosis foundation and the American Society for Preventive Cardiology, which issued new guidelines saying supplements appear heart safe.

Not everyone is convinced.

The larger review did not include all potentially relevant studies, says Erin Michos, an associate professor of medicine and epidemiology who led the Johns Hopkins study. “I’m still concerned about harm from supplements and I don’t advise them for my patients,” she says.

There are other reasons not to take calcium supplements.

The first is that most people don’t need them, Rosen says. Calcium intake from food has been rising, he says, with recent surveys finding averages around 1,000 mg a day — close to or meeting the 1,000 mg. to 1,200 mg recommended for adults (the higher level is advised for women over 50 and men over 70). Many people get more than they realize, he says, not just from milk, cheese and yogurt, but from vegetables, grains, and, increasingly, fortified foods and beverages.

When there is a gap, food is a better choice than supplements, the experts agree. Calcium-rich foods, such as milk (300 mg a cup), plain yogurt (400 mg per cup) and kale (100 mg a cup), come with added nutritional benefits. And supplements come with extra risks: increases in kidney stones and, for some people, constipation and bloating.

Some people do need supplements.

Older adults with osteoporosis — bone thinning severe enough to raise the risk of debilitating fractures — can benefit from calcium supplements, Rosen says, though most need just one 500 mg to 600 mg dose a day. Larger doses are poorly absorbed and rarely needed, he says.

Among others who might need a boost: Vegans, people with lactose intolerance and anyone who, for whatever reason, does not consume enough calcium, says Taylor Wallace, an affiliate professor of nutrition at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., and a co-author of the new cardiovascular statement.

Teen girls, who are in crucial bone-building years, often have diets that fall short of their needs, 1,300 mg a day, Wallace says.

Your bones need more than calcium alone.

Vitamin D — found in fatty fish, fortified foods and supplements, and produced by the skin in response to sun exposure — also is essential to bone health. Many supplements combine vitamin D and calcium, but experts disagree on who should take those supplements and in what doses. Under current U.S. nutrition guidelines, teens and adults are advised to get 600 to 800 international units of vitamin D each day.

Also important for bone health: weight-bearing exercise, such as walking, dancing and workouts with weights.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: On its face, the story deals with two options: taking calcium supplements or not taking them. Both options are addressed here, so it earns a “satisfactory” rating. But this story also goes a step further, highlighting other factors in supporting bone health, including vitamin D consumption and exercise.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- When a manufacturer recalls an implanted heart defibrillator because of a potential flaw, patients and doctors must decide whether to leave the device in the body or replace it.

A new Canadian study provides the first estimate of the risk of major complications from replacement surgery, important information for patients facing the choice.

"That risk is much higher than we initially thought," said study co-author Dr. Andrew Krahn of the London Health Sciences Center in Ontario. Some patients "might want to hang out and wait and see what happens," Krahn said.

Six percent of the 533 patients who decided to have their recalled defibrillators replaced over a 12-month period suffered major complications, including two deaths, according to a study published in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association.

In contrast, the risk of failure among recently recalled defibrillators has been estimated by the manufacturers at just 0.009 percent to 2.6 percent. And not every failure is deadly.

Implantable defibrillators can be as small as a half dollar and are placed surgically under the skin of the upper chest. Vice President Dick Cheney is among the thousands of Americans who have one.

When the device senses a dangerous and potentially deadly irregular heartbeat, it sends electrical impulses to jolt the heart back to normal. It can correct a heart that beats too fast, as in ventricular tachycardia, or quivers chaotically, a condition known as ventricular fibrillation.

A total of 270,000 defibrillators have been recalled since January 2005, though it is unclear how many were inside patients and how many were on the shelf, according to the Food and Drug Administration. About 80,000 patients received the implantable devices in 2004.

Krahn said the rate of complications from surgical removal will surprise doctors, because replacing a defibrillator is considered a minor procedure.

"It's typically performed with a local anesthetic and sedation. It takes an hour or less," he said. "Most patients return home the same day."

The researchers studied 2,915 patients who were tracked by 17 Canadian hospitals in 2004-05. All the patients had devices that were recalled by manufacturers, Canada's national health system or the FDA.

Only 18 percent decided to undergo replacement surgery. Infection, bruising or bleeding required a follow-up operation in 31 of those patients. Two patients died.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: It is clear from the article that leaving a ‘recalled’ device in place is an option. Other options for treating heart rhythm problems are not noted. However, there are often not good options.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Double chin got you down? There's now a shot for that.

The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a new treatment for adults with "moderate-to-severe fat" below the chin, known as submental fat. The drug, Kybella, is a form of synthetically derived deoxycholic acid, which the body produces naturally to help absorb fats.

Kybella is aimed at destroying fat cells when injected in the area below the chin, while leaving surrounding tissue essentially unaffected. The FDA warned, however, that the treatment also has the potential to kill other types of cells, such as skin cells, if injected improperly.

Patients can receive as many as 50 injections of the drug in a single treatment, the agency said, with up to six treatments administered no less than a month apart. That might seem like a lot of pain for the pleasure of a slimmed-down chin, but currently patients looking to part with their double chins must have fat removed through more invasive means, such as liposuction.

[More women want big butts and the stats don't lie]

The market for the new drug could be a big one.

According to a survey last year by the American Society for Dermatologic Surgery, nearly 70 percent of respondents listed "excess fat under the chin/neck" as a key concern about their appearance. And Americans repeatedly have demonstrated a willingness to shell out money for aesthetic treatments intended to improve their appearance, if not their overall health. A top example: Annual sales of the anti-wrinkle drug Botox have surged to $2 billion in recent years.

Keith Leonard, chief executive of Kythera, the California-based firm that developed Kybella, said at a conference last month that he believes the new treatment "can drive a very large market and leave very satisfied patients."

The FDA said Kybella demonstrated safety and efficacy in two clinical trials involving more than 1,000 adults. A reduction in chin fat was "observed more frequently" in patients receiving the treatment than in those who got a placebo.

[Seriously, why does anyone under 18 still have access to a tanning bed?]

That said, the agency warned Wednesday that the new drug can cause serious side effects, including trouble swallowing or nerve damage to the jaw that can result in an uneven smile or muscle weakness in the face. The most common side effects included swelling, bruising, pain, numbness, redness and areas of hardness in the vicinity of the injection. FDA officials said Kybella should be administered only by a "licensed health care professional," and shouldn't be injected anywhere other than below the chin.

A Kythera representative said Wednesday that the new treatment likely won't be available until June, as it must train doctors to administer Kybella, and that the company would not have more details about the potential cost of the drug until after its launch.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions an alternative this way: “… currently patients looking to part with their double chins must have fat removed through more invasive means, such as liposuction.”
We’ll give the story credit for noting an alternative to the 300 injections required with Kybella. But we wish the story had provided information about the comparative effectiveness of the two procedures, or at least a comment that at the moment, no such comparison can be made.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PROVIDENCE, R.I. [Brown University] -- New results from a clinical trial involving more than 900 military veterans at high risk for keratinocyte carcinoma skin cancer provides evidence that using the generic skin cream fluorouacil 5 percent for two to four weeks may reduce the risk of a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) needing surgery by 75 percent within a year.

The finding that less than one month's use of fluorouacil 5% (5-FU) appeared to prevent cancer for up to a year is encouraging, said lead author Dr. Martin A. Weinstock, a professor of dermatology in the Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University and chief of dermatology at the Providence Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

The dose is the same as dermatologists currently employ to treat actinic keratosis. In a 2015 study, Weinstock and co-authors showed the up to four-week regimen of 5-FU had a multi-year preventive benefit in reducing the number of actinic keratosis (AK) and the need for treatment. Earlier this year, they also showed that the medicine prevents new AKs from emerging for two to three years.

Meanwhile, current means for preventing new carcinomas in high-risk patients -- sunscreen or oral medications -- cease to work as soon as they are no longer used. But in the new study, 5-FU appeared to provide prolonged protection after discontinuation and could be combined with sunscreen, Weinstock said.

In the absence of such a long-lasting prevention option, he said, the typical approach to caring for patients with a history of prior carcinomas is to monitor for the next cancer and then remove it surgically -- an effective but imposing strategy often called "wait and cut."

"People don't appreciate having stuff cut on their face a lot," said Weinstock, who led the trial funded by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and conducted at a dozen V.A. hospitals around the country. "They do it if there is a cancer there, but we want to take a proactive approach where we can give them something to reduce their risk of getting new cancers."

The new results are published in JAMA Dermatology.

Between 2009 and 2013, the Veterans Affairs Keratinocyte Carcinoma Chemoprevention Trial randomly assigned 932 veterans who each had at least two prior basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) or SCCs to either receive the 5-FU cream or a cream just like it but without the active ingredient as an experimental control. All of the veterans were instructed to apply their cream twice a day to their face and ears for up to four weeks. They also received a 30 SPF sunscreen and received education about skin cancer, sunscreen and sun safety.

The two groups were both almost exclusively white and male, and they averaged 71 years of age. The experimental and control groups were very similar along all other measured characteristics, including their self- reported degree of prior sun exposure and sunburn. Veterans typically have spent a large amount of time in the sun during their years of service.

Both groups went to their V.A. center twice a year for two to four years for follow-up exams with a dermatologist. Neither the veterans nor the examining dermatologists knew who received 5-FU and who received the placebo.

After the first year, 20 of the 464 veterans in the control group developed a squamous cell carcinoma that required surgery, but only five of the 468 veterans who got 5-FU did, a statistically significant 75 percent reduction in the risk, according to the study. For the subsequent three years, there was no longer a significant difference between the two groups in the number of patients who required surgical treatment for an SCC.

For BCCs, there was an 11 percent reduced risk after the first year among the group that received 5-FU, but that difference was not statistically significant. In the second year, BCC cases requiring surgery rose in the 5-FU group, but in years three and four, and by the end of the study, there was no significant overall difference in risk of developing a BCC requiring surgical treatment. After four years, 298 of all study the participants had developed at least one BCC, and 108 had developed at least one SCC.

The study did show a significant decrease in the risk of needing Mohs surgery to treat a BCC in the first year. Mohs surgery is more effective but also more elaborate and expensive than a conventional procedure, Weinstock said. In the study's first year, 36 BCCs were treated with Mohs surgery in 27 participants in the control group, but only 17 BCCs were treated with the procedure among 14 patients in the 5-FU group.

"This suggests that using the 5-FU can reduce the resources needed to treat these carcinomas," Weinstock said.

The cream does have common side effects including reddened, more sensitive and often crusty skin, effects that resolve when the application of the cream stops, Weinstock acknowledged. After the study's first six months, 21 percent of the 5-FU group rated the side effects as "severe," and 40 percent rated them as "moderate."

But after six months and again at the end of the four-year trial, 87 percent of participants in the 5-FU group said they'd be willing to repeat the treatment if it proved effective in reducing skin cancer.

In his clinical work, Weinstock said that for particularly high-risk patients, he has recommended 5-FU treatment. Based on the study results, it could be that patients need to renew their regimen with the cream every year.

"The most remarkable thing about this study is that now we have something to use that doesn't lose its effectiveness when you stop using it," Weinstock said. "But this is the first study of its type. I'm hopeful there will be other studies that show other sorts of regimens that last longer and do a better job over time as science progresses. This is an important first step."

He and colleagues are planning further studies, including one to determine the cost-effectiveness of 5-FU treatment.

In addition to Weinstock, the new study has many authors from the VAKCC trial including at each of the study's 12 sites: Boston; Bay Pines, Fla.; Chicago, Ill.; Palo Alto, Calif.; Atlanta; Loma Linda Calif.; Minneapolis; Nashville; Denver; Durham, N.C.; Philadelphia; and Miami.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study mentions that surgery is the normal response to these skin cancers and that Mohs surgery is the procedure of choice in many cases. It also points out that “current means for preventing new carcinomas in high-risk patients — sunscreen or oral medications” — are available.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eylea outperforms Avastin for diabetic macular edema with moderate or worse vision loss

NIH-funded clinical trial shows Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis perform similarly when vision loss is mild.

A two-year clinical trial that compared three drugs for diabetic macular edema (DME) found that gains in vision were greater for participants receiving the drug Eylea (aflibercept) than for those receiving Avastin (bevacizumab), but only among participants starting treatment with 20/50 or worse vision. Gains after two years were about the same for Eylea and Lucentis (ranibizumab), contrary to year-one results from the study, which showed Eylea with a clear advantage. The three drugs yielded similar gains in vision for patients with 20/32 or 20/40 vision at the start of treatment. The clinical trial was conducted by the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net), which is funded by the National Eye Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health.

“This rigorous trial confirms that Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all effective treatments for diabetic macular edema,” said NEI Director Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D. “Eye care providers and patients can have confidence in all three drugs.”

Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all widely used to treat DME, a consequence of diabetes that can cause blurring of central vision due to the leakage of fluid from abnormal blood vessels in the retina. The macula is the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The drugs are injected into the eye and work by inhibiting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a substance that can promote abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage. Although the drugs have a similar mode of action, they differ significantly in cost. Based on Medicare allowable charges, the per-injection costs of each drug at the doses used in this study were about $1850 for Eylea, about $60 for Avastin, and about $1200 for Lucentis.

DRCR.net investigators enrolled 660 people with DME at 89 clinical trial sites across the United States. When the study began, participants on average were 61 years old with 17 years of type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Only people with a visual acuity of 20/32 or worse were eligible to participate (to see clearly, a person with 20/32 vision would have to be 20 feet away from an object that a person with normal vision could see clearly at 32 feet). At enrollment, about half the participants had 20/32 to 20/40 vision. The other half had 20/50 or worse vision. In many states, a corrected visual acuity of 20/40 or better in at least one eye is required for a driver’s license that allows both day- and nighttime driving.

Each participant was assigned randomly to receive Eylea (2.0 milligrams/0.05 milliliter), Avastin (1.25 mg/0.05 mL), or Lucentis (0.3 mg/0.05 mL). Participants were evaluated monthly during the first year and every 4-16 weeks during the second year. Most participants received monthly injections during the first six months. Thereafter, participants received additional injections of assigned study drug until DME resolved or stabilized with no further vision improvement. Subsequently, injections were resumed if DME worsened. Additionally, laser treatment was given if DME persisted without continual improvement after six months of injections. Laser treatment alone was the standard treatment for DME until widespread adoption of anti-VEGF drugs a few years ago.

Among participants with 20/40 or better vision at the trial’s start, all three drugs improved vision similarly on an eye chart. On average, participants’ vision improved from 20/40 vision to 20/25.

Among participants with 20/50 or worse vision at the trial’s start, visual acuity on average improved substantially in all three groups. At two years, Eylea participants were able to read about 3.5 additional lines on an eye chart; Lucentis participants were able to read about three additional lines, and Avastin participants improved about 2.5 lines, compared with visual acuity before treatment. Eylea outperformed Avastin at the one- and two-year time points. While Eylea outperformed Lucentis at the one-year time point, by the two-year time point gains in visual acuity were statistically no different. At the end of the trial, average visual acuity was 20/32 to 20/40 among participants in all three groups.

“The results of the DRCR Network’s comparison of Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis will help doctors and their patients with diabetic macular edema choose the most appropriate therapy,” said John A. Wells, M.D., the lead author of the study and a retinal specialist at the Palmetto Retina Center, Columbia, South Carolina. “The study suggests there is little advantage of choosing Eylea or Lucentis over Avastin when a patient’s loss of visual acuity from macular edema is mild, meaning a visual acuity of 20/40 or better. However, patients with 20/50 or worse vision loss may benefit from Eylea, which over the course of the two-year study outperformed Lucentis and Avastin.”

The number of injections participants needed was about the same for all three treatment groups. Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis participants on average required nine injections in the first year of the study and five in the second year.

The need for laser treatment varied among the three treatment groups. By two years, 41 percent of participants in the Eylea group received laser treatment to treat their macular edema, compared with 64 percent of participants in the Avastin group and 52 percent in the Lucentis group.

The risk of heart attack, stroke, or death from a cardiovascular condition or an unknown cause by end of the trial was higher among participants in the Lucentis group. Twelve percent of Lucentis participants had at least one event, compared with five percent of participants in the Eylea group and eight percent of participants in the Avastin group. This difference in cardiovascular rates has not been seen across all other studies, and therefore may be due to chance. Continued assessment of these serious cardiovascular events and their association with these drugs is important in future studies. Cardiovascular events such as heart attack and stroke are common complications of diabetes. The occurrence of eye complications, such as eye infections and inflammation, was similar for all three drugs.

Results of the study were published online today in Ophthalmology, the journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmology. Eylea and Lucentis were provided by drug manufacturers Regeneron and Genentech, respectively. Additional research funding for this study was provided by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, also a part of NIH.

“This important study would not have happened without funding from the National Institutes of Health and the cooperation of two competing companies,” said Adam R. Glassman, M.S., principal investigator of the DRCR.Net Coordinating Center at the Jaeb Center for Health Research.

The DRCR.net is dedicated to facilitating multicenter clinical research of diabetic eye disease. The Network formed in 2002 and comprises more than 350 physicians practicing at more than 140 clinical sites across the country. For more information, visit the DRCR.net website at http://drcrnet.jaeb.org/.

The study was funded by grants EY14231, EY14229, and EY18817.

The study is registered as NCT01627249 at ClinicalTrials.gov.

Macular edema can arise during any stage of diabetic retinopathy and is the most common cause of diabetes-related vision loss. About 7.7 million Americans have diabetic retinopathy. Of these, about 750,000 have DME. The NEI provides information about diabetic eye disease at http://www.nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic. View an NEI video about how diabetic retinopathy can be detected through a comprehensive dilated eye exam at http://youtu.be/sQ-0RkPu35o.

NEI leads the federal government's research on the visual system and eye diseases. NEI supports basic and clinical science programs that result in the development of sight-saving treatments. For more information, visit http://www.nei.nih.gov.

The NIDDK, a component of the NIH, conducts and supports research on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, nutrition and obesity; and kidney, urologic and hematologic diseases. Spanning the full spectrum of medicine and afflicting people of all ages and ethnic groups, these diseases encompass some of the most common, severe and disabling conditions affecting Americans. For more information about the NIDDK and its programs, visit http://www.niddk.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Corrective laser surgery is named as the alternative therapy to drugs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
According to a U.S. government advisory panel, almost no one should get screened for prostate cancer. But a new study this week reflects the continued view of many physicians — that screening does help to catch tumors earlier. To screen or not to screen: here's why experts still can't agree

If you’re wondering why experts still can’t agree on prostate-cancer screening, you’re not alone.

Just two months ago, a major U.S. government panel said that basically no one should get screened for prostate cancer, claiming the simple blood test for prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, does more harm than good. Now, a new study looks at government data and finds that, without PSA testing, the U.S. would have three times as many patients each year diagnosed with advanced-stage prostate cancer — and the vast majority of those cases would be fatal.

“Almost all men with clinically apparent metastases at initial diagnosis will die from prostate cancer,” urologist and study author Edward Messing told reporters, as he explained the importance of his study.

The new study reflects a broader divide in the medical community, between public health experts who have largely turned away from PSA screening, and many practicing clinicians who feel the test has helped their patients immensely.

No one denies that PSA tests can help to catch prostate cancer early. But two issues are still unresolved. One is how well screening can actually work to prevent cancer deaths; the other is what kind of negative effects screening brings along with its benefits.

On the first issue, there is still some uncertainty. In the U.S., a large randomized trial found no mortality benefit of screening. But an even larger randomized clinical trial in Europe has found a benefit. In its latest results published this spring, the European study team said that men who undergo routine testing have significantly lower risk of prostate-cancer death after 11 years.

Still, the real crux of the debate on PSA testing is the second issue: the possible negative effects of screening. No diagnostic test is 100% accurate, and if a PSA test comes back positive for prostate cancer, the patient will usually be referred for a biopsy to confirm the diagnosis. That test can have side effects. Then, if the patient does have cancer, the available treatments for it — surgery, radiation, as well as other options — also have side effects, chief among them impotence, incontinence, and urinary incontinence. The same European trial that found lower cancer mortality with PSA testing also found that, to save just one life through screening, an extra 37 men would need to be diagnosed with prostate cancer and treated. Many health experts think that’s too much risky treatment to justify the results.

So when the government advisory panel — the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force — recommends against routine PSA testing, it’s making a judgment call. It’s saying that, for most men, the (albeit small) risk of sexual dysfunction and urinary leakage from eventual treatment is not worth it, given the even smaller chance that PSA testing could save your life. But that decision does remain a judgment call. It depends on how much you value certain quality-of-life measures versus how much you value having any life at all.

As for the new paper this week, which suggests that three times as many men would be diagnosed each year with metastatic prostate cancer if it weren’t for PSA testing, that study is published in the journal Cancer — and its numbers deserve a little explanation. To calculate the total number of metastatic cases we’d get without screening, the study takes today’s population of the United States and applies the rates (broken down by age and race) of advanced-stage prostate cancer that were observed before PSA testing was introduced — that is, the rates way back in 1983-85.

In other words, it tells us what the current U.S. population would look like if today we faced the same risks that Americans faced in the ’80s; it finds we’d have roughly 25,000 U.S. men diagnosed with advanced-stage prostate cancer each year compared to just 8,000 today. But is going back in time 30 years really the same thing that we’d get if we abolished PSA testing today? Who knows? The rate of new diagnoses of all cancer types combined has been falling consistently in recent years. However, prostate cancer is one of the few cancers that’s not strongly linked to smoking (and falling cigarette consumption over the past 40 years is a major reason for falling cancer rates). It is, however, linked to obesity, which has been on the rise since the 1980s.

One further fact to keep in mind is that PSA testing works to cut the number of newly diagnosed advanced-stage cancers — but it does so by increasing the number of cancers that are caught early. And, as the debate over PSA testing shows us, early diagnosis is only useful if early treatment can help patients live longer and healthier lives, preventing progression to advanced-stage cancer down the line, but without increasing the risks of other health problems too much in the process. That’s what experts can’t agree about.

Many doctors do have very strong opinions, though. As a patient, if you’re deciding whether to get a PSA test, or whether not to get a PSA test, remember you do have a right to your own opinion too. There’s no easy answer.

MORE: Prostate Cancer Screening: What You Need to Know
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternative to PSA screening is the choice to decline screening, which is implicit in the discussion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 14, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Preliminary research suggests that a single injection of a man-made protein might lower levels of "bad" cholesterol.

Given in the abdomen, AMG145 reduced low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels among a group of healthy volunteers. The shot turned off a newly identified cholesterol regulator, PCSK9, which interferes with the liver's ability to clear bad cholesterol from the bloodstream.

The findings were presented Monday at the American Heart Association (AHA) annual meeting in Orlando, Fla. The study was funded by AMG145 manufacturer Amgen Inc.

High cholesterol is a major risk factor for heart disease. The first step toward lowering cholesterol is typically lifestyle changes, which include eating a low-fat diet and regular physical activity. For some, medications such as statins must be added to get cholesterol levels where they ought to be. Even this is not enough to get everyone's numbers into the safety zone, and not everyone can tolerate currently available medications. An LDL of less than 100 mg/dL of blood is considered optimal.

Study author Clapton Dias, medical sciences director of clinical pharmacology and early development at Amgen, in Thousand Oaks, Calif., said this shot could be given as an add-on to current cholesterol-lowering therapies for people who are not getting as low as they should be or as a standalone treatment for people who can't tolerate existing lipid-lowering drugs.

"Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death in the U.S., and while statins are very effective, a good proportion of people are not meeting their goals, and in this setting the shot could be a valuable addition," he said.

The study included 54 men and two women aged 18 to 45 who did not have elevated cholesterol levels. Participants received one of five doses of the new drug delivered via shot or intravenously or a placebo. Researchers measured LDL cholesterol levels for 85 to 113 days after treatment.

The new drug did hit its target, PCSK9, and decreased levels of LDL cholesterol by up to 64 percent. There were also decreases seen in levels of total cholesterol and apo-B (tiny fat particles in the blood that also increase the risk for heart disease). Levels of triglycerides and "good" HDL cholesterol were not altered by the medication, and there were no serious side effects reported. Now, researchers are testing the new shot in people who have high cholesterol.

Cardiologists were cautiously optimistic about the novel therapy.

Former AHA President Dr. Ralph Sacco said that it is too early to make any predictions about what role, if any, this therapy will have in lowering cholesterol levels, but it could one day fill an important void.

"Even though statins are so effective at lowering cholesterol and reducing risk for heart disease and stroke, they do need to be taken every day and they can have certain side effects in some people," said Sacco, who is also chairman of neurology at the University of Miami. Statin side effects can include liver damage and/or muscle pain.

"This new shot may provide a more long-lasting approach, especially if it could be given once a month," Sacco said.

Dr. Dan Rader, director of preventive cardiology at the University of Pennsylvania, said that PCSK9 is "the hottest target for new treatments to lower LDL cholesterol." And these study results will probably fuel that fire, he added.

"A 60-plus percent reduction in LDL with a single dose of this antibody is impressive," he said. "It is the early days, but the data look strong. We now need more data with people who have repeated dosing and are followed for longer periods of time," Rader added.

"There are still plenty of people who can't achieve adequate LDL levels with existing drugs, including statins," he noted. Plus, "people may find it easier to get a shot every two weeks or monthly than to take a pill every day."

Research presented at meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

Learn about existing treatments for high cholesterol at the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions healthy lifestyle changes and statin drugs as established ways to lower cholesterol. It could have mentioned other approaches — such as nonstatin cholesterol-lowering drugs as well as special margarines fortified with plant sterols — that are sometimes used to lower cholesterol.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The debate over coronary bypass surgery versus stenting goes back decades.

Studies have been inconclusive, but doctors and patients have voted with their feet in favor of the less-invasive procedure — clearing clogged arteries and propping them open with tiny scaffolds called stents.

U.S. doctors do at least two stenting procedures these days for every coronary bypass operation.

Now the biggest collection of cases so far comes out in favor of surgery on the all-important question of mortality. Four years after the procedure, patients over 65 who had coronary artery bypass surgeries (called CABG or "cabbages") were almost 20 percent less likely to die.

Put another way, 21 percent of stented patients had died after four years compared with 16 percent of surgery patients.

Is that a big difference? Well, the study's lead author tells Shots that it might be enough to "tip the balance a little bit, but not overwhelmingly so."

The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, which funded the study with new "stimulus" money from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, is more bullish on the implications.

"We would hope a study as powerful as this one will inform decision-makers to rethink the direction they're going in," the NHLBI's Dr. Michael Lauer told Shots. He says it's been worrying that so many doctors have been opting for stenting over surgery.

Study author Dr. William Weintraub, chief of cardiology at Christiana Care Health System in Newark, Del., is presenting the data at the annual meeting of the American College of Cardiology in Chicago. The study also appears online in the New England Journal of Medicine.

It draws on data from more than 86,000 patients across the nation who underwent CABG operations and nearly 104,000 patients who had coronary stenting. They had blockages in either two or three coronary arteries but did not require emergency procedures.

Although the pro-surgery outcome is not a game-changer, Weintraub says it might cause some doctors and patients to consider surgery. And he says it supports those who now opt for CABGs.

"It's a very big deal to recommend coronary surgery to patients," Weintraub says. "I think doctors work very hard to weigh what's best for their patients. When doctors recommend surgery, these data suggest that that decision is a good one."

But Dr. Laura Mauri says in an accompanying editorial that the new study can't settle any debates. Only studies that randomly assign comparable patients to surgery or stenting can do that. Mauri is an interventional cardiologist – i.e., a specialist who does coronary stenting – at Brigham and Women's Hospital inBoston.

Weintraub notes it's "very difficult and expensive" to do randomized studies on this question – and to make the comparison groups truly comparable. And while such a study is being done, the technology (especially stenting technology) changes. That can call into question the ultimate relevance of the findings.

So the new data may be the best that doctors and patients in this situation can expect for the foreseeable future.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study itself was a comparison between two treatment paths, and the story explains that. A mention of drug treatment as an option would have been welcome.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A recent study from the Center for BrainHealth at The University of Texas at Dallas shows that a certain type of instructor-led brain training protocol can stimulate structural changes in the brain and neural connections even years after a traumatic brain injury (TBI).

The findings, published in Brain and Behavior, further suggest that changes in cortical thickness and neural network connectivity may prove an effective way to quantitatively measure treatment efficacy, an ability that has not existed until now. Building upon previous research, the study challenges the widely held belief that recovery from a TBI is limited to two years after an injury.

"A TBI disrupts brain structure. These brain changes can interfere with brain network communication and the cognitive functions those networks support," said Dr. Kihwan Han, research scientist at the Center for BrainHealth and lead author of the study.

"For people with chronic TBI, they may have trouble with daily tasks such as creating shopping lists and resolving conflicts with others for many years after the injury. These findings provide hope for people who thought, 'This is as good as my recovery is going to get' and for the medical community who have yet to find a way to objectively measure a patient's recovery," he said.

The study included 60 adults with TBI symptoms lasting an average of eight years. Participants were randomly placed into one of two cognitive training groups: strategy-based training or knowledge-based training. Over an eight-week period, the strategy-based training group learned strategies to improve attention and reasoning. The knowledge-based training group learned information about the structure and function of the brain as well as the effects of sleep and exercise on brain performance.

Magnetic resonance imaging measured cortical thickness and resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) before training, after training and three months post-training. Previous studies have shown that cortical thickness and rsFC can be potential markers for training-induced brain changes.

Individuals in the strategy-based reasoning training showed a greater change in cortical thickness and connectivity compared to individuals who received the knowledge-based training. Changes in cortical thickness and functional connectivity also correlated to an individual's ability to switch between tasks quickly and consistently to achieve a specific goal.

"People who showed the greatest change in cortical thickness and connectivity, showed the greatest performance increases in our cognitive tasks. Perhaps future studies could investigate the added benefit of brain stimulation treatments in combination with cognitive training for individuals with chronic TBI who experience problems with attention, memory or executive functions," Han said.

The work was supported by the Department of Defense, the Meadows Foundation and the Friends of BrainHealth Distinguished New Scientist Award.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release compares strategy-based training against knowledge-based training. But the release neglected to mention other approaches to treating TBI. Since the focus here is on cognitive impairments, the release might have mentioned some common treatments such cognitive behavior therapy and occupational therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Ali Andrew Li was born on Jan. 7, he was gently placed on his mother's chest, where doctors cleaned and examined him and covered him with a warm blanket.

"I just loved it," his mother, Salma Shabaik, a family physician who lives in Los Angeles, says. "It was really nice to have the baby right there beneath my eyes where I could feel him, touch him, kiss him."

That was different than the birth of her son Elias two years ago; he was whisked away to a bassinet to be examined. And unlike Elias, who cried a lot after delivery, Shabaik says Ali stopped crying "within seconds" after being placed on her chest.

Kangaroo mother care has been widely used worldwide to care for premature babies, and it's gaining popularity in caring for healthy full term babies like Ali as well. It is as it sounds: Like a kangaroo's pouch, mothers hold their naked newborns on their bare chest for the first few hours of life.

At Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center where Ali was born, the technique is routinely practiced for healthy mothers and newborns. The baby gets to know their mother immediately, says Dr. Larry Gray, behavioral and developmental pediatrician at Comer Children's Hospital, University of Chicago Medicine. "The baby gets landed in a trusting environment," he says, reassuring them that life outside the womb can also be "soft, comfortable and warm."

The benefits are many, according to Dr. Lydia Kyung-Min Lee, an ob-gyn at UCLA. Not only is the baby happier, she says, but his or her vitals are more stable. Body temperature, heart and breathing rate normalize more quickly. The close contact also allows the baby to be exposed to the same bacteria as the mother, which can protect against allergies and infection in the future. Infants who receive kangaroo care breast feed more easily, Lee says, and their mothers tend to breast feed for longer periods of time, which is "all good."

Babies also seem to suffer less pain. Almost 20 years ago, Gray studied how babies respond to a heel prick to draw blood, a procedure that screens newborns for genetic disorders. He found that when healthy newborns had kangaroo care, there was less facial grimacing and crying suggesting pain, compared to babies who had been swaddled and had the procedure in their bassinets, "sort of alone."

One of the first places to show how this technique can help preemies was Colombia in the 1990s. There, hospitals with no access to incubators and other equipment often sent home preemies with no expectation that they would live. But doctors were surprised to see that babies whose mothers carried them close, skin to skin, not only survived but thrived.

This was a "serendipitous magical finding," says Gray, suggesting that skin-to-skin contact acted something like a "natural incubator."

Gray also points to the work of Myron Hofer, a psychiatrist with Columbia University Medical Center who studies attachment between mother and infants. Hofer coined the term "hidden regulators" that pass between mother and baby. It's not just that mother and baby are together, Gray says, but also that the mother is in some way "programming the baby, the breathing, temperature and heart rate."

That "magic" can also happen between baby and father, too, says Gray, if there's skin-to-skin contact. And if mothers or babies are very sick and have to be isolated, Gray suggests mothers take any opportunity to hold their infant skin to skin. Even a little bit of kangaroo contact, he says, can be beneficial.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There is a very brief, indirect discussion of what happens if kangaroo care is not in place, which is that the newborn baby is placed in a bassinet or incubator, “sort of alone.” That’s just barely enough to rate satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It may seem strange to fight bacteria with more bacteria, but it could lead to a long-term solution for eczema patients

Eczema is the most common skin disease worldwide. People suffering from it often deal with a lifetime of painful symptoms. A new clinical trial is testing a natural treatment that researchers hope will provide a long-term solution for those dealing with the dry, itchy and painful skin that comes with chronic eczema. The trial uses a cream containing beneficial bacteria to fight harmful bacteria on the skin. While it may seem counterintuitive to treat bacteria with more bacteria, experts say this approach seeks to restore the natural microbial balance of healthy skin.

"There are over 1,000 species of bacteria that all live in balance on healthy skin, some that even produce natural antibiotics. However, we know that eczema patients lack the beneficial bacteria needed to kill Staph aureus, harmful bacteria that can worsen eczema," said Donald Leung, MD, head of the Division of Pediatric Allergy & Immunology at National Jewish Health.

To fight harmful bacteria, researchers isolate beneficial bacteria from our skin and grow it in a lab. It is then applied to eczema patients' skin as a lotion twice a day for a week. Bacterial DNA from patients' skin is then analyzed in a lab to determine if the cream effectively reduced the amount of bad bacteria present.

"Ideally, we want to eliminate all staph aureus from the skin of eczema patients," said Leung. "What the cream does is help the skin gain back its natural balance and create that barrier needed to keep it healthy."

Researchers hope that using the bacteria-infused cream will offer a long-term solution where other treatments fall short. Powerful antibiotics are commonly prescribed for eczema, but they kill good bacteria on patients' skin along with the bad. Creams containing corticosteroids are also often prescribed to eczema patients, but they come with harsh side effects, and patients usually can't tolerate them for long periods of time.

"The worst symptom of eczema is the itching and the scratching, and the more you scratch, the more it spreads. It can be very painful," said Cassandra Rodriguez, 33, who has struggled with eczema all her life.

Cassandra has tried just about every cream and medication on the market, and says when she learned about the clinical trial, she was on board to give it a try.

"The trial coordinator explained that it's like a probiotic for your skin," said Rodriguez. "You hear all these things about good bacteria for your gut, so it seemed like a promising idea to apply that same concept to the skin."

Cassandra's son also has eczema, and she's hoping this research will lead to an effective treatment so that he won't have to suffer with the pain and embarrassment of the disease for as long as she has. "He's little now, but dealing with eczema as a teen and an adult is really difficult," said Rodriguez. "If there were something on the market that could help him and help everyone suffering with eczema every day, that would be amazing."

Experts say there is more research to be done, but that the goal of the trial is to discover the best combination of bacteria to clear eczema from the skin and then make it available to patients as a prescription cream. The next steps involve testing those different combinations, ensuring they're safe and conducting a longer trial to see if the benefits of bacterial cream can truly provide a permanent solution for eczema patients.

National Jewish Health is the leading respiratory hospital in the nation. Founded 119 years ago as a nonprofit hospital, National Jewish Health today is the only facility in the world dedicated exclusively to groundbreaking medical research and treatment of patients with respiratory, cardiac, immune and related disorders. Patients and families come to National Jewish Health from around the world to receive cutting-edge, comprehensive and coordinated care. To learn more, visit njhealth.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article does well in mentioning two alternative treatments for eczema that can often prove problematic: antibiotics and corticosteroids.
There are a host of other treatment options as listed here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Sharon Samuels was a teenager when she was first diagnosed with essential tremor. Over the years her condition worsened, until a new therapy came along to help improve her brain's motor circuit.

For decades, Sharon Samuels struggled with simple everyday tasks like brushing her teeth, buttoning her shirt, putting on makeup, and eating food.

“I did not want to go out socially with other people, especially people who I did not know, because I could see them looking at me. And the feeling was horrible,” she recalled. “It would take my heart away when I was trying to eat and I’d look up and they were looking at me.”

Samuels, 72, has essential tremor, a movement disorder characterized by uncontrollable shaking mostly in the hands or legs. An estimated 10 million people in the United States suffer from the condition, according to the International Essential Tremor Foundation. The disorder isn’t fatal, but it tends to get worse with age and to affect patients’ quality of life.

Doctors usually treat essential tremor with medication, but the drugs don’t work well for all patients. Now a new trial finds that a treatment to kill off neurons in a certain region of the brain can do away with tremors in some patients who don’t respond to drugs. But the procedure brings lasting side effects in some patients, and its long-term usefulness is still being studied.

In an ongoing clinical trial at 11 medical centers globally, researchers are using ultrasound waves to treat the source of essential tremor in the brain. The therapy, called focused ultrasound thalamotomy, uses the energy generated by sound waves to burn off certain cells in the thalamus, a region of the brain where the essential tremor is thought to originate.

Patients are placed in an MRI machine with their head secured in place in a special helmet. They are awake as doctors aim over 1,000 low-energy ultrasound waves to create a lesion — an injury to the tissue — inside the thalamus.

“As we make the test lesion, we see a subtle improvement in their tremor and the patients notice it,” said Dr. Rees Cosgrove who is leading the trial at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston. Brigham is one of the six centers running the trial in the US.

“As we enlarge the lesion, the tremor just stops and they’ll just look at their hand. It has been shaking for years and they look at it as though, ‘Hmm, is this really my hand?’ It’s really a remarkable moment.”

For Samuels, who underwent the procedure on June 29, the recovery has been surprising. She had been taking tremor medication for almost a decade with little improvement. After the procedure, which only focused on her left hand, her tremor there has almost disappeared.

“This has changed the quality of my life,” she said. “Now, it’s a pleasure, I can sign my name, I can write. I can eat like a normal person, doing things that I couldn’t do before.”

In July, the Food and Drug Administration approved the device being used in the trial. It has been developed by InSightec, which is funding the trial along with the Focused Ultrasound Foundation and the Binational Industrial Research and Development Foundation.

A pilot study on MRI-guided focused ultrasound treatment was published in 2013.

The randomized trial provides further data on the treatment. In the study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine on Wednesday, 76 patients were treated with focused ultrasound, and their tremor was evaluated after the first, third, sixth, and 12th month. Researchers found that the severity of essential tremor reduced significantly over that time in the patients who underwent the treatment versus those who had a sham procedure. The treated group also evaluated their quality of life as much better than before the procedure, despite a few persistent side effects like gait disturbance and paresthesia — the sensation of prickling pins and needles.

Neurologist Dr. Bryan Ho, who is not involved in the trial, noted that tremor suppression remained sustained throughout the 12 months. But he expressed concern about the side effects of the treatment.

“Over a third of patients actually experienced either gait disturbance or paresthesia. It’s a pretty high incidence of side effects,” said Dr. Ho, who is the director of the Movement Disorders Program at Tufts Medical Center.

He added that since these patients were only followed for a year, there isn’t enough data available yet to determine the long-term efficacy of the treatment.

“It’s one and done,” he said. “Patients may have some benefit for a period of time, but how do they do five years from now or 10 years from now after the treatment? That needs to be shown.”

The researchers are in the process of collecting this data; the clinical trial will run until December. The doctors at Brigham will follow up with Samuels — and others who undergo the treatment — for up to five years and run more MRI scans and neurological exams to find out for how long the lesion lasts and keeps the tremor suppressed.

For now, the treatment has had an immense impact on patients’ lives. “These people are able to go back and now use that hand like you and I use our hands, without thinking about it,” said Dr. Cosgrove.

“They can write their names again, they can feed themselves, they are not embarrassed about being in public. So it really is extraordinarily helpful for people.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story states, “Doctors usually treat essential tremor with medication, but the drugs don’t work well for all patients.” That’s true, and so we’ll give this a Satisfactory rating for at least mentioning alternatives.
But it should be noted that other procedural treatment options were not compared or even mentioned in the story and received only a brief mention in one of the videos.
The current standard for tremor patients who don’t respond to medication is deep-brain stimulation, in which a probe connected to a pacemaker is implanted in the thalamus to suppress the tremors. Gamma Knife thalamotomy, which delivers precise doses of radiation to the thalamus, is also considered to be a safe and effective therapy for patients who don’t respond to medication.
Also, some patients have mild symptoms that can be treated with relaxation techniques and the avoidance of triggers such as caffeine.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 3, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Much of the debate over when to start having mammograms has focused on lives saved, but new research suggests that early screening might also translate into smaller tumors and less aggressive breast cancer treatments.

"There are multiple benefits of mammography in terms of early detection. Not only do we save lives, but we reduce the likelihood of needing more aggressive treatment," said study author Dr. Elisa Port. She directs the Dubin Breast Center at Mount Sinai and is chief of breast surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital, both in New York City.

Currently, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that biennial screenings start at age 50 for most women, while the American Cancer Society advises that annual screenings begin at age 45. Earlier guidelines had suggested annual screenings begin at age 40.

Port noted that screening guidelines tend to be based on the ability of mammograms to save lives and how often they give a false positive result.

"But isn't there some benefit to getting tested earlier, like needing fewer lymph nodes removed and not needing chemotherapy? I think it's safe to say that most women, if they could be assured the same survival, would choose not to get more aggressive therapies," she said.

Port's study included more than 1,100 women diagnosed with breast cancer at the Dubin Breast Center. All of the women were older than 40.

The women were separated into two groups. One group had a mammogram within the 24 months before their breast cancer diagnosis. The other group had a screening 25 months or more before their diagnosis. The second group also included women who had never had a mammogram.

Women in the second group were 50 percent more likely to need chemotherapy. They were also 32 percent more likely to need surgery to remove the whole breast (mastectomy), and 66 percent more likely to need lymph nodes removed. And the women who were screened earlier had smaller tumors.

Port also looked at the 40- to 49-year-old age group, and found those who had never had a mammogram were much more likely to need chemotherapy. They were also more likely to have larger tumors (by 10 millimeters, on average) and to need a mastectomy than those in the 24 months or less group. But only 29 women fell into the "never had a mammogram" group.

However, the study did not prove a cause-and-effect link between earlier mammograms and smaller tumors and less aggressive treatment.

And Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society, noted that this was an observational study that only looked at the experience of one institution.

Still, "the observations are consistent with what we have seen with the value of early detection. Clearly, the earlier a breast cancer is diagnosed, the less treatment that will be required. But this study doesn't tell us about long-term outcomes or what transpired over a long period of time," he said.

Also, because of the nature of the study and the small sample size in the young age group sub-analysis, Lichtenfeld said that "this cannot be interpreted as a study telling us what age to start mammograms."

The study is to be presented Thursday at the American Society of Breast Surgeons meeting, in Orlando, Fla. Findings presented at meetings are typically viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Learn more about mammography screening guidelines from the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story makes clear that different advisory groups have differing guidelines for what age to start getting mammograms (40 or 50 years old).
It would have been nice if the story had included examples of what makes someone higher risk or not (personal cancer history, family history, history of radiation), but we think this was satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Fruits and vegetables are staples in a healthy diet, and that includes one aimed at preventing cancer. Many studies have documented the lower risk of various cancers among people who eat more fresh produce, and avoid things like red and processed meat.

But the majority of those studies have focused on adults, and it’s becoming clear that many of cancer’s drivers start early in life, with genes and even with childhood exposures to potential carcinogens.

To investigate this further, Maryam Farvid, a research associate at Massachusetts General Hospital and a visiting scientist at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, and her colleagues decided to study how diet during adolescence might affect cancer risk. In a study reported in the , they plumbed the Nurses’ Health Study, a massive survey of nurses who filled out questionnaires on their diet and were followed for various health outcomes, including cancer.

About half of the 90,000 women who participated in the Nurses’ Health Study also answered questions about their typical diet while they were teens. Those who reported eating nearly three servings of fruit a day on average had a 25% lower risk of developing breast cancer than those who ate half a serving of fruit.

MORE: With Early Breast Cancer Treatment, Less May be More: Studies

Certain fruits seemed to confer the biggest protection against breast cancer — apples, bananas and grapes were associated with the greatest reduction in risk while kale and oranges in adulthood also contributed to reduced breast cancer risk.

Farvid says that apples, bananas and grapes contain fiber, which could help to lower cancer risk; they are also high in flavonoids, which act as antioxidants to combat damage to cells that can trigger abnormal growth. Kale and oranges are high in vitamin C, another antioxidant.

MORE: Mediterranean Diet With Olive Oil Linked to Lower Breast Cancer Risk

“This study underscores the importance of what a young girl eats for her future health,” says Farvid. “This study also has an important message for schools and the need to provide students with the opportunity to consume more fruits and vegetables as part of the school meal program.”

Farvid wasn’t able to document a strong relationship between vegetables and lower breast cancer risk, but says that may be because the study wasn’t powered enough to detect an effect.

The findings are among the first to look at how diet during adolescence can affect health later, and highlights the importance of establishing healthy habits from a young age, especially since many of the chronic diseases occur over many years and get rooted early in life.

The results also underscore the importance of eating whole fruit, rather than fruit juice. In the study, Farvid and her team could not find any significant relationship between fruit juice and breast cancer risk; that may be because fruit’s anti-cancer effects may have to do with the fiber found in the whole fruit, which is stripped out of juice. In the latest Dietary Guidelines for Americans, however, government nutritionists equated servings of whole fruit with fruit juice. “We recommend whole fruit and not fruit juice,” says Farvid, “because maybe one of the most important ways that fruit decreases risk of breast cancer is through fiber, and even natural fruit juice often has no fiber in it.”

In another study also published in the , a separate group of researchers found that among 22,000 Danish women, those who added two alcoholic drinks a day on average increased their risk of developing breast cancer by 30% over five years. The added risk of cancer, however, was counterbalanced by a lower risk of heart disease.

Taken together, the results show how critical diet can be in modulating risk of breast cancer. While challenging, changing diet can be a relatively easy way to alter a woman’s breast cancer risk equation, beginning even at a young age.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This one squeaks by, because it also addresses risk factors such as alcohol and red-meat consumption. However, it would have been better to place the work into a broader context of lifestyle factors that influence risk, such as exercise, maintaining a health weight and avoiding tobacco use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FDA said it is reviewing a handful of reports involving mood changes, suicidal behavior and suicide in patients who have taken the popular allergy and asthma drug.

Merck has updated the drug's labeling four times in the past year to include information on a range of reported side effects: tremors, anxiousness, depression and suicidal behavior.

FDA said it asked the company to dig deeper into its data on Singulair for evidence of possible links to suicide. The agency said it has not established a "causal relationship" between Merck's drug and suicidal behavior. An agency spokeswoman said the review was prompted by three to four suicide reports it received since last October.

CBS News correspondent Kelly Wallace reports Kate Miller's 15-year-old son Cody killed himself just 17 days after starting the drug.

"It was the end of our world and we didn't know why, because this child was a perfectly normal healthy child, Never had a problem," Miller says.

His mom now believes that Singulair cost him his life.

It could take up to nine months before agency scientists can draw any conclusions, FDA said in a posting to its Web site.

The agency recently began notifying the public earlier about possible safety issues. The policy change came after the FDA was criticized for acting too slowly on information about the risks of Merck's painkiller Vioxx and, GlaxoSmithKline PLC's diabetes pill Avandia.

Merck officials stressed that the FDA's inquiry is based on reports, not clinical studies - which are the standard tool for evaluating drug safety. The company said none of the 11,000 patients enrolled in 40 Singulair trials has committed suicide.

"We have no indication that anything about the mechanism of Singulair is consistent with these events," said George Philip, director of research and product development. "But because suicide is a life-threatening event we thought it was important to provide this information in the product label."

Merck said it recently added reports of suicide to Singulair's label, which already listed suicidal thinking and behavior as reported side effects.

Merck says the information is on the company's Web site, though one must go to the fourth page of a product labeling file to find it.

Dr. Mary Ann Michelis told CBS News she received calls from concerned patients Thursday. She's now writing letters to every patient who takes Singulair, urging them not to over-react.

Michelis said, "They should not stop taking their medication unless they are experiencing a major change in their moods."

In clinical trials of asthma patients, the most common side effects were headache, flu, abdominal pain and cough.

With sales of $4.3 billion last year, Singulair is used by millions of patients in the U.S, according to Merck. First approved in 1998, it is part of a class of asthma and allergy drugs that includes AstraZeneca's Accolate and Critical Therapeutics's Zyflo.

FDA said it is also reviewing reports of side effects with those drugs. Their labeling does not contain language about suicide.

Shares of Merck & Co. Inc. fell 16 cents to $44.54 in late trading.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The perspective of the clinician who prescribes Singulair and other drugs for asthma and allergies provides an adequate, if brief, discussion of treatment options. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - Sleep deprivation -- typically administered in controlled, inpatient settings -- rapidly reduces symptoms of depression in roughly half of depression patients, according the first meta-analysis on the subject in nearly 30 years, from researchers at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. Partial sleep deprivation (sleep for three to four hours followed by forced wakefulness for 20-21 hours) was equally as effective as total sleep deprivation (being deprived of sleep for 36 hours), and medication did not appear to significantly influence these results. The results are published today in the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.

Although total sleep deprivation or partial sleep deprivation can produce clinical improvement in depression symptoms within 24 hours, antidepressants are the most common treatment for depression. Such drugs typically take weeks or longer to experience results, yet 16.7 percent of 242 million U.S. adults filled one or more prescriptions for psychiatric drugs in 2013. The findings of this meta-analysis hope to provide relief for the estimated 16.1 million adults who experienced a major depressive episode in 2014.

Previous studies have shown rapid antidepressant effects from sleep deprivation for roughly 40-60 percent of individuals, yet this response rate has not been analyzed to obtain a more precise percentage since 1990 despite more than 75 studies since then on the subject.

"More than 30 years since the discovery of the antidepressant effects of sleep deprivation, we still do not have an effective grasp on precisely how effective the treatment is and how to achieve the best clinical results," said study senior author Philip Gehrman, PhD, an associate professor of Psychiatry and member of the Penn Sleep Center, who also treats patients at the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center. "Our analysis precisely reports how effective sleep deprivation is and in which populations it should be administered."

Reviewing more than 2,000 studies, the team pulled data from a final group of 66 studies executed over a 36 year period to determine how response may be affected by the type and timing of sleep deprivation performed (total vs early or late partial sleep deprivation), the clinical sample (having depressive or manic episodes, or a combination of both), medication status, and age and gender of the sample. They also explored how response to sleep deprivation may differ across studies according to how "response" is defined in each study.

"These studies in our analysis show that sleep deprivation is effective for many populations," said lead author Elaine Boland, PhD, a clinical associate and research psychologist at the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center. "Regardless of how the response was quantified, how the sleep deprivation was delivered, or the type of depression the subject was experiencing, we found a nearly equivalent response rate."

The authors note that further research is needed to identify precisely how sleep deprivation causes rapid and significant reductions in depression severity. Also, future studies are needed to include a more comprehensive assessment of potential predictors of treatment outcome to identify those patients most likely to benefit from sleep deprivation.

This research was funded by National Institutes of Health grants (R01 HL102119, P30 NS045839, R01MH107571, R01MH098260, P41 EB015893, R01 MH080729), National Aeronautics and Space Administration grants (NNX15AK76A, NBPF02701, NNX08AY09G, NBPF03401, NBPF02501, NNX14AM81G, NX16AI53G), National Heart, Lung, and Brain Institute (U01 HL125388), National Institute on Drug Abuse (1 R21 DA040902-01A1), the Office of Naval Research (N00014-11-1-0361), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NNX14AN49G), National Space Biomedical Research Institute through NASA (NCC 9-58), and grant support from Merck and Philips Healthcare/Respironics.

In addition to Gehrman and Boland, additional authors include Rachel V. Smith from the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center, and Hengyi Rao, David F. Dinges, Namni Goel, John A. Detre, Mathias Basner, Yvette I. Sheline, and Michael E. Thase, all from Penn.

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania(founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $5.3 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 18 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $373 million awarded in the 2015 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2015, Penn Medicine provided $253.3 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that depression is most typically treated with anti-depressant drugs. We would have liked a little more context for readers on other non-drug treatments such as exercise and cognitive behavioral therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cutting the cord is a momentous event in a baby's life.

For nine months, the developing fetus is attached to its mother by the umbilical cord. Then, moments after birth, that cord is severed.

Now, research suggests there may be benefits to keeping mom and baby attached a few minutes longer.

Those benefits, researchers say, likely have to do with iron.

Waiting a few minutes before clamping the umbilical cord allows more iron-rich blood from the placenta to reach the newborn.

Iron deficiency occurs in about one in six American babies, and it's more common among those clamped quickly, said Ola Andersson, a neonatologist and pediatrician at Uppsala University in Sweden, who led a study published today in JAMA Pediatrics. Babies who are anemic often appear tired and pale.

His previous research has shown that babies whose cords were clamped a few minutes later than usual were 90% less likely than others to have iron-deficiency anemia when they were 4 months old.

The benefits of those extra few minutes may last a long time.

In the new study, Andersson found that healthy, full-term newborns whose umbilical cords were left attached for three extra minutes had better fine motor control when they reached preschool than those clamped immediately. Some 4-year-old boys who were clamped later even appeared to have better social skills.

Iron is essential to the developing brain, he said, and deficiencies during early months — perhaps linked to early clamping — could affect nerve and muscle control, making it harder for the child to later control a pen or interact comfortably with peers.

Andersson's study marks the first time researchers have followed children to see whether the clamping makes a difference later in life. In 2011, he published a study of 400 healthy, full-term babies showing that those clamped later fared better; the new study of 263 of those children extends those findings by nearly four years.

Boys showed more benefit than girls, probably because they are more likely to be iron-deficient, Andersson said.

Immediate clamping started about 70 years ago out of concern that leaving the delivered infant attached to the placenta could rob the mother of too much blood.

But those doctors overestimated the benefit to the mother and didn't look at the impact their change had on the babies, said Heike Rabe, a researcher at Brighton and Sussex Medical School and University Hospitals, in the United Kingdom, who wrote an editorial accompanying the study.

For babies born at full-term, "we should trust nature more than we do now," she said.

Rabe has published reviews showing that delaying clamping for 30 seconds, or squeezing the umbilical cord to get the blood out faster, is also better for premature babies.

Many countries and professional organizations, including the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, have called on obstetricians to delay cord clamping in premature babies when feasible. There was not enough evidence before to extend that recommendation to full-term babies, but Rabe thinks this study should tip the balance in favor of delay.

Kjersti Aagaard, vice chair of obstetrics and gynecology at Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children's Hospital, is more skeptical. She said the decision about when to clamp should be made between the doctor and parents, depending on the delivery, the health of the baby and the mother's condition.

"The most important thing for parents to be talking with their provider about is how will we adapt to the delivery as it emerges," she said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There’s either early or late clamping, and the article describes both methods
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A treatment that improves the lives of nearly 1.3 million people with rheumatoid arthritis might one day originate from scorpion venom. A group of researchers led by Dr. Christine Beeton at Baylor College of Medicine has found that one of the hundreds of components in scorpion venom can reduce the severity of the disease in animal models, without inducing side effects associated with similar treatments. The study appears in the Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.

"Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease - one in which the immune system attacks its own body. In this case, it affects the joints," said Beeton, associate professor of molecular physiology and biophysics and member Dan L Duncan Comprehensive Cancer Center at Baylor College of Medicine. "Cells called fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) play a major role in the disease. As they grow and move from joint to joint, they secrete products that damage the joints and attract immune cells that cause inflammation and pain. As damage progresses, the joints become enlarged and are unable to move."

Current treatments target the immune cells involved in the disease and none are specific for FLS. Beeton and her colleagues studied FLS looking for an 'Achilles' heel' that would allow them to prevent or stop them from damaging the joints.

"In previous work, we identified a potassium channel on FLS of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and found that the channel was very important for the development of the disease," Beeton said. "We wanted to find a way to block the channel to stop the cells damaging the joints."

Potassium channels work by opening gates on the surface of cells that allow potassium ions - small charged atoms - to flow in and out of the cell. The flow of ions through the channels is necessary for the cells to carry out many of their essential functions. Animals such as scorpions have venoms that block potassium and other ion channels. They use the venoms to paralyze and kill prey. Decades ago, scientists discovered this and realized that, if handled correctly, venoms also might have medicinal applications.

Scorpion venom may lead to improved treatments for rheumatoid arthritis

"Scorpion venom has hundreds of different components. One of the components in the venom of the scorpion called Buthus tamulus specifically blocks the potassium channel of FLS and not the channels in other cells such as those of the nervous system," said first author Dr. Mark Tanner, a graduate student in the Beeton lab during the development of this project. "Here, we investigated whether this venom component, called iberiotoxin, would be able to specifically block the FLS potassium channel and reduce the severity of the rheumatoid arthritis in rat models of the disease."

When the researchers treated rat models of the disease with iberiotoxin, they stopped the progression of the disease. In some cases they reversed the signs of established disease, meaning that the animals had better joint mobility and less inflammation in their joints. In addition, treatment with iberiotoxin did not induce side effects, such as tremors and incontinence, observed when treating with another channel blocker called paxilline.

"It was very exciting to see that iberiotoxin is very specific for the potassium channel in FLS and that it did not seem to affect the channels in other types of cells, which might explain the lack of tremors and incontinence," Tanner said.

"Although these results are promising, much more research needs to be conducted before we can use scorpion venom components to treat rheumatoid arthritis," Beeton said. "We think that this venom component, iberiotoxin, can become the basis for developing a new treatment for rheumatoid arthritis in the future."

Other contributors of this work include Michael W. Pennington, Brayden H. Chamberlain, Redwan Huq, Elizabeth J. Gehrmann, Teresina Laragione and Pércio S. Gulko. The contributors are affiliated with one or more of the following institutions: Baylor College of Medicine, Peptides International, Inc. and Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

This work was supported by the Arthritis Foundation grant 6483 and the National Institutes of Health grants GM088129, AI050831, AR069960, HL007676, CA125123 and HG006348.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release does the bare minimum here, stating, “Current treatments target the immune cells involved in the disease and none are specific for FLS.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eating More — Or Less — Of 10 Foods May Cut Risk Of Early Death

About half of all U.S. deaths from heart disease, stroke and Type 2 diabetes are linked to poor diets, according to a new study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

And eating more — or less — of just 10 types of food can help raise or lower the risk of death from these causes, the researchers found.

Scientists at Tufts University identified the foods that seem to contribute the most to the risk. At the top of the list? Salt. Consuming too much salt was associated with 9.5 percent of the deaths.

Next — and I sympathize with all of you who love to eat these — high intake of red meat and processed meats such as bacon was linked to 8 percent of the deaths. And sugary drinks were a factor in 7.4 percent of the deaths.

We know, it may be tough to cut back on foods you love. Bacon is so alluring to many that it has even been called the 'gateway' to meat for vegetarians!

But, here's the flip side: The researchers also found there's a significant risk in eating too little of certain healthy foods. So, think of it this way: You can start consuming more of the foods that are protective.

For instance, the study found that low consumption of nuts and seeds was linked to about 9 percent of deaths.

In addition, diets low in seafood, whole grains and fruits and vegetables were found to contribute to about 6-8 percent of the deaths.

"The good news is that we now understand which foods we need to target to prevent Americans from dying prematurely from cardiometabolic diseases," says lead study author Renata Micha, a public health nutritionist and epidemiologist at the Friedman School at Tufts University.

In 2012, about 700,000 Americans died from these diseases. Diet was linked to nearly 319,000 of these deaths. "This is a remarkable burden, nearly 1,000 deaths each day" linked to dietary habits, says senior study author Dariush Mozaffarian, dean of the Friedman School at Tufts.

So, changing Americans dietary habits could have a significant impact, the authors argue. "Our research suggests that nearly half of the risk can be reduced [by] eating a healthy diet," Mozaffarian says.

The new analysis is based on data from the federal survey known as NHANES, the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Researchers asked some 8,500 participants about their eating habits. In addition, Mozaffarian and his colleagues estimated associations of diet and disease from prior studies and clinical trials.

Now, the task of estimating death or disease linked to diet is tricky. Scientists use statistical methods to try to tease apart the impact of diet as part of people's overall lifestyle.

One challenge: People who have healthy diets often have other healthy habits, too — such as getting regular exercise. Dietary habits also track with socio-economic status. So, people with lower incomes are more likely to have poorer diets compared with wealthier people.

The Tufts researchers used studies that had controlled for these lifestyle factors, but it's not a perfect science.

"Relying on evidence from observational studies...carries the potential limitation of confounding bias," states an editorial that was published alongside the study. The editorial raises the possibility that the effect of confounding factors such as socioeconomic status and physical activity could be substantial. "For instance, it's possible that processed meat consumption merely reflects a Westernized dietary pattern."

Mozaffarian acknowledges the limitations. "At the end of the day, our findings might modestly over - or under-estimate the health burdens," he told us.

He says the bigger point is this: "Whether poor diet is causing 1,000 cardiovascular and diabetes deaths per day, or 500, it remains among the leading causes of preventable suffering."

Poor diets are also linked to billions of dollars in healthcare spending. For instance, diabetes costs the U.S. $245 billion a year. In the U.S., a women with diabetes incurs, on average, about $283,000 in lifetime health care costs. (Many cost studies don't separate Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes.)

If you love foods that are associated with cardiovascular risks, you don't have to give them up entirely. As most nutrition studies show, it's excessive consumption that drives up the risk.

For instance, dietary guidelines recommend limiting sugar consumption to no more than 10 percent of daily calories. This means that a single 200-calorie sugary drink may be OK for a person who typically consumes a 2,000 calorie-per-day diet.

The problem: Most Americans consume much more.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses exercise as another lifestyle factor that might be associated with reduced risk of death. Smoking could also have been mentioned.
As well, stress management and solid social connections are believed to be important lifestyle factors affecting health, yet unlikely to be captured in those nutrition-related questionnaires.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An estimated 170 million people worldwide suffer from age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a serious eye condition marked by the death of light-sensitive cells in the retina. Doctors can slow macular degeneration with vitamins, laser surgery, stem cell treatments, and even implantable miniature telescopes. But many sufferers ultimately go blind.

In 2013, the FDA approved an artificial retina that could help restore limited vision to people with degenerative eye diseases. But the device relied on a sunglass-mounted external camera and a transmitter that relayed sight information to the retinal implant.

Now researchers at the Italian Institute of Technology in Genoa and the University of California, San Diego have crafted artificial retinas that can be implanted entirely inside the eye, which offer hope to those with macular degeneration.

The devices are only experimental prototypes with many years of additional research and development likely before they might be ready for commercial use. But Dr. Grazia Pertile, director of ophthalmology at the Sacred Heart Don Calabria in Negrar, Italy and one of the Italian researchers, said in a written statement that her team's device could be “a turning point in the treatment of extremely debilitating retinal diseases.”

She’s not alone in that assessment.

“This is definitely a game changer,” Dr. Kapil Bharti, an investigator at the National Eye Institute in Bethesda, Maryland who is not involved with the research, says. “Previous versions of these work in a very, very low-resolution range. Patients were practically still blind and incapacitated as far as everyday tasks were concerned. These promise that patients could become more independent.”

When healthy, retinal cells transmit visual information to the brain. As these cells die off, AMD sufferers lose their central vision. The new prosthesis is designed to be implanted onto the back wall of the eye, where it absorbs light and transforms it into an electrical signal that stimulates the still-active retinal cells to restore vision.

Related: This Revolutionary Gene-Editing Tool Could Change the World

When the prosthesis was tested in rats, the animals' pupils constricted in response to exposure to light. The researchers were unable to determine how well the rats were able to see, if at all, but they noted that the animals’ eyes continued to react to light more than six months after the implant was installed.

"We hope to replicate in humans the excellent results obtained in animal models," Pertile said. The team will conduct human trials later this year.

The findings were published in the journal Nature Materials.

The researchers in San Diego have taken a different approach to solving AMD that they think can restore vision to resolutions as sharp as a healthy eye.

There, engineers have partnered with Nanovision Biosciences Inc. to create a retinal implant that uses silicon nanowires smaller than the width of a cell to sense light entering the eye and stimulate retinal neurons. Powered by a small wireless device, this circular array of nanowires mimics densely packed retinal cells to help achieve "functional vision," says Gabriel A. Silva, professor of bioengineering and ophthalmology at UC San Diego.

“We want to create a new class of devices with drastically improved capabilities to help people with impaired vision,” Silva said.

The findings were reported in the Journal of Neural Engineering.

Neither of the implants is able to restore color to vision yet, and Bharti has questions about the durability of organic eye implants. But, he says, “Those are things that can be easily worked out and can be done in the coming future. Overall, this is very exciting.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions current therapies for age-related macular degeneration, such as “vitamins, laser surgery, stem cell treatments, and implantable miniature telescopes.” The reader learns that these treatment slow the degenerative process but are not a cure. The story also mentions a currently available artificial retina.
It also could have mentioned that many patients with AMD will not need any interventions as the process is slow for most.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
February 28, 2017 - For infants with congenital malformations of the ear, a treatment system called EarWell can gently reshape the ear--avoiding the pain and cost of later surgery, reports a study in the March issue of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery®, the official medical journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS).

But treatment must begin early--preferably within the first three weeks after birth, according to the study by ASPS Member Surgeon H. Steve Byrd, MD, and colleagues of Pediatric Plastic Surgery Institute, Dallas. Dr. Byrd comments, "The EarWell system is effective in eliminating or reducing the need for surgery in all but the most severe congenital ear malformations."

The researchers review their experience with nonsurgical correction of congenital ear malformations in 175 infants. The EarWell system is a relatively simple technique for molding and reshaping the ear, taking advantage of the increased malleability of the ear cartilage in newborns. For best results, treatment should start within the first three weeks after birth, or correspondingly later in infants born prematurely.

The technique and length of EarWell treatment varies according to the type and severity of the infant's ear deformity. Dr. Byrd and colleagues present a classification system and technical details for plastic surgeons to follow in evaluating the best treatment for specific types of malformations.

For most infants in the study, both ears were treated, for a total of 303 ears. Ninety-eight percent of infants had relatively mild "constricted"-type ear deformities. EarWell treatment started at an average age of 12 days and continued for 37 days, including an average of six follow-up visits to the plastic surgeon's office.

EarWell treatment was highly successful in correcting or reducing the severity of congenital ear malformations. Results were judged good to excellent in 97 percent of ears with one simple deformity and 88 percent with more complex "mixed" deformities. About 70 percent of ears with constricted malformations were graded as having no deformity after treatment.

Complications consisted mainly of skin injuries that healed without further problems. In eight cases, treatment had to be stopped because of an allergic reaction to the adhesive tape used.

While the EarWell system is not new, the report is the largest study of congenital ear malformations treated with this approach--including a standardized approach to treatment and assessment of the results. The results strongly support its use, especially in infants with deformities and less-severe malformations.

But lack of awareness of this nonsurgical alternative is a key limiting factor. "The opportunity for early treatment can be hampered by a failure to convince pediatricians that the majority of misshapen newborn ears do not self-correct," Dr. Byrd and coauthors write. They also point out that EarWell is highly successful in the treatment of prominent ears--a condition that commonly goes unnoticed by parents and pediatricians, but is likely to get worse as the child grows.

"While we can operate on ears later in the patient's life, waiting not only increases the surgery's difficulty and expense, but may expose the child to teasing, bullying, and loss of self-esteem," comments Editor-in-Chief Rod J. Rohrich, MD, in a featured video on the Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery website. "If your baby has any type of ear deformity, plastic surgeons can help with or without surgery. Discuss non-surgical, ear molding alternatives with your pediatrician, and consult with a board-certified plastic surgeon...the earlier the better!"

Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® is published by Wolters Kluwer.

Click here to read "Classification of Newborn Ear Malformations and their Treatment with the EarWell Infant Ear Correction System."

Article: "Classification of Newborn Ear Malformations and their Treatment with the EarWell Infant Ear Correction System" (doi: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000003150)

For more than 70 years, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® (http://www. ) has been the one consistently excellent reference for every specialist who uses plastic surgery techniques or works in conjunction with a plastic surgeon. The official journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® brings subscribers up-to-the-minute reports on the latest techniques and follow-up for all areas of plastic and reconstructive surgery, including breast reconstruction, experimental studies, maxillofacial reconstruction, hand and microsurgery, burn repair, and cosmetic surgery, as well as news on medico-legal issues

The American Society of Plastic Surgeons is the largest organization of board-certified plastic surgeons in the world. Representing more than 7,000 physician members, the Society is recognized as a leading authority and information source on cosmetic and reconstructive plastic surgery. ASPS comprises more than 94 percent of all board-certified plastic surgeons in the United States. Founded in 1931, the Society represents physicians certified by The American Board of Plastic Surgery or The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.

Wolters Kluwer is a global leader in professional information services. Professionals in the areas of legal, business, tax, accounting, finance, audit, risk, compliance and healthcare rely on Wolters Kluwer's market leading information-enabled tools and software solutions to manage their business efficiently, deliver results to their clients, and succeed in an ever more dynamic world.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2015 annual revenues of €4.2 billion. The group serves customers in over 180 countries, and employs over 19,000 people worldwide. The company is headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands. Wolters Kluwer shares are listed on Euronext Amsterdam (WKL) and are included in the AEX and Euronext 100 indices. Wolters Kluwer has a sponsored Level 1 American Depositary Receipt program. The ADRs are traded on the over-the-counter market in the U.S. (WTKWY).

Wolters Kluwer Health is a leading global provider of information and point of care solutions for the healthcare industry. For more information about our products and organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release cites an independent source, stating “While we can operate on ears later in the patient’s life, waiting not only increases the surgery’s difficulty and expense, but may expose the child to teasing, bullying, and loss of self-esteem.” We’re giving the benefit of the doubt here since the release suggests delayed surgery as an alternative treatment. It would have been better if the release had mentioned no treatment — or watch and wait to see if less severe ear deformities resolved on their own — as an option as well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration approved a new drug on Tuesday to treat serious cases of eczema.

The drug, called Dupixent, is a twice-a-month injection under the skin. Patients can do it at home. It’ll cost $37,000 a year but the drug’s makers, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi, have stressed that’s the wholesale price and make a point of saying there will be programs to help people pay for it.

It’s approved for people with atopic dermatitis, a catchall term for itchy skin caused by allergy.

It can be very unpleasant.

“The cause of atopic dermatitis is a combination of genetic, immune and environmental factors. In atopic dermatitis, the skin develops red, scaly and crusted bumps, which are extremely itchy,” the FDA says.

“Scratching leads to swelling, cracking, weeping clear fluid, and finally, coarsening and thickening of the skin.”

There are many treatments out there now, from simple skin lotions to steroid creams and immune suppressant drugs like tacrolimus. But none of these works for everybody, and the immune suppressant drugs can raise the risk of cancers such as lymphoma.

Dupixent is for the hard-core cases that aren’t helped by anything else.

It’s a monoclonal antibody — a targeted immune system drug — that inactivates two inflammatory compounds called interleukin 4 or IL-4, and IL-13. “By binding to this protein, Dupixent is able to inhibit the inflammatory response that plays a role in the development of atopic dermatitis,” the FDA said in a statement.

Known generically as dupilumab, the drug can cause serious allergic reactions and eye inflammation. “The most common side effects include injection site reactions; cold sores in the mouth or on the lips; and eye and eyelid inflammation, including redness, swelling and itching,” the FDA notes.

The agency gave it both priority review and breakthrough therapy status, speeding it through the approval process.

Studies of about 2,000 people showed Dupixent injections resulted in clear skin or nearly clear skin for about two-thirds of those who tried it, and it reduced itching sharply in 40 percent.

"People with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis cope with intense, sometimes unbearable symptoms that can impact them for most of their lives," Julie Block, president and CEO of the National Eczema Association, said in a statement provided by the company.

“Of the adults with uncontrolled moderate to severe atopic dermatitis in the United States, it is estimated that 300,000 are most in need of new treatment options,” Regeneron said.

In a nod to the sensitivity around drug prices, the company stressed that there is no single price for the drug.

“The Wholesale Acquisition Cost (WAC) of Dupixent in the United States is $37,000 annually. Actual costs to patients, payers and health systems are anticipated to be lower as WAC pricing does not reflect discounts, rebates or patient assistance programs,” it said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story states:
There are many treatments out there now, from simple skin lotions to steroid creams and immune suppressant drugs like tacrolimus. But none of these works for everybody, and the immune suppressant drugs can raise the risk of cancers such as lymphoma.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATLANTA--Administering chemotherapy to African-American breast cancer patients prior to surgery could improve their prognosis and survival rates from the disease, according to a new study.

A research team led by Georgia State University found African-American breast cancer patients who receive chemotherapy prior to surgery exhibit trends of reduced regional (in lymph nodes) recurrence and distant (in remote organs, such as the liver, lungs and brain) recurrence of tumors, which may help diminish the inequality in breast cancer-related clinical outcomes between African-American and European-American patients.

There is a significant disparity in breast cancer mortality between African-American and European-American breast cancer patients. Despite a similar number of reported cases of breast cancer among African-American and European-American women, African-Americans experience a more aggressive clinical course and a 40 percent higher death rate than European-Americans among premenopausal and menopausal breast cancer patients.

Recurrent breast cancer has hindered the successful management of this disease for decades and is one of the primary factors for the racial disparity in prognosis and outcomes. Differences in recurrence rates and patterns between the races following various forms of treatment have not been thoroughly investigated.

This is the first clinical study to suggest that neoadjuvant chemotherapy (treatment prior to surgery) may improve breast cancer recurrence rates and patterns in African-Americans. The results are published in the journal PLOS ONE.

Researchers at Georgia State analyzed clinical data from a large cohort of breast cancer patients treated at Northside Hospital in Atlanta from 2005 to 2015. The patients' self-reported races were primarily African-American and European-American. The researchers studied rates and patterns of tumor recurrence after hormone, radiation and chemotherapy among African-American and European-American breast cancer patients.

"We found that, in general, African-American breast cancer patients exhibit increased likelihood for tumor recurrence, particularly to regional and distant sites, after receiving any combination of adjuvant therapy (treatment following surgery) compared to European-American breast cancer patients. This higher incidence of tumor recurrence can contribute to a poorer prognosis," said Nikita Wright, first author of the study and a senior Ph.D. student in Dr. Ritu Aneja's laboratory in Georgia State's Biology Department.

When breast cancer recurs, it is more challenging to treat regional and distant tumors than local tumors (in the breast), Wright explained.

"Interestingly, we found that neoadjuvant chemotherapy actually reversed these recurrence trends," Wright said. "We found that African-American breast cancer patients responded better to neoadjuvant chemotherapy than European-American patients. Among patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy, African-Americans exhibited trends of lower regional and distant tumor recurrence than European-Americans, but higher local recurrence, which is easier to manage clinically and is associated with a relatively better prognosis."

The researchers also found that among early stage patients (noninvasive or minimally invasive breast cancer), African-Americans displayed higher tumor recurrence than European-American patients.

Co-authors of the study include Jun Xia, Sergey Klimov, Pranay Neema, Dr. Dora Il'yasova, Dr. Padmashree C. G. Rida, Dr. Remus Osan and Dr. Aneja of Georgia State; Dr. Guilherme Cantuaria and Dr. Mildred Jones of the Northside Hospital Cancer Institute; Dr. Uma Krishnamurti, Dr. Xiaoxian (Bill) Li and Dr. Michelle D. Reid of Emory University; and Dr. Meenakshi Gupta of West Georgia Hospitals.

The study was funded by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release discusses the alternative here (surgery first and chemo or other treatments after), and why they so far don’t seem to be as helpful to African American women.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Australian researchers have discovered that an existing medication could have promise in preventing breast cancer in women carrying a faulty BRCA1 gene.

People who carry a faulty BRCA1 gene are at high risk of developing aggressive breast cancer. Currently many women with a gene mutation choose surgical removal of their breast tissue and ovaries to reduce their chance of developing breast and ovarian cancer.

By pinpointing the cells that give rise to breast cancers in women who have inherited a faulty version of the BRCA1 gene, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute researchers have identified that the drug denosumab may have potential to prevent breast cancer from developing. If confirmed in clinical studies, this would provide a non-surgical option to prevent breast cancer in women with elevated genetic risk.

Using samples of breast tissue donated by women carrying a faulty BRCA1 gene, Ms Emma Nolan, Professor Jane Visvader and Professor Geoff Lindeman were able to pinpoint the cells that give rise to breast cancer. The research, which also involved researchers at the Australian familial cancer consortium kConFab and US biotechnology company Amgen was published today in Nature Medicine.

Cancer precursor cells in BRCA1-mutant breast tissue had many similarities to aggressive forms of breast cancer, said Ms Nolan, who is a PhD student at the institute enrolled through The University of Melbourne's Department of Medical Biology. "These cells proliferated rapidly, and were susceptible to damage to their DNA - both factors that help them transition towards cancer," she said. "We were excited to discover that these pre-cancerous cells could be identified by a marker protein called RANK."

Professor Lindeman, who is also a medical oncologist at The Royal Melbourne Hospital, said the discovery of RANK as a marker of cancer precursors was an important breakthrough, because inhibitors of the RANK signalling pathway were already in clinical use. "An inhibitor called denosumab is already used in the clinic to treat osteoporosis and breast cancer that has spread to the bone," he said. "We therefore investigated what effect RANK inhibition had on the cancer precursor cells in BRCA1-mutant breast tissue."

The research team showed that RANK inhibition switched off cell growth in breast tissue from women with a faulty BRCA1 gene and curtailed breast cancer development in laboratory models.

"We think this strategy could delay or prevent breast cancer in women with an inherited BRCA1 gene mutation," Professor Lindeman said. "A clinical trial has already begun to investigate this further."

"This is potentially a very important discovery for women who carry a faulty BRCA1 gene, who have few other options. Current cancer prevention strategies for these women include surgical removal of the breasts and/or ovaries, which can have serious impacts on people's lives. To progress this work, denosumab would need to be formally tested in clinical trials in this setting as it is not approved for breast cancer prevention," Professor Lindeman said.

Professor Visvader said the discovery had its basis in more than a decade of investigations of breast stem cell function. "By thoroughly dissecting how normal breast tissue develops, we have been able to pinpoint the precise cells that are the culprits in cancer formation," she said. "It is very exciting to think that we may be on the path to the 'holy grail' of cancer research, devising a way to prevent this type of breast cancer in women at high genetic risk."

The research team worked closely with Mrs Avis Macphee, a patient advocate, through the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute's consumer-researcher buddy system. The research was supported by The National Breast Cancer Foundation, The Qualtrough Cancer Research Fund, The Joan Marshall Breast Cancer Research Fund, the Australian Cancer Research Foundation, Cancer Council Victoria, the Cancer Therapeutics Cooperative Research Centre, an Amgen Preclinical Research Program Grant, the National Health and Medical Research Council, the Victorian Cancer Agency, and the Victorian Government Operational Infrastructure Support Scheme.

The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute is the research powerhouse of the Victorian Comprehensive Cancer Centre, an alliance of leading Victorian hospitals and research centres committed to controlling cancer.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that: “This is potentially a very important discovery for women who carry a faulty BRCA1 gene, who have few other options. Current cancer prevention strategies for these women include surgical removal of the breasts and/or ovaries.” That’s enough to merit a satisfactory rating. However, the release would have been much stronger if it had mentioned other options for women with the BRCA1 mutation, such as enhanced screening or chemo-preventive drugs (such as tamoxifen), which may also reduce risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - When the results of a test wouldn’t change how doctors manage a patient’s care, most say it’s not worth doing. But new tests for breast cancer risk mutations beyond the well-known BRCA genes would offer actionable information for many women and their doctors, a new study finds.

The BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations put women at high risk for breast, ovarian and other cancers, but mutations of other genes are believed to confer extra risk as well.

Earlier this year, 17 genetic experts argued against testing for a wider panel of breast cancer-related gene mutations until they are proven to be valid and useful in clinical practice (see Reuters story of May 27, 2015 here: reut.rs/1TvOoDf).

“There’s a lot of controversy even among experts,” said the senior author of the new study, Dr. Leif W. Ellisen of Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center in Boston.

For 15 years, at-risk women have only been tested for BRCA1 and 2, but many companies now offer multi-gene panels for 20, 25 or 30 other genes, Ellisen told Reuters Health.

“Are patients better off getting these much broader tests?” he said. “Does it actually change what you would tell them to do in terms of screening, prevention, or risk management?”

According to the new results, at least for some women, it would change their clinical management, he said.

Several of the authors of the new paper disclosed that they receive research funding, consult for or are employed by genetic testing companies like Myriad Genetics and Invitae Corporation.

Between 2001 and 2014, the study team did panel tests for 25 or 29 genes on 1,046 women who were referred for hereditary breast or ovarian cancer gene testing, but had tested negative for BRCA mutations. Most of the women had a personal history of breast or ovarian cancer already.

The researchers found that 40 women, or 4 percent of the total group, did have potentially harmful mutations in other genes. Of those 40 women, 26 had mutations carrying low to moderate risk of breast or ovarian cancer, eight had mutations associated with Lynch syndrome, which increases colon and ovarian cancer risk, and three had high-risk breast cancer genes.

Including another 23 patients who were referred into the study at a late stage, there were 63 women positive for non-BRCA mutations. Of those, the researchers decided that 33 would have been considered for additional screening or prevention measures based on their results. And for many, family testing would be recommended for first-degree relatives, according to the report in JAMA Oncology.

Even among all appropriate candidates who are sent for genetic testing, only nine percent will test positive for the BRCA mutations, so an additional four percent who have non-BRCA mutations is a significant number, Ellisen said.

Often these additional women do not have a high risk of breast or ovarian cancer, but some do have a high risk of colon or uterine cancer, and would be referred for additional screening, he said.

Multigene testing is not more expensive than testing for the BRCA mutations alone, he said.

Though these results indicate that additional genetic screening is clinically useful, some genetic test results will be uncertain, and it can be psychologically difficult for patients to deal with this uncertainty, Ellisen said.

“We do not advocate for broad population-based screening,” he said. “The interpretation of these tests is not a simple color-by-numbers thing.” The vast majority of uncertain genes will be benign, but a misinterpretation could lead a patient to a drastic, unnecessary surgical procedure, he said.

“Many cancer genetics experts have again urged caution, characterizing the use of multigene testing in the clinical setting as premature,” Dr. Elizabeth M. Swisher of the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle writes in a commentary accompanying the new paper.

“Yet thousands of women and their physicians are ignoring this advice, ordering a wide selection of multiplex tests daily,” Swisher writes. “The train has left the station and is unlikely to return,” so it is important to assess how useful this additional testing can be, she concludes.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The piece in itself is about an investigation of the clinical usefulness of additional (alternative) genetic panels to the “routine” BRCA1/2 tests. So the story meets our standard here. But as mentioned before, there are serious concerns about the use and availability of genetic test panels and it would have been great to add some context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Small doses of aspirin can lower the risk of heart attack in people who never had heart disease, a new look at the medical evidence shows.

But the blood-thinning drug doesn’t appear to cut the chances of dying from the disease, at least not enough that researchers can say for certain. And experts warn people to consult their doctor before taking the medication, which increases the risk of bleeding ulcers.

“I like to say you have to make the recommendation about aspirin one patient at a time,” Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, who was not linked to the study, told Reuters Health.

LeFevre worked on the 2009 aspirin recommendations from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), a federally supported expert panel.

The task force advises that men age 45 to 79 take aspirin to stave off heart attacks, as long as the benefit outweighs the risk of bleeding. For women age 55 to 79, aspirin is recommended to prevent strokes, with the same caveat.

The new work, by Alfred Bartolucci of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and colleagues, was supported by aspirin-maker Bayer AG.

The research team pooled the results of the nine trials that have tested the drug in the prevention of heart disease so far, including three that weren’t part of the 2009 USPSTF review.

About 100,000 men and women age 45 and up took part in the studies. Some were healthy and some had diabetes, but none had chest pain or other symptoms of an ailing heart.

The researchers found a 19-percent reduction in non-fatal heart attacks among participants who took aspirin compared to those who did not.

They don’t mention how many people actually suffered such a heart attack, but an earlier analysis of six of the trials showed that out of every 1,000 people, 18 individuals taking aspirin had heart attacks every year, compared to 23 individuals taking placebo pills.

On the other hand, that analysis also found aspirin increased the rate of bleeding from 0.7 to 1 per 1,000 people per year, making the authors conclude the drug was of “uncertain net value.”

Heart disease is the leading killer worldwide and accounts for more than a third of deaths in the U.S., according to the American Heart Association. Every year, heart attacks alone kill some 400,000 Americans.

In the current study, published in the American Journal of Cardiology, the researchers also report small decreases in stroke and death risks with aspirin, although those changes might have been due to chance.

“It refines our knowledge of how beneficial aspirin is,” Dr. Graham Nichol, an expert in emergency care at the University of Washington in Seattle, said about the study. “I don’t think this paper is inconsistent with previous work.”

Nichols, who was not involved in the study, said aspirin is clearly beneficial for people who’ve already had heart disease, and that it also seems to help those at high risk.

“There is not universal agreement on what is high risk,” he told Reuters Health. “In my mind, if you have diabetes or multiple risk factors for heart disease — such as smoking or obesity — it is reasonable to take aspirin.”

In addition, working to eliminate those risk factors by other means will not only slash the risk of heart disease, but also a host of other health problems.

LeFevre added that while the new study did add extra evidence compared with earlier work, it failed to analyze the effects on men and women separately.

That muddies the picture because men may see a benefit in the form of fewer heart attacks, whereas aspirin appears to lower the risk of stroke in women.

“We can’t tell from the existing study if that is going to hold up or not,” he said.

One recent study has suggested that despite the increase in bleeding ulcers from aspirin, the reduction in heart attacks might make the cheap drug cost-effective for men over 45.

The question then becomes finding out what your risk of heart attack is in the first place, which your doctor can help with.

“The number of events that you prevent depends on your baseline risk,” LeFevre concluded. “A blanket recommendation that everybody should take an aspirin is not a good idea.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Embedded in the analysis was at least a nod to other approaches.  For example, the story stated:
“There is not universal agreement on what is high risk,” he told Reuters Health. “In my mind, if you have diabetes or multiple risk factors for heart disease — such as smoking or obesity — it is reasonable to take aspirin.” In addition, working to eliminate those risk factors by other means will not only slash the risk of heart disease, but also a host of other health problems.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most Americans hear “colorectal cancer screening” and think “colonoscopy” — the unpleasant cleanse, the snakelike scope, the wobbly ride home. It’s a process that’s undeniably inconvenient, yet one we’re told is unquestionably necessary.

That’s a shame. Because although colonoscopy certainly has its advantages, direct evidence that it’s the best way to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer is not one of them. And the drawbacks of colonoscopy — including the time commitment, not-so-fun preparation, expense and small chance of harm — are probably keeping some people from participating in colorectal cancer screening.

According to public health experts, that’s a bad thing. The United States Preventive Services Task Force says the net benefit for screening adults age 50-75 is “substantial,” adding that colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death in the country. But as of 2012, just 65 percent of eligible adults were being screened as recommended, and almost 28 percent had never been screened.

Among those who are screened, colonoscopy is by far the most popular method in the U.S. But there is a menu of options beyond colonoscopies — and they’re not necessarily any better or worse, according to the USPSTF’s recently finalized updated recommendations for screening among average-risk adults. The group said that while some tests are backed by more evidence than others, it found no head-to-head studies suggesting any strategy — including colonoscopy — is better than another. “Choose the one that fits your preferences and lifestyle,” said Douglas Owens, a physician and member of the task force.

Included on the list are two cheap, at-home poop tests intended to be done annually: the guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT) and a more sensitive test called the fecal immunochemical test, or FIT. Both look for tiny amounts of blood in the stool that might be shed by cancer or polyps. You get one from your doctor, take a poop sample at home, and then return the sample to the doctor. Only if you get a positive result do you need to have a colonoscopy. (These are different from a new stool-based DNA test, which while on the USPSTF’s list is much more expensive and has been studied less.)

Of the two, Richard Wender, a physician and chief cancer control officer of the American Cancer Society, said the FIT is preferable, both because it’s more accurate and because it requires only one poop sample and no changes in diet. It costs about $25 or less and when done every year, the USPSTF’s models estimate, it will avert 20-23 deaths from colorectal cancer per 1,000 people screened. (Wender doesn’t recommend the OTC tests that are available.)

That’s comparable to the two “scope” tests on the USPSTF’s list, flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy, which have the advantage of both detecting and removing precancerous polyps in one procedure. (Flexible sigmoidoscopy, which looks at the lower part of the large intestine, has been shown by randomized trials to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer but isn’t reimbursed as well as colonoscopy and is on the decline in the U.S.)

Colonoscopy is the most popular test in the U.S. In addition to its polyp-removing ability, if you have a negative test, you don’t have to come back for another 10 years. There is indirect evidence it reduces colorectal cancer deaths, in the form of a large study following people who did and didn’t get the test over time. And it seems logical that if sigmoidoscopy cuts colorectal cancer deaths, the more extensive colonoscopy must provide a similar benefit. But that’s not yet been proved by randomized controlled trials. Based on the available evidence and its modeling, the USPSTF estimates it reduces deaths from colorectal cancer by 22-24 per 1,000 people screened.

But that lack of trial data is why the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care earlier this year recommended against using colonoscopy as a first-line screening method. “They were very clear: We’re going to stick to the evidence, and right now we don’t have evidence for colonoscopy,” said Aasma Shaukat, section chief of gastroenterology in the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Colonoscopy also has plenty of downsides. It’s expensive, running upward of $1,000. (The test is covered without cost sharing as preventive care under the Affordable Care Act.) Most people prefer to have sedation during the procedure, which means time off from work and finding a ride home. There’s variation in the quality of the test, depending on who’s doing it. There’s a small but real risk of harm, such as a perforation.

So why do so many people prefer it to the poop test? For many, because they’ve been told it’s the best test to get. A 2012 study found primary care physicians overwhelmingly said they thought it was the best colorectal screening option. Katie Couric’s on-air colonoscopy in March 2000 boosted awareness and increased colonoscopy rates. There’s also a “more is better” attitude when it comes to medicine among many people, said Shaukat. And colonoscopies are well-reimbursed for the physicians who perform them. Hospitals have focused on marketing colonoscopies rather than alternative tests.

No one is arguing colonoscopy is a bad test. It just hasn’t been shown to be better than an annual FIT, said James Allison, a clinical professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California-San Francisco. He said the public health message is slowly changing to reflect that. The 80% by 2018 campaign from the National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable, for example, which aims to increase the rate of screening, emphasizes a suite of options. “People are very motivated to get screened when they hear colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer-related death and if they know there are tests that are affordable and can be done at home,” said Wender.

So if you want a colonoscopy after talking with your physician and digging into all its pros and cons — fantastic. But if you prefer something less invasive but more frequent, you can test your poop every year without feeling like you’re opting for, um, No. 2.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Since this story is totally about the available alternatives for colorectal cancer screening, it easily gets a Satisfactory rating.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES -- Researchers have demonstrated for the first time that the progression of Type-1 diabetes can be halted -- and possibly reversed -- by a stem cell transplant that preserves the body's diminishing ability to make insulin, according to a study published today.

The experimental therapy eliminated the need for insulin injections for months or even years in 14 of 15 patients who were recently diagnosed with the disease. One subject, a 30-year-old male, hasn't taken insulin since his stem cell transplant more than three years ago, according to the study in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

The study suggests a new avenue for treating the intractable disease, in which the immune system destroys insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas. Without insulin, patients can't metabolize sugar and risk developing nerve damage, cardiovascular disease, kidney failure, and blindness.

Patients with Type-1 diabetes typically compensate by monitoring their blood sugar levels every few hours and injecting themselves with insulin as many as five times a day.

After the stem cell treatment, "patients are absolutely medication-free; they're off insulin," said Dr. Richard Burt, chief of the division of immunotherapy at Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine and senior author of the study.

The strategy is similar to an approach showing some success in treating other immune-system disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, and multiple sclerosis.

"We all realize that without addressing the problem at the level of the immune system, we'll never really beat Type-1 diabetes," said Dr. Francisco Prieto, who treats diabetics in Elk Grove, Calif., and wasn't involved in the study. "This is very encouraging work."

Burt and his colleagues cautioned that they don't yet know whether the fix is permanent and, if it is not, how long it will last. One of the subjects was insulin-free for one year but then relapsed after a respiratory viral infection, said lead author Dr. Julio Voltarelli, associate professor at Ribeirao Preto Medical School at the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil.

The researchers also cautioned that the process is not without risk, with patients vulnerable to infection during part of the therapy.

But other doctors said that even if the benefits of the therapy are temporary, the research provides valuable insight into the mechanism behind the disease.

The Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation in New York estimates that as many as 3 million Americans have Type-1 diabetes, with between 30,000 and 35,000 new cases diagnosed each year.

The age of onset is considerably younger than for Type-2 diabetes patients, who can still make insulin but can't use it efficiently.

The stem cell approach mirrors the bone marrow transplants used to treat patients with certain cancers and blood diseases. The idea is to wipe out the faulty immune system and replace it .

In the study, 15 Brazilian patients were treated within a few months of their diagnosis, before their immune systems had the chance to eradicate all of their insulin-producing cells.

The study was conducted in Brazil because of Voltarelli's interest in the experiment. It was funded by the Brazilian Ministry of Health and other sources.

The patients, who ranged in age from 14 to 31, were treated with drugs and hormones that prompted the body to produce hematopoietic stem cells and send them from the bone marrow into the bloodstream, where they were extracted by a special machine.

About two weeks later, the patients checked into the hospital and received chemotherapy and other drugs to kill off their immune systems over five days.

After a day of rest, they were infused with their own hematopoietic stem cells, which took about eight to 12 days to establish a new immune system. In the interim, they were given antibiotics to protect against infections.

The treatment had no effect on one patient, whose disease had already progressed too far, doctors decided. Of the remaining 14 patients, 12 were able to stop taking insulin shortly after their transplants. Altogether, five patients have not needed insulin injections for at least 23 months, and two have been insulin-free for more than 18 months.

Even if patients continue to require insulin shots, the treatment should be considered a success if it halts the destruction of beta cells, said Dr. Jay Skyler, with the Diabetes Research Institute at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, who wrote an editorial accompanying the study.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article discusses the alternate, standard thereapy for type 1 diabetics, which is insulin injections.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Hospitals can improve patient care and reduce costs associated with coronary angioplasty if cardiologists perform more of these procedures through an artery in the wrist and if they take steps to discharge such patients on the same day, according to a new study led by Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.

Coronary angioplasty is a procedure in which arteries are opened to increase blood flow to the heart.

The research, published Feb. 20 in JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions, suggests that the lower costs of the wrist approach largely are due to the fact that patients experience fewer complications and can be discharged earlier, compared with procedures that access the heart through the larger, deeper artery in the groin. The researchers estimated that shifting standard practice by 30 percent to the wrist approach, along with same-day discharge, could save the United States $300 million per year.

“We have unequivocal evidence and data that show better outcomes when we access the heart’s coronary arteries and perform angioplasty through a blood vessel in the wrist rather than through the femoral artery in the groin,” said first author Amit P. Amin, MD, an assistant professor of medicine. “The femoral artery is the traditional route, but when we go in through a vessel in the wrist, we see less bleeding, fewer complications, less pain and discomfort, higher patient satisfaction, shorter hospital stays, and lower costs.”

Patients may undergo coronary angioplasty — also called percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) — to alleviate chest pain or shortness of breath. Such symptoms suggest the coronary arteries that deliver blood to the heart are blocked or narrowed and oxygen delivery to the heart muscle is reduced. Interventional cardiologists insert a small tube into an artery in the wrist or the groin, which can be used to view the narrowed heart artery, deliver an inflatable balloon to open up the narrowed section, and possibly deliver a stent to hold the vessel open.

Using the National Cardiovascular Data Registry CathPCI Registry, the researchers analyzed data from almost 280,000 Medicare patients who underwent PCI and were eligible for same-day discharge. Despite the fact that all of these patients were capable of leaving the hospital the same day as their procedures, only about 5 percent of these patients actually were discharged without having stayed overnight.

“We have seen that it is very safe to send these patients home the same day,” said Amin, who treats patients at Barnes-Jewish Hospital. “We use risk-prediction models to predict their risks ahead of time, and we plan ahead to mitigate any issues so we can facilitate a same-day discharge. This is really about patient care. We want to outline health-care pathways that provide the best care for patients.”

The analysis demonstrated an average cost of $13,389 for the wrist approach with same-day discharge, compared with $17,076 for the groin approach with at least one night of hospitalization, resulting in a cost savings of about $3,700 for outpatients who get the wrist-access procedure. Independent of the length of stay, the wrist approach costs about $900 less than the groin approach, on average.

The investigators estimated that if a hospital performing 1,000 of these procedures annually shifted 30 percent of these patients to the wrist-access with same-day discharge approach, the hospital would save $1 million over that period. Expanding that practice to hospitals nationwide might save the United States $300 million in health-care spending per year. Health-care costs for the 600,000 patients who receive PCI each year in the U.S. are estimated to be $10 billion.

Of the study’s patient population receiving PCI, 9 percent received the procedure in which doctors used wrist access. According to Amin, improved technology has allowed wrist access to become a viable route to the coronary arteries, even for complex cases, and should be considered for more patients.

“The traditional way has been to go through the bigger femoral artery that is a straight pathway to the heart,” Amin said. “Unfortunately, that artery is also deep. It’s associated with more bleeding complications. In contrast, the wrist artery is small and is associated with fewer complications. The minor challenge is in the difficulty of navigating a smaller, more twisting path of an artery through the wrist. But with advances we have in technology and equipment, those challenges are rapidly decreasing.”

This work was supported by a grant from Vita Solutions, a subsidiary of The Medicines Company, for whom Amin has provided consultation; and by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers UL1TR000448, KL2TR000450, TL1TR000449 and 1KM1CA156708-01. Amin also reported consulting for Terumo. Co-authors from other institutions reported receiving grant funding from or providing consultations to the National Institutes of Health; the American College of Cardiology Foundation; Eli Lilly; Amorcyte; Gilead; Genentech; UnitedHealthcare; Amgen; Janssen; Health Outcomes Sciences; Blue Cross Blue Shield of Kansas City; Edwards Lifesciences; Medtronic; St. Jude Medical; Abbott Vascular; Saint Luke’s Hospital Foundation of Kansas City, partially funded by Merck; Boston Scientific; Biomet; Daiichi Sankyo; AstraZeneca; and Bellerophon.

Amin AP, Patterson M, House JA, Giersiefen H, Spertus JA, Baklanov DV, Chhatriwalla AK, Safley DM, Cohen DJ, Rao SV, Marso SP. Costs associated with access site and same-day discharge among Medicare beneficiaries undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions. Feb. 20, 2017.

Washington University School of Medicine‘s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The point of the study was to compare variants on angioplasty method, and the release does that clearly.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A modified version of the polio vaccine, infused straight into aggressive brain tumors, helped some patients live for years longer than they normally would have, doctors reported Tuesday.

It’s no miracle cure — only about 20 percent of patients with gliomas were helped — but some are alive six years later, the team reported in the New England Journal of Medicine.

It’s a hopeful enough finding to move forward and test the vaccine in more people, the team at the Duke University School of Medicine said.

“It’s very unusual, almost unprecedented to get this kind of long-term survival,” neurologist Dr. Darell Bigner, who led the study team, told NBC News.

The Duke team tested 61 glioma patients over five years. They all had grade IV gliomas, a group of brain tumors that includes glioblastoma.

These patients have a “dismal” prognosis, the Duke team wrote in the New England Journal of Medicine. “There is currently no effective therapy.”

Standard treatment of brain tumors includes surgery if the tumor is somewhere reachable; chemotherapy; and radiation. But if the tumor is aggressive, it’s usually fatal.

“These are people who failed everything,” Bigner said. “Virtually all patients, no matter what you treat them with, are dead within in two years.”

About a third of all brain tumors are gliomas, according to the National Brain Tumor Society. About 80,000 people a year are diagnosed with a brain tumor, and about 24,000 of those are malignant. “The average survival rate for all malignant brain tumor patients is only 34.7 percent,” the group says.

But there’s evidence that some viruses can home in on tumors and kill them. It’s not clear why, but viruses can also make tumors more visible to the immune system.

The team at Duke worked with the National Cancer Institute to design and manufacture a modified version of polio vaccine virus.

Polio viruses are attracted to nerve cells — that’s why they cause paralysis.

The medical team used polio viruses already weakened and altered for use in polio vaccines, and genetically engineered them to carry parts of a common cold virus, called a rhinovirus, known to be attracted to glioma cells.

They infused various doses into the tumors of the 61 glioma patients.

“We inject the virus directly into brain tumors and it kills all the tumor cells it comes in contact with,” Bigner said. “The most important thing is, it sets up a secondary immune response and really destroys the distant tumor cells.”

The very first patient was Stephanie Hopper, who was diagnosed with a glioblastoma when she was just 20.

“I was throwing up and I had a headache behind my eye. I didn’t even know I had cancer until after the surgery to remove the tumor,” Hopper told NBC News. “It was the size of a tennis ball.”

Hopper was a little wary of being infused with a polio virus, but was ready to try. It worked. She’s still alive, married and working as a nurse in Greenville, South Carolina, more than six years later.

“I’m amazed,” she said. “I never really felt like I was going die. I think my life was just put on hold.”

After three years, 21 percent of patients were still alive, the team reported. That compares to 20 months or less on average for similar patients.

One patient had a hemorrhage and 19 percent had a notable adverse event, the team reported. More than half had headaches and half had hemiparesis, weakness or paralysis on one side of the body. Another 45 percent had a seizure. More than a quarter had aphasia -- brain damage that makes speaking and communication difficult.

The patient who had the hemorrhage suffered aphasia but was still alive more nearly five years later. Two patients died during the trial.

“The nature of the treatment causes side-effects,” Bigner said. “The virus infection causes a very potent inflammation response and that response causes brain swelling.”

The cancer drug Avastin is used in low doses to control the swelling, the team said.

It’s not clear why just one in five patients benefits, said Dr. Annick Desjardins, who worked on the study team.

“Similar to many immunotherapies, it appears that some patients don’t respond for one reason or another, but if they respond, they often become long-term survivors,” Desjardins said. “The big question is, how can we make sure that everybody responds?”

The Duke team compared their 61 volunteers to similar past patients who did not get the treatment. All but one of those previous patients died after an average of 11 months. Just 14 percent were still alive two years after diagnosis and 4 percent were alive three years later.

But the 21 percent or so of patients helped by the vaccine all survived at least three years.

As of March of this year, eight patients had no evidence of the tumors growing any more and two had no evidence of a brain tumor at all.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned standard treatment for glioblastoma can include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation.
However, the story would have been stronger if had mentioned that there are other experimental viral treatments under study for glioblastoma.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new insomnia drug helped people get a bit more shut-eye in a lab study, researchers report.

The drug, known as suvorexant, is being developed by Merck Research Laboratories, which funded and conducted the study. The medication is not available yet, but the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reviewing it for possible approval, the researchers said.

In the United States, about 10 percent of people say they have chronic insomnia, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. There are sleep aids on the market, but they do not work for everyone and they can have side effects that include sleepwalking, daytime drowsiness and confusion.

Suvorexant works differently from those drugs, zeroing in on specific brain chemicals involved in the ability to sleep, explained study author Dr. William Herring, executive director of clinical research at Merck.

The study, published online Nov. 28 and in the Dec. 4 print issue of the journal Neurology, included 254 healthy adults with primary insomnia, which means it wasn't caused by an underlying physical or mental health problem.

All of the patients spent four weeks on one of four doses of suvorexant and another four weeks on placebo pills. They had their sleep monitored in a sleep lab on their first night with each treatment, and then came back again after four weeks.

Overall, Herring's team found, people slept better with the drug, although the improvement was not dramatic.

At the outset, when patients spent eight hours in bed, they were typically asleep for 66 percent of that time. One day on suvorexant boosted that by anywhere from 5 percent to 13 percent, relative to the placebo. Between 21 and 37 fewer minutes were spent awake during those sleep periods.

There was still a benefit four weeks later. One expert pointed out, however, that the benefit was small.

"The amount of additional sleep was not tremendous," said Dr. Carl Bazil, director of the division of epilepsy and sleep at New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center.

The effect was essentially comparable to what has been seen with other sleep medications, said Bazil, who was not involved in the research.

But, he said, suvorexant is seen as a potentially important development in the world of sleep medicine, because the drug blocks specific brain chemicals called orexins, which help keep people awake. Standard sleep medications work more widely throughout the brain, Bazil explained, which is why they can have a host of side effects.

"The way [suvorexant] works makes a lot of sense," Bazil said. "The hope is that it will help some people who haven't responded to [other drugs], and have fewer side effects."

It's promising news, Bazil added, that there were no serious side effects in this study.

The most common side effects were sleepiness (reported by about 10 percent of patients on the two higher doses of suvorexant), headache (reported by about 5 percent), dizziness and abnormal dreams (5 percent).

There are still many questions, including whether the drug would benefit people with insomnia due to a health condition, which doctors call secondary insomnia.

The study also excluded adults aged 65 or older -- an age group commonly affected by insomnia. But, Herring said, seniors were part of a larger, 12-month trial, and Merck has submitted those results to the FDA.

Another sleep specialist said the findings show "some potential benefit" from suvorexant, but he cautioned insomnia sufferers against relying completely on any drug.

"Medication can be important," said Dr. William Kohler, who directs the Florida Sleep Institute in Spring Hill. "But in the long run, the best methods for treating insomnia are behavioral techniques."

Kohler said cognitive behavioral therapy -- where people learn to change the thoughts and habits that affect their sleep quality -- is a proven way to manage insomnia. For most people, he said, medication should be a temporary treatment; behavior change is the long-term fix.

Bazil agreed: "I look at most people with insomnia as someone who developed bad sleep habits."

A drug, ideally used for a short time, may help encourage sleep and get people on the right track, Bazil said. "But those bad sleep habits -- you've got to address them too," he added.

"The problem," Kohler noted, "is that we don't want to make behavior changes. We want to pop a pill."

Learn more about insomnia and good sleep habits from the National Sleep Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Strong ending that addressed this criterion:
Another sleep specialist said the findings show “some potential benefit” from suvorexant, but he cautioned insomnia sufferers against relying completely on any drug.
“Medication can be important,” said Dr. William Kohler, who directs the Florida Sleep Institute in Spring Hill. “But in the long run, the best methods for treating insomnia are behavioral techniques.”
Kohler said cognitive behavioral therapy — where people learn to change the thoughts and habits that affect their sleep quality — is a proven way to manage insomnia. For most people, he said, medication should be a temporary treatment; behavior change is the long-term fix.
Bazil agreed: “I look at most people with insomnia as someone who developed bad sleep habits.”
A drug, ideally used for a short time, may help encourage sleep and get people on the right track, Bazil said. “But those bad sleep habits — you’ve got to address them too,” he added.
“The problem,” Kohler noted, “is that we don’t want to make behavior changes. We want to pop a pill.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Patients who have robot-assisted surgeries on their kidneys or prostate have shorter hospital stays and a lower risk of having a blood transfusion or dying — but the bill is significantly higher, a study found.

The analysis, which appeared in the Journal of Urology, compared increasingly common robotic surgery with two other techniques for the same surgery and found that direct costs can be up to several thousand dollars higher for the robotic type.

Touted as less invasive and more efficient, robotic surgeries typically use a laparoscopic or “keyhold surgery” approach, in which tools and a tiny video camera are inserted into the body through one or two small incisions.

Robotic surgery replaces a surgeon’s hands with ultra-precise tools at the ends of mechanical arms, all operated by the surgeon from a console.

“I think the take home message is that robotic (surgery), looking at our study, had certain beneficial outcomes compared to open and laparoscopic procedures,” said study leader Jim Hu at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

Hu and his team analyzed surgery data from a national government database to see if the costlier robotic surgeries were cost effective with extra benefits over older techniques.

During the last three months of 2008 — the most recent data available that allowed a comparison among robotic, open and laparoscopic surgeries — more than half of all prostate removals involved robot-assisted surgery.

About three percent of prostate patients had standard laparoscopic surgery and 44 percent had open surgery. Open and laparoscopic surgeries were still more common than robotic surgeries for kidney repairs and removals.

Among patients who had their prostate removed, none died from laparoscopic or robotic surgery, whereas two out of every 1,000 died after the open procedure.

About five percent of the men who had open surgery needed a blood transfusion, compared to less than two percent of men who had robot-assisted surgery. The open-surgery group also stayed in the hospital about one day longer than the robotic group.

The results were similar for people who had kidneys removed.

The trade-off was the cost, with robotic prostate removal costing about $10,000 on average, roughly $700 more than laparoscopic surgery and $1,100 more than open surgery.

For kidney removal, robotic surgery cost $13,900, which was $2,700 more than laparoscopic and $1,300 more than open surgery.

David Penson, a surgeon at Vanderbilt University Medical Center who was not part of the study, said more consideration should have been given to the state of patients afterwards. Emphasis should be lmited on procedure, he said, as opposed to surgical skill.

“Years ago, this was thought to be the be-all-end-all operation, particularly with prostate surgery. We were going to get patients out of the hospital quicker, have better potency and incontinence outcomes,” he told Reuters Health.

"And the reality of it is that... there are some benefits -- but not as much as we had hoped." SOURCE: bit.ly/zZIYa1
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The focus of the story was on a study comparing robot-assisted surgery with two other surgical techniques.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People who cram all their exercise into one or two sessions at the weekend benefit nearly as much as those who work out more frequently, researchers say.



A study of more than 60,000 adults in England and Scotland found that “weekend warriors” lowered their risk of death by a similar margin to those who spread the same amount of exercise over the whole week.



The findings will reassure people who find it hard to make time for a daily exercise routine and opt instead to break a sweat once or twice a week in the hope of keeping fit.



“Millions of people enjoy doing sport once or twice a week, but they may be concerned that they are not doing enough,” said Gary O’Donovan, a physical activity researcher and author on the study at Loughborough University. “We find a clear benefit. It’s making them fit and healthy.”



The UK’s National Health Service recommends that to ward off an early death, people should spend 150 minutes a week performing moderate exercise, or 75 minutes a week doing vigorous exercise. As a rule of thumb, moderate exercise can be done while maintaining a conversation, whereas during vigorous exercise talking at the same time is too hard.



In the study, those who met the physical activity target by exercising through the week had a 35% lower risk of death than the inactive adults, with cardiovascular deaths down 41% and a 21% lower risk of cancer death.



But the weekend warriors also saw substantial health benefits if they met the physical activity target too. Their overall risk of death was 30% lower than the sedentary adults, with the risk of cardiovascular and cancer deaths lower by 40% and 18% respectively.



“Weekend warriors are people who meet the recommended volume of physical activity each week through only one or two sessions. There are doing a large proportion of vigorous exercise and that makes you fitter than moderate exercise,” said O’Donovan. Men and women benefited equally, according to the study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association: Internal Medicine.



The results are based on medical data gathered for 63,591 adults aged 40 and above between 1994 and 2012. Nearly 9,000 of the study participants died in the period.



For those who have resolved to get fit in the New Year, O’Donovan recommends to start with moderate exercise, such as brisk walking, and then to set realistic, incremental goals to boost confidence without running the risk of setbacks due to injury. “A middle aged or older person should do as much as 12 weeks of moderate exercise before introducing vigorous exercise,” he said.



Ulf Ekelund at the Norwegian School of Sport Sciences in Oslo said the study emphasised what researchers have found time and again: that even a small amount of regular exercise wards off death. In the study, those who exercised a little had a 29% lower risk of death than those who did no exercise at all. “The novel finding is that it appears the duration, and possibly the intensity, of leisure time physical activity is more important than the frequency,” Ekelund said.



“My take home message is that the greatest risk reduction and the greatest gain for the individual and for public health is if those who are physically inactive take up some activity,” he added.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses the impact of different activity levels on early death risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Can a little fresh blood reverse the damage of Alzheimer’s disease?

Researchers trying to answer the question say they found the treatments are at least safe. And they got a tiny hint that they just may help.

The team at Stanford University found that infusions of plasma from healthy young men didn’t hurt the 18 Alzheimer’s patients who got them. And a few of the patients seemed to do a little better in the skills of everyday living, although memory and thinking skills were not affected.

This does not mean that blood transfusions could treat Alzheimer’s disease, researchers cautioned. The study is a very long way from showing that. But it does show it’s worth going forward with more tests, said Dr. Sharon Sha, who ran the test program at Stanford.

“Although it’s very exciting, it is very early days,” added Sha.

“We need to do the next steps to understand what is in the young plasma.”

Plasma is the liquid part of blood, with the red cells and immune cells removed.

The researchers were working off earlier studies from the lab of Tony Wyss-Coray at Stanford, who found that infusing young human plasma into old mice seemed to perk them up. The work made headlines and launched a company, Alkahest, that’s working to develop young human plasma into treatments for aging-related diseases.

Alkahest plans to move forward with formal clinical trials in 40 volunteers next year, said Joe McCracken, vice president for development at the company.

"We do have a study with what we think is a commercially viable product that will start early next year," McCracken said.

Stanford was doing what’s called a proof of concept trial, just to check the safety of the treatment, in 18 volunteers with moderate Alzheimer’s disease.

At first they did what’s called a blinded trial --- treating half the patients with real plasma, and giving half the patients a sham infusion, with no one knowing which patient got the real treatment. Then they swapped the two sides.

Later, because it was taking so much time and effort, they cut the trial to just nine people and all nine knew they were getting the real thing – a unit of plasma, once a week for a month, from healthy young men under the age of 30.

There was no measurable effect on memory or thinking, the team told the Clinical Trials on Alzheimer’s Disease conference in Boston. But Sha said on two measurements of function there was a difference in answers the caregivers gave on a questionnaire.

“Anecdotally, when I saw these patients and caregivers, those that did say they had an improvement…they might have said things like ‘they are more engaged’, ‘they are participating on conversations more’,” she said.

But that doesn’t mean there really was an effect. You just cannot tell with a trial of only 18 people.

“I worry that people would take this information and say, ‘I need to get this. I need to get young blood.’ It’s important to understand the science behind this first,” Sha said.

More than 5 million Americans have Alzheimer’s, and this number is expected to grow as the population ages. There’s no cure, and treatments that have looked promising have flopped in big trials.

“There are things you can do but right now there is no drug that is actually going to slow down the progression of the brain disease in Alzheimer’s,” said Keith Fargo, director of scientific programs for the Alzheimer’s Association.

“They showed it was safe and tolerable treatment at least for this small number of people,” Fargo said.

Sha says it’s not clear what might be found in plasma from young people that might help the symptoms of Alzheimer’s. “There is a theory that there is an inflammatory process that is driving the disease and the plasma is helping that,” she said.

Any actual treatment would not involve whole plasma, McCracken said.

He said the company has developed a safer plasma product that has blood clotting factors removed, as well as immunoglobulin. Whole plasma must be matched to blood type.

And, McCracken says, the company is working to figure out just what it is in the plasma that might affect aging and disease.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does state flatly that, “There’s no cure (for Alzheimer’s), and treatments that have looked promising have flopped in big trials.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People with diets short on omega-3 fatty acids – the kind found in fish oil – were more likely to experience accelerated brain aging, a new study found.

“People with lower levels of omega-3 fatty acids had lower brain volumes that were equivalent to about two years of brain aging,” said Dr. Zaldy S. Tan, a member of the UCLA Easton Center for Alzheimer’s Disease Research in the Department of Neurology.

The study was published Tuesday in the print edition of the journal Neurology.

Tan and his colleagues compared blood levels of two nutrients in omega-3 fatty acids with MRI brain scans and cognitive tests. They found people in the bottom 25% scored lower on such mental tests as problem solving, multi-tasking and abstract thinking.

Tan said the MRI images showed those with lower levels of omega-3 fatty acids were also more likely to have minute but significant structural changes in the brain. The MRIs showed higher white matter hyperintensity volume, tiny lesions in the brain, raising the risk for death, stroke and dementia for the low omega-3 fatty acids group.

Tan said the results were consistent with signs of damage to the intricate network of blood vessels in the brain. A third of the brain by volume is composed of blood vessels.

Tan’s team studied 1,575 people with an average age of 67 who were free of dementia. They controlled for such risk factors as age, smoking, gender, body mass index, physical activity and APOE, the one known gene linked to dementia risk.

Tan said the next step in the research is to follow these people to see if the risk factors they observed translates into a higher rate of cognitive deterioration.

Fatty fish like salmon offer a concentrated source of the omega-3 fatty acid nutrients Tan and his colleagues looked at eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).

Vegetable and canola oils, soybeans, flaxseed, walnuts and vegetables including spinach, kale and salad greens are also a source of omega-3 fatty acids. These contain alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), which the body partially converts to EPA and DHA.

Both types are thought to be beneficial. The typical American diet doesn't contain enough of either. Choose My Plate, the government’s dietary guidelines, recommends eating seafood twice a week.

“This is an important new finding that supports omega-3 for brain health and brain size,” said Dr. Majid Fotuhi, chairman of the Neurology Institute for Brain Health and Fitness and assistant professor of neurology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

Fotuhi recommends his patients get 1,000 mg per day of DHA, a nutrient that increases blood flow in the brain, reduces inflammation in the brain, heart and elsewhere, and reduces the toxic aggregation of amyloid in the brain.

DHA has the added benefit of improving mood and reducing symptoms of depression, he said. The only people who should avoid DHA are patients on a blood thinner like Cumadin, he added.

Neurology, published weekly, is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions alternative sources of omega-3 fatty acids and recommends the MyPlate government dietary guide. Other alternatives for dementia prevention such as exercise and mental stimulation could have been mentioned as well.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Just over a year ago, Catherine Price decided to start taking one of the cheapest, safest, oldest, most widely prescribed drugs for Type 2 diabetes. So much metformin is taken in the United States — some 72 million prescriptions were written for it in 2013 — that a recent study found higher trace levels of it (presumably from the urine of people taking it) in Lake Michigan than of any other drug, including caffeine.

But Price, a science and medical reporter in Oakland, Calif., doesn’t have Type 2 diabetes. She has Type 1, the far less common form of the disease, which requires lifelong treatment with insulin, to compensate for her body’s failure to produce enough of the hormone. However, she had read studies indicating that metformin combined with insulin might help Type 1 diabetics, too. Moreover, the drug was being studied in clinical trials as a way to lower the risk of cancer, heart disease and dementia — not just for diabetics, but for everyone.

For Price, there was yet another possible benefit — as a treatment for polycystic ovary syndrome, an endocrine disorder that doctors thought might explain the difficulty she and her husband had had conceiving.

Sure enough, a month and a half after she had started taking metformin pills and even as she was enjoying the benefits of better blood-sugar control, Price became pregnant, eventually giving birth to a girl.

“I’m still taking metformin along with my insulin,” said Price, 36, who was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes 14 years ago. “I remember eating Mexican food one night, which can be a potential disaster for people with diabetes because of the carbs, but I noticed I needed only two-thirds to a half of the insulin I normally needed.”

Synthesized in the 1920s, metformin was first approved for treatment of Type 2 diabetes in the United Kingdom in 1958. It took until 1995 to get approval in the United States after a potentially fatal disorder linked to a similar drug was found to be rarely if ever associated with metformin.

Unlike insulin shots, which help Type 1 diabetics break down sugar and starches in the blood, metformin lowers blood-sugar levels primarily by squelching the liver’s tendency to release stored-up sugar into the bloodstream. Keeping that extra sugar (actually a form of sugar called glucose) out of the blood helps to maintain normal blood-sugar levels, thereby preventing such long-term complications as blindness, kidney failure and lower-limb amputation.

About 29 million people in the United States have diabetes, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. More than 90 percent of them have Type 2, in which their bodies slowly fail to respond to normal levels of insulin, forcing their pancreas to produce so much that it’s eventually exhausted. The estimated 2.5 million with Type 1, in contrast, lose their ability to produce insulin, usually within a matter of months, due to an autoimmune attack by the body on itself.

Today, the range of ailments being targeted by metformin, a prescription drug sold under such names as Glucophage, Glumetza, Fortamet and Riomet, all share one characteristic: They are diseases related to aging.

“Metformin actually lowers the rate of cell turnover,” said Michael Pollak, who has been studying metformin’s effects on pancreatic cancer as chairman of oncology at McGill University in Montreal. “It makes cells divide less quickly. The rate-of-living theory defines aging as the number of cell divisions you undergo since you were a fertilized egg. If the theory is true, then people who age more gracefully have a slower rate of cell division. The question is whether the rate-of-living theory is operational in mammals.”

Pollak says that none of the most exciting possible benefits for the drug have yet been proved in randomized clinical trials of non-diabetics. For now, the evidence suggesting benefits is limited to large studies of diabetics that have found, on average that those who take metformin tend to have lower rates of cancer, heart disease and dementia, and to live longer overall than those who take other drugs for diabetes. Those effects have also been seen in animal studies. But such evidence often does not pan out in human studies.

At a medical meeting in May, Pollak reported disappointing results from his first randomized, placebo-controlled trial of metformin for people with pancreatic cancer. “It yielded no benefit,” he said. “Plain old metformin given in the same dose as we do for Type 2 diabetes doesn’t seem to be a breakthrough for cancer, at least for pancreatic cancer.”

Many other metformin clinical trials are underway for breast, colorectal, endometrial and other cancers.

For heart disease, the benefit of metformin over most other drugs for Type 2 diabetics has been seen repeatedly in clinical trials. For people without diabetes, only one study has been published, finding no apparent effect after 18 months. As with cancer, however, other studies are underway.

For dementia, which people with Type 2 diabetes have double the risk of developing compared with non-diabetics, metformin has been found in a number of studies to cut that risk substantially.

“There’s been a lot of excitement about metformin and dementia,” said Rachel Whitmer, an epidemiologist at Kaiser Permanente in California.

In 2013, Whitmer presented the results of a study of about 15,000 people newly prescribed a medication for Type 2 diabetes: By the end of the five-year study, those who received metformin had a 40 percent lower risk of having developed dementia than those prescribed sulfonylureas, another common type of diabetes drug.

But, Whitmer notes, “I don’t think the story is complete. There needs to be more work in this area with all drugs for diabetes.”

For Type 1 diabetes, researchers at the University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine published a study in May in which they added either a low dose of metformin or placebo pills to the insulin regimen of 74 adolescents. Those who received metformin lost weight — generally a benefit for those with diabetes — and needed less insulin after six months. Those who received the placebo needed more insulin than at the beginning of the study and saw their blood pressure rise. The one goal the study did not achieve was better blood-sugar control.

“There is some benefit, but it wasn’t the full benefit we hoped for,” said Helen Nickerson, senior scientific program manager at JDRF, formerly known as the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, which partly funded the study. Even so, she said, she is hearing from doctors that growing numbers of them are prescribing metformin along with insulin to patients with Type 1 diabetes.

No one would suggest that a person with Type 1 diabetes stop taking their insulin. Doing so would be life-threatening. For those with Type 1, metformin is being tested only as an add-on to insulin.

JDRF, meanwhile, is funding a clinical trial to see if metformin will reduce the risk of heart disease in people with Type 1, and it is funding a trial in Britain to see if the drug will prevent children from developing Type 1 in the first place.

Terry Wilkin, a professor of endocrinology and metabolism at the University of Exeter, is leading the prevention trial. He theorizes that the risk of developing Type 1 rises when excess demand for insulin is placed on the pancreas in children who are even slightly overweight. His study will give low daily doses of metformin to children who are at high risk of developing Type 1.

“If we can even slightly lower their average blood sugar with metformin,” Wilkin said, “I believe we can have a big benefit on their risk of developing Type 1.”

Despite all these potential benefits of metformin — and despite a recommendation from the American Diabetes Association that it be tried before any other drug for newly diagnosed Type 2 diabetics — a recent study found that only about half of all such people get metformin as their first prescribed medication. The study does not explain why that might be. Among the possibilities, experts say, are that newer drugs are being pushed heavily in direct-to-patient advertising and that some patients are turned off by the common though mild side effect of metformin — stomach upset and diarrhea — which can usually be avoided by starting on a low dose.

The author of the study, Niteesh Choudhry, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, also found that newly diagnosed Type 2 diabetics who start on metformin are the least likely to need an additional diabetes drug later.

“It’s clear that physicians and patients are not always choosing to start on metformin,” he said. “There are legitimate reasons to put patients on one drug rather than another. But the guidelines do recommend metformin first.”

For patients with Type 2 whose doctor started them on a drug other than metformin, he said, “I certainly would encourage people to talk with their doctor. That’s always a good thing.”

Hurley is a New Jersey-based science journalist who writes frequently on diabetes and health.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’re on the fence with this one. The start of the story focuses on new uses for metformin — uses that the story goes on to show are speculative and so far unproven (or disproven). It ends by highlighting that where the evidence for benefit exists — in patients with type 2 diabetes — metformin is underutilized compared to other diabetes medicines. However, the true comparison is for the potential new uses, and here the article should have stated clearly that until more evidence is available, metformin is unproven for these indications and that standard treatments should be the focus for the present. The story does warn that type 1 diabetics should never replace their insulin with metformin, but it doesn’t highlight the importance of maintaining standard treatments for the other conditions that are discussed. Again, we’ll err on the side of the story here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - Scientists in Canada and Sweden have used laboratory-made biosynthetic corneas to restore vision to patients in a small human trial, and shown for the first time that they can help to repair damaged eye tissue.

The scientists, whose work was published Wednesday in the Science Translational Medicine journal, said their findings offered hope for the millions of people who go blind each year because of a worldwide shortage of corneas for donation. “This study ... is the first to show that an artificially fabricated cornea can integrate with the human eye and stimulate regeneration,” said May Griffith of the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, who led the study.

“With further research, this approach could help restore sight to millions of people who are waiting for a donated human cornea for transplantation.”

The cornea is a tiny piece of transparent, film-like tissue that covers the surface of our eyes. Made from parallel strands of the protein collagen, it refracts light to focus images on the retina.

Although the fragile film is easily destroyed by trauma or infection, replacement human corneas can be used to restore vision, although this depends on a steady supply of donors.

A team led by Griffith and Per Fagerholm, an ophthalmology professor and eye surgeon at Linkoping University in Sweden, conducted the study by removing diseased tissue from the corneas of 10 patients and replacing them with biosynthetic implants designed to mimic a normal human cornea.

For the process they used recombinant human collagen, a substance synthesized in the laboratory to mimic human tissue and supplied by the San Francisco biotech firm FibroGen Inc.

The patients were monitored for two years after surgery. The researchers found that, eventually, the cells and nerves from nine of the 10 patients regrew completely and packed themselves into the implant, resulting in a kind of “regenerated” cornea that looked and functioned like normal, healthy eye tissue.

The biosynthetic corneas also became sensitive to touch and the treated eyes began producing normal tears, the researchers said. Vision improved in six of the 10 patients.

After the patients were also fitted with contact lenses, which is common after corneal transplants, their vision was comparable with that of patients who undergo regular human corneal tissue transplants.

“The results were pretty encouraging and there is great potential here,” Fagerholm said in a telephone interview.

Loss of vision due to corneal disease or trauma affects over 10 million people a year, but lack of access to donor tissue limits the number of transplants, particularly in poorer countries.

In the United States, an estimated 42,000 corneal grafts a year are performed using tissue from posthumous donors, but there are sometimes problems with rejection and experts say failure rates are significant.

Fagerholm said the patients in this trial had no problems with rejection and did not need long-term immune suppression drugs to help their bodies accept the corneas.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does compare the treatment to human tissue transplants. It could have pointed out that the study was not designed as a direct comparison with people who received a human cornea transplant.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COLUMBIA, Mo. (March 10, 2016) - Approximately 14 percent of men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer at some point in their lifetimes, according to the National Institutes of Health. Radiation therapy traditionally has been a primary treatment for the cancer, but one-fourth of men have a recurrence of prostate cancer within five years after the therapy. Now, a University of Missouri School of Medicine researcher has found that a complex procedure to remove the prostate achieves excellent long-term survival for men after radiation therapy has failed.

"Prostate cancer, unfortunately, is a common cancer, and more than 27,000 men are estimated to have died from the disease in 2015," said Naveen Pokala, M.D., an assistant professor in the Division of Urology at the MU School of Medicine and lead author of the study. "By studying a national database of prostate cancer cases, we found that a procedure known as salvage radical prostatectomy can greatly increase a man's chance of survival when traditional radiation therapy has failed to eradicate the cancer."

Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program database, Pokala and his research team studied 364 patients who underwent a salvage radical prostatectomy surgery after unsuccessful radiation treatments. Looking at survival rates, the researchers found that 88.6 percent of men were still alive 10 years later and 72.7 percent of men were still alive 20 years later.

During a salvage radical prostatectomy, the prostate gland and surrounding tissue are surgically removed to keep the cancer from spreading. The procedure is challenging because tissue that surrounds the prostate is scarred during radiation treatment, making it difficult for the surgeon to identify and cut out tissue that needs to be removed. If the cancer is localized, a highly skilled surgeon can remove the gland and surrounding tissue using a robotic minimally invasive technique or through an open surgery.

"Because radical prostatectomy is a complex surgery, there can be a reluctance to undergo the procedure," Pokala said. "However, this study shows that it is a viable treatment option. This can bring a renewed hope and peace of mind to men living with prostate cancer."

The study, "Survival Outcomes in Men Undergoing Radical Prostatectomy after Primary Radiation Treatment for Adenocarcinoma of the Prostate," recently was published by Clinical Genitourinary Cancer, a peer-reviewed journal on the detection, diagnosis, prevention and treatment of genitourinary cancers.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release did not include information on what alternatives patients may have chosen who suffered recurrence after radiation, but did not elect to have the prostatectomy. However, we’ll give them the benefit of a doubt since there are no clinical trials comparing options such as cryotherapy, surgery and brachytherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
America's favorite dietary supplements, multivitamins, modestly lowered the risk for cancer in healthy male doctors who took them for more than a decade, the first large study to test these pills has found.

The result is a surprise because many studies of individual vitamins have found they don't help prevent chronic diseases and some have even caused problems.

In the new study, multivitamins cut the chance of developing cancer by 8%. That is less effective than a good diet, exercise and not smoking, each of which can lower cancer risk by 20% to 30%, cancer experts say.

Multivitamins also may have different results in women, younger men or people less healthy than those in this study.

"It's a very mild effect and personally I'm not sure it's significant enough to recommend to anyone" although it is promising, said Dr. Ernest Hawk, vice president of cancer prevention at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and formerly of the National Cancer Institute.

"At least this doesn't suggest a harm" as some previous studies on single vitamins have, he said.

Hawk reviewed the study for the American Association for Cancer Research, which is meeting in Anaheim, Calif., where the study was to be presented on Wednesday. It also was published online in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

About one-third of U.S. adults and as many as half of those over 50 take them. They are marketed as a kind of insurance policy against bad eating. Yet no government agency recommends their routine use "regardless of the quality of a person's diet," says a fact sheet from the federal Office of Dietary Supplements.

Some fads, such as the antioxidant craze over vitamins A and E and beta-carotene, backfired when studies found more health risk with those supplements, not less. Many of those were single vitamins in larger doses than the "100% of daily value" amounts that multivitamins typically contain.

Science on vitamins has been skimpy. Most studies have been observational — they look at groups of people who do and do not use vitamins, a method that can't give firm conclusions.

Dr. J. Michael Gaziano, of Brigham and Women's Hospital and VA Boston, led a stronger test. Nearly 15,000 male doctors who were 50 or older and free of cancer when the study started were given monthly packets of Centrum Silver or fake multivitamins without knowing which type they received.

After about 11 years, there were 2,669 new cancers, and some people had cancer more than once. For every 1,000 men per year in the study, there were 17 cancers among multivitamin users and more than 18 among those taking the placebo pills. That worked out to an 8% lower risk of developing cancer in the vitamin group.

Multivitamins made no difference in the risk of developing prostate cancer, which accounted for half of all cases. They lowered the risk of other cancers collectively by about 12%. There also was a trend toward fewer cancer deaths among multivitamin users, but the difference was so small it could have occurred by chance alone.

Side effects were fairly similar except for more rashes among vitamin users. The National Institutes of Health paid for most of the study. Pfizer Inc. supplied the pills and other companies supplied the packaging.

The main reason to take a multivitamin is to correct or prevent a deficiency, "but there may be a modest benefit in reducing the risk of cancer in older men," Gaziano said.

Cancer experts said the results need to be confirmed by another study before recommending multivitamins to the public. These participants were healthier — only 4% smoked, for example.

For people who do want to take multivitamins, doctors suggest:

— Be aware that they are dietary supplements, which do not get the strict testing required of prescription medicines.

— Ask your doctor before taking any. Vitamin K can interfere with common heart medicines and blood thinners, and vitamins C and E can lower the effectiveness of some types of chemotherapy. For people having surgery, some vitamins affect bleeding and response to anesthesia.

— Current and former smokers should avoid multivitamins with lots of beta-carotene or vitamin A; two studies have tied them to increased risk of lung cancer.

Copyright 2012 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says that multivitamins are “less effective than a good diet, exercise and not smoking, each of which can lower cancer risk by 20% to 30%, cancer experts say.” We’ll call this good enough for a satisfactory, but we do quibble with the story’s broad assertions regarding the effectiveness of these lifestyle recommendations. With the exception of smoking cessation, which is certainly effective for preventing cancer, it’s never been conclusively proven that dietary changes or exercise can reduce cancer risk. In fact, recent research suggests that fruits and vegetables — long thought to be strong cancer fighters — actually have little or no effect on cancer risk. Obesity is emerging as the main diet-related culprit when it comes to cancer, something the story could have been more precise about.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The controversy over when a woman should get mammograms is about to heat up again.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of experts whose members are appointed by the federal government, issued a final set of recommendations late Monday saying that women between the ages of 50 and 74 should get routine screening once every two years. The task force's guidelines are important because insurers and government programs often follow the panel's recommendations in deciding whether to cover certain preventive services.

The task force's final recommendation is likely to be controversial because some other groups say the screening should start earlier. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, for example, recommends that regular screenings begin at age 40, while the American Cancer Society calls for women to start yearly screening at age 45 and then move to screening every two years starting at age 55.

Congress has sided with proponents of earlier screening. Last month, in anticipation of Monday's release of the task force’s final recommendation, lawmakers took preemptive action: It directed insurers to ignore the task force's latest guidelines and, instead, to rely on its 2002 recommendation. That called for annual mammograms to begin at 40. As a result of the congressional action, women in their 40s will continue to be able to get annual mammograms at no cost.

The differences over when to start regular screening reflect the growing concern that the benefits of mammograms may have been oversold, and that they don't outweigh the anxiety and potential harm caused by over-diagnosis and false positives from the tests.

[In major shift, these guidelines scaled back breast cancer screening for women in their 40s]

The debate over when to start regular screening involves only women of "average risk" who don't have specific risk factors for breast cancer such as the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genetic mutations or a family history of the disease. They're also not aimed at diagnostic mammography, which takes place once a woman has a symptom such as a lump. The screening recommendations are not binding on doctors, hospitals or insurers.

In releasing its final recommendations, the task force confirmed an earlier guidance it issued that said screening mammography had the greatest benefit for women ages 50 to 74. For women in their 40s, the likelihood of benefit is less and the potential harms are proportionally greater, it said. The most serious potential harm is unneeded treatment for a type of cancer that would not have become a threat to a woman's health during her lifetime.

The congressional action, which was included in the recently enacted spending law, has drawn criticism from some experts.

“The U.S. Congress thinks it's perfectly acceptable, even preferred, for a scientific document from 14 years ago to guide coverage policy on screening for breast cancer in women,” says Kenneth Lin, a Georgetown University family medicine doctor who teaches preventive and evidence-based medicine.

Part of the problem is the common perception that women deserve free mammogram coverage and that the scientific community is basing its decision on cost or rationing, said Lawrence Gostin, a Georgetown University law professor and expert on public health.

Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, said the task force's guidelines for women in their 40s — that they should discuss whether to get mammograms with their doctors and make individual decisions — come closest to following the evidence accumulated over the past three decades. Women should trust that process, she said.

Despite the decades of marketing of mammography to women, "women are capable of understanding the complexities of the issue, evaluating the evidence and making their own health decisions," she said in a statement.

"At some point we will have to decide that we are not going to pay for interventions that lack a high level of medical evidence," she said. "At this time, what does concern us very much are attempts by Congress to interfere with the makeup and process of the US Preventive Services Task Force."

The task force first suggested in 2009 that breast cancer screening begin at 50 instead of 40, touching off enormous criticism. In 2010, Congress passed the Affordable Care Act, which required that certain preventive services be provided for free — if those services got a strong recommendation from the task force. But it included an amendment that effectively directed insurers to use the 2002 recommendations for mammograms. That meant that women who were 40 and older could get mammograms at no cost.

In April 2015, the task force came out with its latest draft guidance, basically reaffirming its 2009 recommendations that the greatest benefit of mammography screening is for women between 50 and 74.

Worried that millions of women under 50 could lose their free annual mammogram coverage if the guidelines became final, several health-care groups, including ACOG, the American College of Radiology and the Susan G. Komen Foundation, lobbied Congress to block that from happening.

Language was included in the spending bill that says any recommendations of the task force related to breast cancer screening, mammography and prevention refers to those “issued before 2009.”

Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.) was among the lawmakers who pushed for the language to be included. In a statement, she said her number one priority was to ensure that women can get mammograms if they and their doctors decide it's the right thing to do. "This means making sure that cost is not a deterrent to care," she said.

Several groups that lobbied for congressional action said in a statement last month that the task force recommendations conflict with those of other organizations. This results in confusion and puts more than 22 million women at risk of losing of losing insurance coverage for mammograms.

This post has been updated.

The simple way doctors can make patients feel understood

How cancer will affect Americans in 2016: in seven charts

Omega 3 is still good for the brain. But 'fish oil supplements just don't cut it.'
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternatives in a story like this one are the recommendations from other organizations. And the story does explain varying recommendations from the USPSTF and two other groups: the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and the American Cancer Society.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
UK researchers behind a potential 'universal' liquid biopsy blood test for cancer detection have licensed the technology to an industrial partner to take it to market.

The research team believes that the test could be the first screening tool to 'rule in, or rule out' cancer in patients under suspicion of the disease, alongside other traditional diagnostics methods.

The test was developed at the University of Bradford, UK. It measures the damage to the DNA of white blood cells when subjected to different intensities of ultraviolet (UV) light, revealing measurable differences in the cells' susceptibility to further damage in patients with cancer.

The damage forms a 'comet tail' of DNA pieces that are pulled towards the positive end of an electric field. The longer the comet tail, the more DNA damage is present, which correlates with the presence of cancer. In a 2014 proof of concept study, the Bradford researchers showed they could identify which samples were from patients with three different types of cancer - even those who had yet to be diagnosed - with 93 per cent success.

However, in their two most recent clinical trials of the test involving over 700 blood samples from colorectal and prostate cancer patients (and further breast and lung cancer samples that were available), they were unable to distinguish those with cancer from healthy patients in 60 cases.

To determine whether scoring more cells on the slides would explain this 'challenging subgroup', lead researcher Professor Diana Anderson from the University of Bradford asked IMSTAR, to reanalyse the inconclusive slides. The Bradford team had scored 100 cells per slide, but the Pathfinder™ system is able to analyse up to 10,000 cells per slide, and uses Artificial Intelligence concepts in its proprietary software.

Scoring a minimum of 2,000 cells per slide, the IMSTAR Pathfinder™ system was able to separate all individuals of the cancer group from the healthy control group with confirmed statistical significance. These findings are published in FASEB BioAdvances journal.

Professor Anderson said: "This test is different from other universal cancer tests being developed, because it is not looking for a specific biomarker or mutation. This is a generic test for cancer in an individual, regardless of the underlying mechanism that's causing their cancer.

"I'm now convinced that if we used the powerful IMSTAR system to look at thousands of cells on all the slide samples in the trials, we would see a significant increase in the overall predictability beyond the original 93 per cent of the original 2014 study."

Paris-based company IMSTAR has now coupled the innovative technology developed at Bradford with their fully-automated Pathfinder™ cell reader-analyser to create a powerful and robust test for early detection, called TumorScan™.

Co-first author Dr Mojgan Najafzadeh from the University of Bradford said: "We feel that we've taken it as far as we can in proving that the test works with high predictability for cancer outcome, and IMSTAR are the right partners to improve it still further."

Dr Francoise Soussaline, PhD, DSc, IMSTAR's president said: "To bring a universal 'liquid biopsy' blood test for cancer to market, it must achieve a number of criteria, including high sensitivity and specificity and be fully automated with high throughput for a medical routine use. In addition, test results must be available in 24hrs and at affordable cost.

"We believe that the combination of Bradford's innovation and IMSTAR's unique expertise has shown that TumorScan can achieve these requisites."

IMSTAR's vice-president for medical applications, Dr Michel Soussaline, confirmed that the company will be working to automate the full test workflow further to take it to market.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release did attempt to explain alternatives. More could have been said about this, but we found it sufficient for a satisfactory rating:
Professor Anderson said: “This test is different from other universal cancer tests being developed, because it is not looking for a specific biomarker or mutation. This is a generic test for cancer in an individual, regardless of the underlying mechanism that’s causing their cancer.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For biochemist Peter Molan, honey's ancient power to heal is not a matter of faith. So sure is he of the science behind it that he frequently applies the stuff of his research on himself -- and on his wife.

"She had a persistent boil on her buttocks," he explained. Since no standard salves had helped, he liquefied a dollop of a particular variety of honey known as manuka in the kitchen microwave, poured it over gauze and applied it.

"Fortunately, manuka is effective in treating burns as well as boils," Molan said cheerfully. Within a short time, he said, both boil and burn healed.

Manuka honey -- widely used for wound treatment in New Zealand, where Molan is co-director of Waikato University's Honey Research Unit -- is becoming increasingly accepted for this purpose around the world. Research over the past two decades, much of it conducted in Molan's lab, has focused on the potential for manuka to be used as an antimicrobial that may one day stand alongside such standard wound treatments as silver dressings and penicillin.

Manuka has also attracted attention because, in an era when the efficacy of pharmaceutical antibiotics is under threat, it has shown some promise in the treatment of wounds infected with especially challenging bacteria, such as methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), the superbug whose incidence increased 32-fold in U.S. hospitals between 1976 and 2003, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Manuka dressings have been in use for some time in Great Britain and Australia as well as in New Zealand; earlier this year they were cleared for use as an antimicrobial dressing in Canada; and last month the Food and Drug Administration cleared them for use in wound and burn care -- though not as an antimicrobial drug -- making them the first honey-based products cleared for medical use in the United States.

The picture has not always been so bright for manuka, or its manufacturers. New Zealand's scrubby manuka trees with their creamy blossoms used to be chopped down for farmland. Beekeepers regarded manuka honey as almost worthless, feeding it to their bees or simply discarding it: It was difficult to process, its taste too strong and bitter, its color too dark. In short, it seemed "medicinal."

This began to change with Molan's work. He had spent his career examining the possible antibacterial properties of various natural substances: milk, yeast, bull semen. At a colleague's suggestion, he began looking into manuka honey, and for the past 25 years he has led the way in this particular aspect of apitherapy, the study of honey as a medicine.

Surrounded by the pipettes and petri dishes of his lab, and with a strip of manuka dressing wrapped around a cut finger, Molan says, "Manuka honey tastes like medicine because it is medicine."

Today, New Zealand's Active Manuka Honey Association estimates that 120 tons are sold each year, with sales of almost $10 million annually. Manuka is proving to be a moneymaker for many companies that market it online as "nature's miracle" and "nature's greatest secret," claiming it can relieve everything from stomach ulcers to bedsores and sinus infections. Although Molan says he has no direct financial interests in honey, the honey research unit was set up with support from New Zealand's Honey Industry Trust, and his work has resulted in his university's signing a multimillion-dollar contract last year with New Zealand health-care products company Comvita.

All honey is medicinal to some extent. Its low water content allows it to draw fluid away from wounds; its high sugar content makes it difficult for microorganisms to grow. What's more, worker bees secrete an enzyme, glucose oxidase, into nectar, which releases low levels of the disinfectant hydrogen peroxide when honey makes contact with a damp surface such as a wound. Because of a chemical reaction with tissue, honey also makes healing wounds smell good.

From the time of the ancient Sumerians, who prescribed a mix of river dust and honey for ailing eyes, until the early 20th century, honey was a conventional therapy in fighting infection, but its popularity waned with the advent in the mid-20th century of a potent, naturally occurring antibiotic: the blue-green mold penicillin.

Not all honeys are equal, though. Manuka appears to have a poorly understood antimicrobial ingredient, dubbed its Unique Manuka Factor (UMF). The level of UMF can vary, and each batch of manuka is ranked according to its UMF value: The higher the concentration, the darker, thicker and more expensive the manuka is. A 250-gram jar with UMF16, which is in the midrange, sells for about $28.95 on the Internet.

As with other natural health-care products, many of the claims for manuka's efficacy are sweeping and scantily supported. Molan distances himself from the notion, for example, that, once ingested, manuka acts as a rejuvenator. The most promising research, he and many other scientists say, focuses instead on bioactive honey's potency as a topical application.

The South African Medical Journal reported in 2006 on a trial among gold miners in which honey worked as well as, and was more cost-effective than, a standard gel on shallow wounds and abrasions.

The European Journal of Medical Research reported in 2003 that honey had an 85 percent success rate in treating infected post-op Caesarean wounds, compared with a 50 percent success rate for conventional interventions.

One reason for the heightened interest in honey is that traditional antibiotics are proving increasingly powerless against certain microbes. In 2000, a World Health Organization report warned: "Since 1970, no new classes of antibacterials have been developed to combat infectious diseases." On average, the report said, "research and development of anti-infective drugs takes 10 to 20 years." Today, according to the CDC, "nearly all significant bacterial infections in the world are becoming resistant to the most commonly prescribed antibiotic treatments."

Hence the hope that a naturally occurring substance such as honey might help fill the void.

Molan offers anecdotal evidence from a ward at Waikato Hospital, where MRSA has been a persistent problem. The charge nurse, he says, began placing manuka on all wounds. "Not only did manuka clear up the infections, there were no cross-infections," Molan says. "Now, whenever MRSA appears at Waikato Hospital, they choose honey dressings."

At the May meeting of the European Wound Management Association, researchers presented the results of a small Irish study that compared the effects of manuka honey and a commonly used hydrogel dressing on 100 patients with chronic leg ulcerations. Those patients treated with manuka dressings experienced a higher rate of cleansing and faster healing than those who used the hydrogel dressing. Ten of the patients had ulcers colonized with MRSA. After four weeks, seven of those 10 wounds no longer showed the bacteria's presence. The results have not yet been published.

Even scientists who are intrigued by manuka's promise recognize that more research needs to be done. (And there's wide agreement among medical professionals that people should not test the treatment themselves by slathering their cuts and burns with honey from the pantry shelf.)

Andrew Jull, a research fellow at the University of Auckland's Clinical Trials Research Unit and principal investigator in a trial in New Zealand of 368 patients into the use of honey as a therapy for leg ulcers, says that while "there is reasonable evidence for manuka honey's antibacterial effect" in the lab, "there is still need for in vivo testing."

Molan suggests there may be another reason the United States has been slower than some other countries to adopt medicinal honey: the scientific establishment's resistance to traditional remedies.

He believes it's not customers or patients who need convincing, "it's the medical community. They find it difficult to accept anything that has an ancient lineage, whatever the scientific evidence," he says. "But manuka is catching on fast."

So much so that in July the FDA gave Derma Sciences, a manufacturer of wound-care products based in Princeton, N.J., clearance to sell manuka wound and burn dressings as medical devices. The company, which has been developing manuka products since 2005, buys medical-grade honey from Comvita, which receives unprocessed honey from beekeepers in New Zealand. The dressings should be available this fall.

Rose Cooper, a microbiologist and honey expert at the University of Wales Institute at Cardiff, remains cautiously optimistic that the increased use of honey dressings will help better information to emerge.

"Honey is not a panacea," she said in a telephone interview, but it has been used by British doctors for several years, and with its growing use elsewhere in the world, "health-care professionals will be more likely to consider honey in treating wounds, and so more data will accumulate." ·

Eric Frederick Trump is a science journalist and a research associate of the Trauma and Violence Interdisciplinary Studies Program at New York University. Comments:health@washpost.com.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention other types of wound dressings and antibiotics as alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
VANCOUVER, British Columbia, April 13, 2016 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Mapping blood flow in the brain of athletes using an advanced form of ultrasound may make it easier to more accurately recognize concussions, according to a study released today that will be presented at the American Academy of Neurology's 68th Annual Meeting in Vancouver, Canada, April 15 to 21, 2016.

"There is growing evidence that concussions can change the blood flow in the brain," said study author Robert Hamilton, PhD, co-founder of Neural Analytics in Los Angeles, Calif., and a member of the American Academy of Neurology. "While such changes may be detected with MRI, we believe there may be a less expensive and portable way to measure these changes with a transcranial Doppler (TCD) device."

More than one million athletes experience a concussion each year in the United States.

TCD uses ultrasound to map blood flow activity in the brain. Traditionally, it has measured variables like the speed and variability (pulse) of blood flowing through the arteries. But those measurements haven't been enough to accurately detect concussion.

For this study, researchers used an advanced version of TCD ultrasound to get a more complete picture of just how the blood moves through the middle cerebral artery, one of the three major arteries in the brain.

Researchers compared a group of 66 high school athletes in contact sports who had been recently diagnosed with a concussion to a control group of 169 high school student athletes from both contact and non-contact sports. Examples of collision sports included in the study were football, soccer, basketball, hockey, water polo and lacrosse. The non-contact sports included were cheerleading, cross country, cycling, tennis and track. Both the control and concussion groups were approximately 30 percent female.

Each of the concussed athletes had their brain blood flow measured with the advanced ultrasound headset within an average of six days after the injury. They were also given a general concussion evaluation and had their blood pressure checked.

The study found that the advanced version of TCD ultrasound was able to differentiate between healthy and concussed athletes 83 percent of the time. This is in contrast to traditional TCD ultrasound measurements like change in cerebral blood flow reactivity which differentiated between the two 60 percent of the time, average blood flow speed which differentiated 55 percent of the time and blood flow resistance which differentiated 53 percent of the time.

"This research suggests that this advanced form of ultrasound may provide a more accurate diagnosis of concussion," said Hamilton. "While more research is needed, the hope is such a tool could one day be used on the sidelines to help determine more quickly whether an athlete needs further testing."

"This important work provides insight into a tool that may yet prove useful in the recognition and management of concussion," said Jeffrey Kutcher, MD, FAAN, with the The Sports Neurology Clinic in Brighton, Michigan. "The potential of having an accessible technology that detects a physiological change following brain trauma is very exciting. However, what these detected blood flow changes mean to a patient's clinical care is still unclear."

"This is an important area of research. Testing of the TCD technique at the sideline at the time of injury will be an important next step to determine its ultimate utility," said Randolph S. Marshall, MD, MS, with Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York and a member of the American Academy of Neurology's Science Committee.

The study was supported by the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation.

Learn more about concussion at www.aan.com/concussion, where you can access the AAN's Sports Concussion Guideline, QuickCheck app, and other resources.

The American Academy of Neurology, an association of 30,000 neurologists and neuroscience professionals, is dedicated to promoting the highest quality patient-centered neurologic care. A neurologist is a doctor with specialized training in diagnosing, treating and managing disorders of the brain and nervous system such as Alzheimer's disease, stroke, migraine, multiple sclerosis, brain injury, Parkinson's disease and epilepsy.

For more information about the American Academy of Neurology, visit http://www.aan.com or find us on Facebook, Twitter, Google+ and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Existing strategies to detect changes in blood flow in the brain—magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and “traditional” transcranial Doppler devices—are compared to the advanced version of TCD ultrasound tested here.
However, we think the criteria here was just marginally met. An alternative for diagnosing concussion not discussed is evaluating clinical signs and symptoms, the typical method for classifying a head trauma as a concussion or not. We do not know whether doppler ultrasound is a better predictor of long-term problems than clinical signs and symptoms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 3, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new study finds that people with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who haven't done well on other treatments may find relief with Xeljanz (tofacitinib), a drug currently used to treat arthritis.

Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease. It affects about 700,000 Americans, according to the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation (CCF).

The illness causes inflammation, irritation, swelling and sores on the lining of the large intestine. Symptoms include diarrhea with blood or pus and abdominal discomfort, according to CCF.

"There is still a substantial unmet need for new treatments for patients with ulcerative colitis," said study lead author Dr. William Sandborn. He is professor of medicine and chief of the division of gastroenterology at the University of California, San Diego.

Xeljanz targets certain proteins involved in the body's inflammatory and immune responses that other so-called biologic drugs don't, the researchers said.

"Treatment with oral tofacitinib is potentially a new treatment option for patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis, pending review by the [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]," Sandborn said.

The study was funded by Pfizer, Inc., the maker of Xeljanz. Sandborn said he has received research grants from the company and served as a consultant for Pfizer.

Whether Xeljanz should be used as a first treatment is still not clear, said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Because Xeljanz comes as a pill, it could have an advantage for patients, Swaminath said. But so far it has only been tried with patients who have not responded to other treatments, he said.

"How it is used in the real world may be different than how it was used in these studies," Swaminath said. "I am not going out on a limb and say this should be the first choice, because we don't have enough data to say that's the way it should be positioned."

The researchers randomly assigned more than 1,700 people with ulcerative colitis to one of three phase 3 trials.

The first two trials looked at more than 1,100 patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who had failed with conventional treatment or treatment with newer "tumor necrosis factor antagonist" drugs, such as Remicade (infliximab). They received Xeljanz or a placebo twice a day for eight weeks.

In the third trial, nearly 600 patients who responded to Xeljanz were assigned to a maintenance dose (one group with 5 milligrams [mg] and another group with 10 mg) of the drug, or placebo for a year.

In the first trial, nearly 19 percent of the patients taking Xeljanz experienced a remission of their condition in eight weeks. That compared to just 8 percent of patients receiving placebo.

In the second trial, almost 17 percent of those taking Xeljanz had a remission, compared with nearly 4 percent of those taking placebo, the researchers found.

In the third trial, more than 34 percent of patients taking 5 mg of Xeljanz had disease remission after one year. Forty percent of those taking a 10-mg dose of the drug had remission at a year. Only 11 percent of patients on placebo saw a remission.

However, in all of the trials, more patients taking Xeljanz suffered from infections, such as shingles, than those receiving placebo, researchers found.

In addition, five patients taking Xeljanz developed nonmelanoma skin cancer, compared with one patient receiving placebo. Five patients taking the drug experienced heart problems compared with no one on the placebo.

Also, compared with placebo, Xeljanz was associated with an increase in levels of cholesterol.

The report was published May 4 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Dr. Sonia Friedman is an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. She's also the author of an editorial accompanying the study.

"Tofacitinib is a promising new class of medical therapy that has efficacy in ulcerative colitis. It is an oral, small-molecule drug that is different from current biologic therapies, such as infliximab [Remicade], adalimumab [Humira], golimumab [Simponi] and vedolizumab [Entyvio]," Friedman said.

An advantage of Xeljanz is that it is a pill. Other biologic drugs are given by infusion or injection. In addition, patients cannot develop antibodies to Xeljanz as they can with other biologic drugs, Friedman said.

"Tofacitinib may be used in the future as rescue therapy from failure of biologics," she said. "Only future studies will determine whether it can be used as initial therapy for ulcerative colitis and what patients it would help the most."

For more information on ulcerative colitis, visit the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This one is a close call. The story makes clear that Xeljanz is given in pill form, as opposed to infusion or injection, which is a point worth making. It also notes that the trials only involved patients for whom existing pharmaceutical treatments had failed. In addition, the story tells readers that patients don’t develop antibodies to Xeljanz, as they do with other pharmaceuticals in the same class of so-called “biologic” drugs.
The story does not, however, explain to readers why antibodies are important or relevant to the treatment process. The story also doesn’t mention surgical treatment options, which involve removing the colon and rectum. Ultimately, however, the story does a very good job of placing the drug’s potential use in context. One source, for example, notes that there is still far too much uncertainty to recommend making Xeljanz the first line of treatment, while another describes it as a potential “rescue therapy” when other options fail. Altogether, the story is more good than bad on addressing alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The information entered on this page will not be used to send unsolicited email, and will not be sold to a third party.

Daily treatment with the antiviral drug tenofovir during the third trimester of pregnancy reduced the mother-to-child transmission rate of hepatitis B (HBV) from 18 percent to 5 percent, according to the findings of a clinical trial led by researchers from NYU Langone Medical Center and published on June 16 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

The study focused on the most common way that children become infected with hepatitis B, an incurable viral infection that causes liver disease and cancer, which is through infection during the perinatal period. Without intervention, 80 to 90 percent of infants who are born to mothers infected with hepatitis B develop a chronic infection. The current standard of care is to provide vaccine and immune globulin to reduce transmission rates.

“Preventing mother-to-child transmission is the most effective way to reduce the global burden of chronic hepatitis B infection and liver cancer,” says Calvin Pan, MD, lead author of the study and a clinical professor of medicine at NYU Langone. “We believe that these findings will not only save many lives, but could also help to eradicate hepatitis B nationally and abroad.”

The study was conducted in five locations in China, where HBV infection is endemic. Pan and colleagues enrolled 200 pregnant women with a high “viral load,” defined as one million copies of the virus per milliliter in a blood sample. Participants were randomly assigned to either a control group that received no antiviral therapy, or to a second group that received a daily dose of 300 milligrams of tenofovir in pill form, beginning at 30 or 32 weeks of pregnancy and continuing until 4 weeks after delivery.

Treatment effectively reduced the viral load of the pregnant women, says Pan. Before delivery, 68 percent of tenofovir-treated mothers had HBV loads below 1 million copies per milliliter, compared to 2 percent of nontreated mothers.

In terms of safety, researchers found that tenofovir was well tolerated; only one participant treated with tenofovir voluntarily withdrew from the study due to nausea. Among the children born during the study, Pan and his colleagues found no significant differences between the tenofovir-treated group and the control group with regard to fetal development and infant growth.

“This study provides strong evidence on how best to care for women infected with hepatitis B during pregnancy and reduce the rate of disease transmission,” says Mark Pochapin, MD, the Sholtz/Leeds Professor of Gastroenterology and director of the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology at NYU Langone.

Based on the findings, the investigators recommend that women be tested for HBV viral load at week 28 of pregnancy. Those with a high viral load should receive tenofovir treatment starting at gestational week 30 until delivery to reduce the risk of transmission to their infants. In addition, infants should receive hepatitis B vaccine and immune globulin. Moving forward, longer term, observational studies are needed to confirm the safety of fetal exposure to tenofovir treatment, says Pan.

This research was supported by Gilead Sciences.

Dr. Pan’s co-authors were Zhong Ping Duan at Beijing Youan Hospital, Capital Medical University, in Beijing; Er Hei Dai and Bao Shen Zhu at Fifth Hospital of Shijiazhuang, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang; Shu Qing Zhang and Wen Jing Zhao at Hepatobiliary Disease Hospital of Ji Lin Province, Changchun; Guo-Rong Han and Hong-Xiu Jiang at Second Affiliated Hospital of Southeast University, Nanjing; Yuming Wang at Institute for Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing; Huai Bin Zou at Youan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing; and Huai Hong Zhang at Nanyang Center Hospital, Nanyang, Henan, all for the China Study Group for the Mother-to-Child Transmission of Hepatitis B.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release is comparing the use of an antiviral drug given to pregnant women versus the normal procedure of giving both a vaccine and immune globulin.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Washington, DC - September 18, 2018 - An international team of researchers has successfully deployed a Zika virus vaccine to target and kill human glioblastoma brain cancer stem cells, which had been transplanted into mice. In a study published this week in mBio®, an open-access journal of the American Society for Microbiology, the team shows that a live, attenuated version of the Zika virus could form the basis of a new treatment option for this fatal brain cancer.

Glioblastoma kills about 15,000 adults in the US each year and is currently incurable because patients experience a high recurrence rate of their cancer even after the standard treatments of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. Scientists suspect this recurrence is due to cancer stem cells, called glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs), which hide out in nearby brain tissue even after the combination of therapies.

"During the Zika epidemic, we learned that the virus preferentially infects neural progenitor cells in the fetus, and causes the devastating microcephaly seen in babies born to infected mothers," says Pei-Yong Shi, a virologist at University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston. He co-led the current study with tumor biologist Jianghong Man of the National Center of Biomedical Analysis in Beijing and virologist Cheng-Feng Qin of the Chinese Academy of Military Medical Sciences in Beijing.

"We made the connection that perhaps Zika virus could also specifically infect the GSCs," because these cells have similar properties to neural stem cells, says Man. In previous work, Shi and his collaborators at Washington University in St. Louis showed that Zika virus did indeed attack and kill GSCs grown in the lab dish and in a mouse model of glioblastoma. In addition, the Zika virus was much less efficient at attacking the differentiated, healthy brain cells. (image: transmission electron micrograph of Zika virus, NIAID)

"If we could find a way to specifically target those GSCs that are the source of recurrence, then that might provide an option to prevent recurrence or even a cure," says Qin.

The team's first objective was to determine if there was a safe way to use Zika virus in patients to attack the cancer cells. Shi's lab has developed a promising live-attenuated Zika vaccine candidate called ZIKV-LAV that had been shown to be safe, non-virulent, and effective in protecting against infection in mice and non-human primates. The ZIKV-LAV has a small deletion from the viral genome that prevents it from replicating itself efficiently.

When the team injected this ZIKV-LAV into the brains of mice, they saw no health effects on the mice, no weight loss, and no behavioral abnormalities such as loss of appetite, depression, lethargy, or self-injury. The mice also functioned normally in tests for anxiety and motor function.

Next, the team wanted to show whether the ZIKA-LAV could work to infect and kill human patient-derived GSCs in a mouse model. So they mixed GSCs from two different human patient donors with the ZIKA-LAV and injected the mixture into the brains of mice. Mice that got the injection of the GSCs only rapidly developed tumors. Mice that got the ZIKV-LAV injected as well saw a significant delay in tumor development. Co-implanting the virus along with the GSCs also prolonged the median survival time of the treated mice to around 50 days, compared to around 30 days for the untreated mice who received GSCs alone.

Qin says that perhaps in the future patients would be given the Zika vaccine at the same time as surgery to "let the viruses hunt down the GSCs and eliminate them."

Finally, the team investigated the cellular mechanisms that the modified Zika virus used to kill the GSCs. They took GSCs treated with the ZIKV-LAV and those GSCs not treated and sequenced all the RNA messages being expressed in these two cell populations. Comparing those profiles, the team found that in the treated cells, the virus triggered a strong antiviral response in the cells, which induced inflammation and eventually cell death.

Next, the team will work with clinicians to develop safety tests of the ZIKV-LAV in glioblastoma patients. They may also modify the Zika virus further to make it an even more potent cancer cell killing machine. For example, Man explains, the researchers could add an immune modulator as a 'cargo' in the viral genome. Then, once such a virus infects a cancer cell and kills it, the immune modulator would be released to alert and activate the patient's systemic immune system against the remaining cancer cells.

"As a virologist, I see that we should take advantage of the 'bad' side of viruses," says Shi. "They should have a role to play in cancer treatment."

The American Society for Microbiology is the largest single life science society, composed of more than 30,000 scientists and health professionals. ASM's mission is to promote and advance the microbial sciences.

ASM advances the microbial sciences through conferences, publications, certifications and educational opportunities. It enhances laboratory capacity around the globe through training and resources. It provides a network for scientists in academia, industry and clinical settings. Additionally, ASM promotes a deeper understanding of the microbial sciences to diverse audiences.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release states that normal cancer treatments such as radiation, surgery, and chemotherapy are not successful in the long run against human glioblastoma brain cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- An intrauterine device that releases a progestin hormone may be an effective treatment for younger women with early-stage uterine cancer, Italian researchers report.

By delaying a total hysterectomy, which is the usual treatment for endometrial cancer, the IUD allows women to remain fertile and possibly to have families, according to the study published online Wednesday in Annals of Oncology, the monthly journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology.

"The study was done to see if this was a viable option for younger women who want to preserve fertility," said Dr. Jamie Bakkum-Gamez, senior associate consultant in the division of gynecologic surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. "We see it as buying more time to have a family and, once that's completed, to have a hysterectomy."

"It's a very important trial," added Dr. Angeles Alvarez Secord, associate professor of gynecologic oncology at Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center in Durham, N.C. "I've been using [the IUD] clinically for several years now for this purpose in patients who desire future fertility and some patients who cannot undergo surgery or who are at high risk for surgical complications. It's a fantastic alternative to treat patients with these diseases, and this study will help doctors when they discuss [treatment options] with patients."

Bakkum-Gomez has also used the method in her practice and is conducting a study of the IUD, which was originally designed as a contraceptive device, for this purpose.

About 3 percent to 5 percent of women who get endometrial cancer, which affects the womb lining, are under the age of 40 and will lose their fertility if they undergo a hysterectomy. The majority of these women have not yet had children, according to background information in the article.

Although the IUD is not yet approved to treat endometrial cancer, it is approved and widely used to treat endometriosis and abnormal uterine bleeding.

While hysterectomy or removal of the uterus is the accepted treatment for this kind of cancer, doctors have been using the hormone in oral form for the past 20 years, but only for "well-selected groups of women," said Dr. Elizabeth Poynor, a gynecologic oncologist and pelvic surgeon with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Well selected," in this case, means those with early-stage disease who want to maintain their fertility, much like the group in this trial.

Oral hormone treatment to slow down the cancer's growth is a systemic therapy, however, and can have adverse side effects such as skin rashes, nausea and vomiting, headaches and abnormal uterine bleeding, according to background material accompanying the study.

The theoretical -- but still unproven -- advantage to this new IUD method, Poynor said, is that "there is a lower risk of systemic side effects . . . and that you may be giving higher doses of the drug directly into the uterus."

The authors followed 20 Italian patients from January 1996 to June 2009 with atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH), which often precedes the cancer, and 14 women with early-stage endometrial cancer confined to the inner layer of the womb.

Participants -- all of whom were between ages 20 and 40 -- had an IUD known as Mirena, which released levonorgestrel, inserted for a year. They also received monthly injections of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which halts estrogen production, for six months.

The IUD was removed at the end of the year if there was no evidence of cancer.

Ninety-five percent of women with AEH initially saw their lesions disappear completely, while 57.1 percent of women with early-stage cancer also responded completely to the treatment. (The disease progressed in one of the women with AEH and four of the women with early-stage cancer.)

Of the patients with AEH, four later relapsed and required further treatment; of the women with early-stage cancer, two who had an initial complete response relapsed. However, all the women were alive and seemingly cancer-free by the end of the study after further treatment (either the IUD and GnRH treatment or a hysterectomy), the study reported.

"They did show a higher recurrence or progression rate with endometrial cancer than with AEH and that is consistent with other data," said Bakkum-Gamez, who added that the IUD method would not be appropriate for later-stage cancers, which tend to be more aggressive.

No adverse effects from treatment were noted, according to the researchers, who declared no conflicts of interest.

In background material, the researchers stated the progestin-releasing IUD should be effective in treating AEH and also early endometrial cancer, as long as those patients were evaluated with laparoscopy, ultrasound and MRI to make sure their cancer had not spread and there was no simultaneous ovarian cancer.

Nine of the women in the study successfully delivered babies.

The National Cancer Institute has more on endometrial cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story compares the progestin IUD with systemic hormones and hysterectomy
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings suggest that the antidepressant Lexapro might make hot flashes a little less of a nuisance to women — adding to the mixed bag of results regarding that drug’s effect on menopause symptoms.

The study, of 205 women, found that those randomly assigned to take Lexapro (escitalopram) for eight weeks reported less daily “interference” from their hot flashes.

Compared with women given inactive placebo pills, they said hot flashes were taking less of a toll on their work, daily activities, sleep and general mood. Women on the placebo also improved over time, however.

The findings come from the same clinical trial that, last year, showed Lexapro halved the number of hot flashes women had each day. (See Reuters story of January 18, 2011.)

A separate study a few months later showed no such benefit, however. In two trials of 36 women, researchers found that Lexapro did not cut the number or severity of hot flashes over eight weeks. (See Reuters Health story of May 26, 2011.)

And the lead researcher on that study said these latest findings are “nothing to write home about.”

“The differences between the treatment and placebo groups are very small,” said Robert Freedman, a professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit.

In general, studies of hot-flash remedies over the years have “virtually always found a large placebo effect,” Freedman noted in an interview.

That could mean that study participants’ hot flashes are just getting better over time, which they sometimes do.

“But my feeling is that it’s the placebo effect,” Freedman said, referring to the phenomenon of study participants on placebos improving because they believe they are getting a real treatment.

Hot flashes, which mostly affect women transitioning to menopause and already in that phase of life, involve a sudden sensation of heat, sometimes accompanied by sweating or visible reddening of the skin.

Their exact cause is unknown, but hormonal regulation of body temperature is thought to be involved.

Bouts of hot flashes can happen many times a day and past research has found they can continue for anywhere from a few months to up to 10 years.

So far, Freedman noted, the only hot-flash treatment that has consistently worked in studies is hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

And right now, HRT is the only treatment approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for cooling hot flashes.

But women and doctors are wary of HRT these days — since a 2002 clinical trial linked the hormones to increased risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots.

So researchers have been looking for alternatives. And studies have suggested that a few antidepressants, used at low doses, can be helpful for some women — including paroxetine (Paxil), fluoxetine (Prozac) and venlafaxine (Effexor).

This latest study, reported in the journal Fertility & Sterility, focused on hot flash “interference” — the degree to which women feel hot flashes disrupt their lives.

That’s important because it gets at quality of life, according to the researchers, led by Janet S. Carpenter of Indiana University in Indianapolis.

The trial included 205 women who were having at least 28 bouts of hot flashes or “night sweats” a week. Carpenter’s team randomly assigned half to use Lexapro for eight weeks, while the other half were given placebo pills.

The women kept diaries to record their hot flash symptoms. And every four weeks, they filled out a questionnaire on hot-flash interference.

After four weeks, the study found, women on the antidepressant saw their score on the interference scale fall by half, on average. It remained there at week eight.

But women in the placebo group also improved, albeit more slowly and to a somewhat lesser degree.

In a separate analysis of the same study group, Carpenter’s team found that women on Lexapro also reported bigger improvements in sleep problems: half saw their insomnia symptoms drop by at least 50 percent, versus 35 percent of placebo users.

Those findings appear in a separate report in the journal Menopause.

Freedman said that the overall research on antidepressants and hot flashes is still inconsistent. “Overall, the picture is not optimistic.”

In his own study last year, Freedman used a different approach to measuring hot flashes: instead of asking women to record their symptoms in a diary, the researchers had them wear a “detector” to monitor objective measures of hot flashes.

It is possible for women’s hot flashes to remain unchanged objectively, but have their subjective experience of them change. “But that raises the question of why,” Freedman said.

And for now, he noted, it’s also not clear why antidepressants would have effects on hot flashes.

Lexapro, which costs about $125 a month, belongs to the group of antidepressants called selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). They increase levels of the brain chemical serotonin, which may have a role in regulating body heat.

But no one knows if altering serotonin levels actually does affect women’s hot flashes. In fact, Freedman said, there’s some evidence that lowering serotonin levels does not worsen hot flashes — which would be expected if the “serotonin theory” is correct.

Antidepressants can also have side effects, like nausea, drowsiness, headache, constipation and dry mouth.

Right now, no antidepressant is specifically approved to treat hot flashes. But in the U.S., doctors are allowed to prescribe drugs “off-label” for conditions other than their approved uses.

Besides antidepressants, doctors sometimes prescribe certain blood pressure medications or the anti-seizure drug gabapentin, which some studies suggest may be helpful.

Hot flashes often need no drug treatment at all, though.

If they are not severe, experts say simple steps can be enough — like avoiding hot and spicy foods, turning down the thermostat, or trying relaxation techniques, such as yoga or meditation.

There are several herbal or “natural” products marketed for easing menopause symptoms, including black cohosh, soy, red clover and dong quai. But there is little evidence that they work, according to the North American Menopause Society.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions at the very end other remedies for treating hot flashes besides prescription drugs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The biggest reason why the United States has higher infant mortality than other developed countries is that American women are more likely to deliver prematurely – before 37 weeks. And, for unknown reasons, the U.S. rate of preterm delivery has been going up in recent years.

That's why it's a pretty big deal that the Food and Drug Administration has OK'd a drug, called 17-HP, that experts say could make a dent in the preemie problem.

Not a huge dent, but a significant one. The March of Dimes calculates that if all the women eligible to get the newly approved drug actually did, there would be 10,000 fewer preemies a year – out of more than half-a-million born that way.

"Although that may seem like a small percent, it's really a very extraordinary ability to impact on what is really a major public health problem," Dr. Alan Fleischman, the March of Dimes medical director, told Shots.

According to the best research, the drug reduces the risk of premature birth by one-third among women who are at high risk because they had a previous preterm birth.

The drug is not for women whose prior premature births were of twins or other multiple births, or who are carrying more than one fetus in their current pregnancy. Nor is it for women who have other conditions that raise their risk of preterm birth, such as high blood pressure or infection.

And even for the 30,000 or so women who are eligible, 17-HP, which will be marketed as Makena, isn't a magic bullet. The study showed that 37 percent of women who got weekly injections of it delivered prematurely, compared to 55 percent of women who got injections of a placebo.

Interestingly, the drug is not new — it's just taken a long and circuitous route to approval.

In 1956, the FDA approved 17-HP for the treatment of certain cancers and other hormonal disorders, under the brand name Delalutin. But its manufacturer withdrew it from the market in 2000 "for reasons unrelated to safety," as the FDA puts it.

In fact, as a Federal Register posting last year chronicled, there have been questions raised about whether 17-HP caused birth defects of various kinds. In the 1970s, the FDA required warnings on drugs containing progesterone, as 17-HP does, because of an increased risk of birth defects. They later revoked them.

The FDA is apparently satisfied that 17-HP is safe, but it's requiring its sponsors KV Pharmaceuticals and TherRx to conduct further studies of women who have taken it and children exposed during pregnancy.

Everyone in this field is mindful of the long-running tragedy of vaginal and other cancers and male urinary disorders that resulted from the last drug thought to prevent premature birth – a synthetic estrogen called diethylstilbesterol, or DES. In 1971 researchers realized children exposed to DES in utero had a higher incidence of vaginal and breast cancers, and males were subsequently found to have urinary-tract problems.

Fleischman, the March of Dimes official, says there's no such risk from 17-HP, partly because it's not used before the 16th week of pregnancy, when fetal organs have already formed.

"We have been very aggressively tracking all the data," Fleischman says, "and we have no reason to believe that this drug will increase birth defects."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There was at least the historical perspective on “the last drug thought to prevent premature birth – a synthetic estrogen called diethylstilbesterol, or DES.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By Amy Norton NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People with multiple sclerosis have long said that smoking marijuana helps ease their painful muscle cramping. And a new clinical trial suggests they are not just blowing smoke.

The study, published Monday, found that for 30 MS patients with muscle “spasticity,” a few days of marijuana smoking brought some relief.

But the big caveat, researchers say, is that it’s not clear that the downsides of pot smoking are worth it.

Some people with MS are already using medical marijuana to treat certain symptoms, including spasticity — when the muscles in the legs or arms contract painfully, in something akin to a “charley horse.”

There is some science behind the idea: The body naturally produces cannabinoids, the group of chemicals found in marijuana. And studies have suggested the cannabinoid receptors on our cells help regulate muscle spasticity.

But the evidence that pot smoking actually helps with spasticity has been anecdotal.

“We’ve heard from patients that marijuana helps their spasticity, but I think a lot us thought, ‘Well, it’s probably just making you feel good,’” said Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom, the lead researcher on the new study.

“I think this study shows that yes, (marijuana) may help with spasticity, but at a cost,” said Corey-Bloom, of the University of California, San Diego.

The cost, her team found, is that smoking caused fatigue and dizziness in some users, and generally slowed down people’s mental skills soon after they used marijuana.

But it’s not clear if that would have any long-term consequences, Corey-Bloom said.

About 400,000 people in the United States have MS, a chronic disease in which the protective coating around nerve fibers starts breaking down.

The new study, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, included 30 MS patients with muscle spasticity that had failed to get better with standard medication.

Corey-Bloom’s team had each patient smoke marijuana or “placebo” joints — which looked, smelled and tasted like the real thing, but lacked the active ingredient in marijuana, known as THC.

Each patient smoked marijuana once a day for three days and used the placebo cigarette once a day on three separate days. Before and after each treatment, an independent rater assessed the patients’ muscle spasticity.

Overall, the study found, measures of spasticity dropped an average of three points —about 30 percent — on a 24-point scale when patients smoked marijuana, but didn’t change after they smoked the placebo.

The issue of treating spasticity is “certainly an important one,” said Nicholas LaRocca, vice president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society.

“Spasticity is a big problem for many people with MS, and the current medications don’t necessarily work for everyone,” said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study.

“But smoking marijuana does not appear to be a long-term solution, because of the cognitive effects,” he told Reuters Health.

People with MS are already at some risk of “cognitive changes,” LaRocca pointed out, so the potential for lasting effects from long-term marijuana smoking is a concern.

However, LaRocca said, researchers are developing cannabinoid-based medications for MS. That includes a cannabinoid mouth spray called Sativex that has been approved in the UK, Canada, Spain and New Zealand to treat MS-related spasticity.

Research into cannabinoids and spasticity should continue, LaRocca said, because medications may be able to harness the benefits of specific cannabis compounds, without the side effects linked to smoking pot.

Both LaRocca and Corey-Bloom said there were limitations to the current study.

“Blinding” people as to whether they are on marijuana or a placebo is tough since the drug creates a “high” feeling.

In this study, 17 of 30 patients were able to correctly guess whether they were using marijuana or a placebo at each of their six visits with the researchers. And the rest often guessed correctly.

“It’s pretty clear that the patients were not really blinded,” LaRocca said. “What effects that might have had on the results is unclear.”

Corey-Bloom said that should not have influenced the spasticity findings, since an independent researcher (who didn’t know whether patients were smoking marijuana or the placebo) rated spasticity using a standard scale.

But another limitation, she pointed out, is that the study looked at the effects, and side effects, of marijuana over only a few days. “We can’t say anything about long-term effects,” Corey-Bloom told Reuters Health.

For now, LaRocca recommended that people with spasticity see a doctor experienced in treating MS. And if you’re on an anti-spasticity medication and it’s not working well enough, or the side effects are too much, tell your doctor, he said.

For some people, a change in the medication dose might help.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that the marijuana was used in subjects who had failed to get better with standard medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Insulin shots could become a thing of the past for type 1 diabetes patients thanks to a technology being developed by Cell and Gene Therapy Catapult, a London-based not-for-profit organisation, and Aberdeen University.

The pre-clinical results have encouraged CGT and Aberdeen University to create a spin-out company, called Islexa. It will manufacture lab-grown islets, the organoids responsible for insulin production, by reprogramming donated pancreatic tissue.

Only 30-50 people with type 1 diabetes in the UK currently receive an islet transplant each year, owing to a lack of donors and the difficulty of extracting islets from pancreatic tissue.

Growing islets will “significantly increase the number of patients who can receive the treatment,” Keith Thompson, CGT’s chief executive, told the World Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine congress in London on Wednesday. He will run Islexa with Michael Bennet from CGT and Anne Lewendon from Aberdeen University.



If clinical trials are successful, the technology means tens of thousands more people could live without the need for frequent insulin injections, although it will take a few years until the treatment is available.

About 320,000 people in Britain have type 1 diabetes, a number set to more than double to 652,000 by 2035. Around the world, 21 million people have type 1 diabetes.

It is a lifelong condition that occurs when the pancreas does not produce any insulin, while type 2 diabetes – far more common, especially as obesity rises around the world – is a condition where the pancreas does not produce enough insulin or the body’s cells do not react to it.

Prof Kevin Docherty, from Aberdeen University, said: “Donated islets are already effectively treating severe cases of type 1 diabetes. Having a hugely expanded supply of lab-grown islets will enable us to significantly extend this established clinical treatment.”

CGT was set up in 2012 and is based on the 12th floor of Guy’s hospital in London. It employs more than 100 people and has government backing through Innovate UK but also gets private funding through partnerships. It is building a £55m cell therapy manufacturing centre in Stevenage. Islexa will use CGT’s labs at Guy’s and facilities at Aberdeen University.

They are looking for investors to take Islexa all the way as a fully fledged external company. The promising early results have given them the confidence to form a wider consortium with the Scottish Islet Transplant Programme, the University of Edinburgh and the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service.



John Casey, consultant transplant surgeon at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh and lead clinician for the islet transplantation programme in Scotland, said: “Islet transplantation can transform the lives of patients with type 1 diabetes, and in some cases can result in long-term freedom from insulin injections with excellent glucose control.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions current treatment with islet cell transplants as well as insulin shots, and that’s enough to merit a Satisfactory rating. However, it doesn’t mention newer efforts to control type 1 with automatically programmed blood glucose monitor/insulin pumps and other means.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — A change in diet can improve the lives of those diagnosed with a common, but hard-to-treat gut disorder.

That’s the result of research by the University of Michigan Health System, presented at Digestive DiseaseWeek, that studied for the first time in the United States the result of following a carefully controlled diet to improve the symptoms and quality of life for those with irritable bowel syndrome.

“This is the only methodically rigorous clinical trial to show that diet-based therapy can not only improve symptoms, but also quality of life in patients with IBS,” says U-M assistant clinical professor and gastroenterologist Shanti Eswaran, M.D., who researches the role of diet and food in functional bowel diseases such as IBS.

Irritable bowel syndrome can be highly debilitating, if not virtually paralyzing, and affect work, sleep and personal and family relationships. Most treatments initially rely on medications that are often expensive, usually ineffective and frequently cause unwelcome side effects. And unfortunately there is no cure.

Many practitioners and patients have turned to diet as a possible treatment, but many of the dietary recommendations have not been backed by clinical trials.The study, the largest of its kind, measured the degree of relief from low FODMAP, a frequently recommended diet, which stands for Fermentable Oligo-Di-Monosaccharides and Polyols.

This diet excludes many compounds found in wheat, certain fruits and vegetables, garlic, onions and sugar substitutes.

Over a six-week process, registered dietitians educated and monitored the progress of more than 90 IBS patients. Roughly half followed a prescribed low FODMAP diet, and half were a control group that used a common-sense regimen, cutting down on large meals, binges and known irritants such as caffeine and alcohol.

The results were impressive: More than 50 percent of the patients on the low FODMAP diet had major improvement of their abdominal pain, compared with 20 percent of the control group.

There was also more improvement of other bothersome symptoms compared to the control group: bloating, diarrhea and stool urgency.

Eswaran collaborated with William Chey, M.D., professor of internal medicine, Kenya Jackson, Sivaram G. Pillai, Samuel W. Chey and Theresa Han-Markey, M.S., R.D., at the University of Michigan on the study abstract published in Gastroenterology.

At four weeks, the proportion of patients with a meaningful improvement in IBS quality of life was significantly higher in the low FODMAP group compared to the control group — 61 percent versus 27 percent.

While the results are highly encouraging for IBS sufferers, there are a few important caveats, Eswaran says.

Because of the many unknowns about the chemical causes and triggers of IBS, the list of “bad” foods is exhaustive and elusive, and help from a dietician is highly recommended.

“Low-FODMAP is not a new treatment, but we are now convinced that it really works,” she says. “Our next step will be to more precisely determine the underlying chemistry of how and why particular foods can yield dramatically different results for different people. Meanwhile, we strongly recommend that IBS patients work with their physician and a registered dietitian to navigate the Low-FODMAP diet to take control of their IBS symptoms.”

Eswaran received funding to conduct the research from the University of Michigan Nutritional and Obesity Center and Prometheus Diagnostics.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions “medications that are often expensive, usually ineffective and frequently cause unwelcome side effects.” Some elaboration would have been useful.
The majority of IBS patients actually do get relief from standard dietary changes and occasionally medications (depending on whether they have diarrhea or constipation predominant). This was a little misleading as the news release suggests that other methods aren’t effective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women who undergo Caesarean sectionsmore than seven days before their due dates put their babies at higher risk of respiratory problems, longer hospital stays and other complications.

A multisite study that appeared Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine reinforces recommendations by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists that discourage scheduling C-sections before 39 weeks of pregnancy unless there is documentation of lung maturity or it is medically necessary. (Due dates are set at 40 weeks gestation, and infants are considered full term at 37 weeks.)

The findings offer important guidance to the growing number of women who face planned C-sections -- one in three babies in the United States, estimates the National Center for Health Statistics.

"We recognize that by the end of a long pregnancy there is a desire to see the baby and to move forward," said Dr. Brian Mercer, one of the study's authors and director of both the division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and obstetrics at MetroHealth Medical Center in Cleveland.

"But mothers and families need to recognize the potential risk of moving forward before it's time," he said.

The findings from the study sponsored by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development's Maternal Fetal Medicine Units Network also underscore the importance of a woman seeking medical care as early into her pregnancy as possible, so that doctors can accurately gauge the gestational age with an ultrasound, Mercer said.

Researchers at 19 medical centers studied more than 24,000 women who gave birth to a single child by C-section from 1999 to 2002. Of those, more than 13,000 had elective C-sections. All of the women had previously had C-sections.

More than one-third of the surgeries performed during that time happened at 37 or 38 weeks. Babies born at 37 weeks were twice as likely to have breathing problems, infections or to stay in intensive care than babies born a week later. Breathing problems -- already a high risk because labor helps clear the baby's lungs of fluid -- happened four times as often in babies born at 37 weeks than those born at 39 weeks.

Dr. Justin Lavin, director of theMaternal-Fetal Medicine Departmentat Akron Children's Hospital and a high-risk obstetrician, said he hopes the study's findings help people understand why doctors like him say nowhen it comes to scheduling unnecessary C-sections early.

"This happens to me every day," Lavin said. "Sometimes [the mother] is a bit uncomfortable, or sometimes Dad has to go on a business trip or Grandma wants to fly in," Lavin said. "It's human nature."

The standard practice has been that doctors planning repeat C-sections do so between 36 and 40 weeks, when most fetuses have developed enough to survive outside the womb.

The tests the doctors perform to determine the extent of the fetus's development are often not sophisticated enough to determine subtle milestones for breathing and processing food independently, said Dr. John Thorp, a University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill obstetrician and one of the authors of the study.

"I think there is something inherent in labor -- probably a signal from baby to mother that the baby is ready to make the transition -- that we choose to circumvent when we schedule an elective, repeat C-section," Thorp said.

"I think it points to a role for the baby in the initiation of labor and the baby's readiness to make the transition."

The Associated Press and McClatchy Newspapers contributed to this story.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Clearly vaginal labor after C-section is the alternative to elective repeat C-section. The story could have done more to discuss the pros and cons of vaginal delivery after C-section.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CDC To Doctors: Anti-HIV Pill No Magic Bullet Against Virus

In November, researchers revealed a encouraging finding: taking a pill can greatly reduce the risk of getting HIV. Now health officials are warning doctors that preventing the disease will take more than just writing a prescription.

The pill, called Truvada, is already on the market for treating HIV infections. But the landmark study, involving 2,500 men who have sex with men, showed that taking Truvada faithfully can reduce the risk of infection by as much as 92 percent.

That touched off a lot of celebrating. It's the first time anybody's shown that taking a pill can prevent HIV – and it was the first new weapon against HIV unveiled in many years.

To make sure it works, though, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says doctors need to do a number of things:
• Prescribe Truvada only for men at high risk of getting infected – that is, only for men who have sex with men, those who have multiple sex partners, and those who live in areas where there's a lot of HIV circulating.
• Test patients before prescribing it to make sure they're not already infected. That'll help avoid creating viruses resistant to the drug when patients miss doses. For the same reason, patients should get an HIV test periodically while on the drug.
• Counsel patients on Truvada to use condoms faithfully, because the drug isn't a sure bet against the virus.
• Above all, tell patients they must take the drug every day – not just when they've had risky sex.

The study makes that last point very clear. Overall, men who took Truvada had a 44 percent lower risk of HIV infection. But those who said they took the drug at least 9 out of every 10 day had a 73 percent lower risk.

That doesn't tell the whole story. When researchers tested the blood of patients for traces of Truvada, they found many who claimed to have taken the pill regularly weren't telling the truth. Among those whose tests showed they really did take it every day, the risk of HIV infection was 92 percent lower than those not on the drug.

There's one other thing, the CDC says. Make sure patients understand that warding off HIV isn't cheap. Each pill currently costs around $36, which adds up to more than $13,000 a year. Some insurers might pay, but some might balk.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Not applicable.  Because of the nature of this drug, no comparison is really necessary.  As the story stated, “It’s the first time anybody’s shown that taking a pill can prevent HIV – and it was the first new weapon against HIV unveiled in many years.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dieters who go vegetarian not only lose weight more effectively than those on conventional low-calorie diets but also improve their metabolism by reducing muscle fat, a new study published in the Journal of the American College of Nutrition has found.

Losing muscle fat improves glucose and lipid metabolism so this finding is particularly important for people with metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes, says lead author, Dr. Hana Kahleová, Director of Clinical Research at the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine in Washington DC.

Seventy-four subjects with type 2 diabetes were randomly assigned to follow either a vegetarian diet or a conventional anti-diabetic diet. The vegetarian diet consisted of vegetables, grains, legumes, fruits and nuts, with animal products limited to a maximum of one portion of low-fat yoghurt per day; the conventional diabetic diet followed the official recommendations of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Both diets were restricted by 500 kilocalories per day compared to an isocaloric intake for each individual.

The vegetarian diet was found to be almost twice as effective in reducing body weight, resulting in an average loss of 6.2kg compared to 3.2kg for the conventional diet.

Using magnetic resonance imaging, Dr. Kahleová and colleagues then studied adipose (fat-storage) tissue in the subjects' thighs to see how the two different diets had affected subcutaneous, subfascial and intramuscular fat (that is, fat under the skin, on the surface of muscles and inside muscles).

They found that both diets caused a similar reduction in subcutaneous fat. However, subfascial fat was only reduced in response to the vegetarian diet, and intramuscular fat was more greatly reduced by the vegetarian diet.

This is important as increased subfascial fat in patients with type 2 diabetes has been associated with insulin resistance, so reducing it could have a beneficial effect on glucose metabolism. In addition, reducing intramuscular fat could help improve muscular strength and mobility, particularly in older people with diabetes.

Dr. Kahleová said: "Vegetarian diets proved to be the most effective diets for weight loss. However, we also showed that a vegetarian diet is much more effective at reducing muscle fat, thus improving metabolism. This finding is important for people who are trying to lose weight, including those suffering from metabolic syndrome and/or type 2 diabetes. But it is also relevant to anyone who takes their weight management seriously and wants to stay lean and healthy."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does mention one alternative to the vegetarian diet — the anti-diabetic conventional diet which adheres to official recommendations of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Young people suffering from treatment-resistant depression (TRD) showed a significant reduction of their symptoms after being administered ketamine injections, according to a study published in the Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology.

Researchers from the University of Minnesota (UM) and the nonprofit Mayo Clinic found that ketamine caused an average decrease of 42 percent on the Children’s Depression Rating Scale (CDRS)—the most widely used rating scale in research trials for assessing the severity of depression and change in depressive symptoms among adolescents.

Ketamine is perhaps best known for being a popular recreational drug and a useful medical anesthetic, but a growing body of research is indicating that the compound could be an effective treatment for depression. Several recent studies have shown that even a single dose in adults can lead to rapid reductions in depressive symptoms. However, relatively little research has been conducted into ketamine's antidepressant effects in adolescents.

"Adolescence is a very important time for studying depression, first because depression often starts during these years, and second because it is an important time for brain development," Kathryn Cullen, from the Department of Psychiatry at UM, told Newsweek.

"When adolescent depression persists without successful treatment, it can interfere with achieving important developmental milestones. Finding the right treatment is critical to allow the restoration of healthy brain development and prevent negative outcomes like chronic depression, disability and suicide."

Unfortunately, about 40 percent of adolescents do not respond to their first intervention and only half of nonresponders respond to the second treatment, according to the researchers.

"Standard antidepressant treatments do not work for everyone and take weeks to months to take effect, a time period when patients are at risk for continued suffering and suicide attempts," Cullen said. "The field is in need of new treatment options. Ketamine has a very different mechanism of action than standard treatments."

The latest study involved 13 young people ages 12 to 18 who had failed two previous trials of antidepressants. During a two-week period, the researchers gave them six ketamine infusions.

They found that the treatment was well tolerated, with the participants showing an average decrease in CDRS scores of 42.5 percent. Five of the participants met the criteria for clinical response and remission. Of these, three were still in remission after six weeks, while the remaining two relapsed within two weeks.

According to the scientists, the results demonstrate the potential role for ketamine in treating adolescents with TRD. However, they note that the study was limited by its small sample size, so future research will be needed to confirm these results.

"The purpose of our study was to investigate the effects of ketamine for TRD in younger patients for whom this indication for ketamine administration is not well studied," Mark Roback, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Minnesota, told Newsweek.

"I think our results show promise for this population, however this study is just a beginning. The study serves to point out the need for further, rigorous, study designed to answer the many questions that remain about ketamine for TRD, such as optimal dosing and route of administration, dosing interval and treatment length, and long-term effects—just to name a few."

James Stone, a clinical senior lecturer from the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience at King's College London, who was not involved in the study, told Newsweek that there is "a lot of potential for the use of ketamine as a second or third line antidepressant where other treatments have failed."

"Although ketamine is potentially a huge breakthrough in the treatment of depression, we still don’t know about the long-term safety, or about how to keep people well from depression without requiring regular ketamine dosing," Stone added. "Further studies are needed to address these questions."

This article has been updated to include additional comment from Kathryn Cullen.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The nature of this study was to investigate the potential use of ketamine as an alternative to other drug treatments.  Participants had to have tried at least two previous drug approaches without success before they could qualify for inclusion in this study.  So therefore, there clearly were alternatives considered and the story mentioned them.
The story would have benefited from a wider discussion of the treatment of adolescent depression, including the role of psychotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - People struggling with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) might feel better with antidepressants or psychotherapy, a recent study suggests.

People with IBS typically suffer from chronic abdominal pain, gas, diarrhea and constipation. While some people improve with customized diets that avoid certain foods that trigger symptoms, this approach doesn’t help everyone and some emerging research suggests that the condition may also be influenced by processes in the brain.

For the current analysis, researchers examined data from 53 trials that compared the effects of antidepressants or psychotherapy, either alone or in combination, versus placebo treatments or “usual management” in people with IBS.

Rates of “no relief” were highest with placebo treatments. People were 34 percent less likely to have no relief from antidepressants and 31 percent less likely to get no relief from psychotherapy, the study found.

“One component of IBS is increased sensitivity to the functions of the bowels; simply summarized, this means either the nerves taking messages from the bowel to the brain are more sensitive or that the brain is more attentive or reacts in a more emotional manner to the normal messages arising in the bowel, or both,” said Dr. Michael Camilleri, a researcher at the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science in Rochester, Minnesota, who wasn’t involved in the current study.

“Since there are really no medications to reduce the nerve sensitivity, some doctors give medications that modulate the function of the brain in the hope that this approach will reduce the ability to sense or emotionally react to the signals or messages arriving from the bowels,” Camilleri said by email.

Psychiatric conditions including depression, anxiety, and somatisation - physical symptoms thought to have psychological origins - are common among people with IBS, researchers note in the American Journal of Gastroenterology.

Although the use of antidepressants is common among IBS patients, psychotherapy is not, the study authors note.

One limitation of the current study is that the smaller studies used in the analysis had a wide variety of designs and methods for testing the success of treatment, researchers note. Another drawback is that these studies weren’t designed to prove how antidepressants or psychotherapy might directly improve IBS symptoms.

Still, a psychological evaluation may make sense for IBS patients because it’s possible their symptoms might be a byproduct of untreated depression, said Dr. Agnieszka Kulak-Bejda, a psychiatry researcher at the Medical University of Białystok in Poland who wasn’t involved in the study.

Antidepressants may work better for certain types of IBS, and the study findings also suggest that the type of medication may matter, Kulak-Bejda said by email.

A family of medicines known as tricyclic antidepressants were more effective at relieving global symptoms of IBS, the analysis found. But another family of medicines known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) was better than a placebo for easing symptoms like pain and bloating and improving quality of life.

“The decision to use antidepressants as a form of therapy should be taken individually,” Kulak-Bejda said. “The decision should be made after considering all the pros and cons.”

Lead author Dr. Alexander Ford of the University of Leeds in the U.K. didn’t respond to requests for comment.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does refer to dietary interventions that are used to reduce IBS symptoms.
The story would have been stronger had it mentioned pharmaceutical interventions that may be used in IBS treatment. These pharmaceuticals often have limitations and potential drawbacks of their own, but given that the story specifically evaluates the use of antidepressants as a therapeutic intervention for IBS, this seems like a significant oversight. Why? Comparing some treatment to no treatment is very different from comparing some treatment to established treatment to see if benefits are comparable or better.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Updated | Almost sixty years since the FDA approved the pill for birth control in women, a male version may finally be on the horizon. Researchers have developed a prototype male pill that appears to be safe in a month-long trial.

More attractive to many men than a long-acting injection or topical gel—both of which are in development—the prototype pill offers a “major step forward” in male contraception, Stephanie Page, a professor at the University of Washington in Seattle and senior investigator on the study, said in a statement.

Read more: Male birth control pill could be made from heart-stopping poison in ancient African arrows

The once-daily prototype pill suppressed certain hormones to the low levels you'd expect to see with effective longer-term contraceptives, results from an ENDO 2018, the Endocrine Society’s annual meeting in Chicago, abstract show.

The prototype pill—dimethandrolone undecanoate (DMAU)—is somewhat similar to the combined female pill, which contains estrogen and a steroid hormone. Rather than estrogen, DMAU uses a male hormone like testosterone.

Currently available forms of testosterone can exit the body too quickly for use in a once-daily pill. The “undecanoate” in DMAU, however, is a long-chain fatty acid that can slow the drug’s journey out of the body, Page said.

Read more: Side effects are not what's holding back the male contraceptive pill

Eighty-three men took various doses of DMAU or a placebo for a month. Researchers analyzed the men’s hormones and cholesterol with blood tests at the start and end of the study. They found testosterone and two hormones needed for the production of sperm were notably suppressed in men who took the highest dose of DMAU.

While some subjects on all doses experienced mild weight gain and decreases in so-called "good" HDL cholesterol, DMAU appeared safe. All participants passed safety tests including liver and kidney health checks.

“Despite having low levels of circulating testosterone, very few subjects reported symptoms consistent with testosterone deficiency or excess,” Page said. There were no significant changes in mood or sexual function, but a minority of participants did experience decreased libido during the study.

Page has high hopes for the results, calling them “unprecedented in the development of a prototype male pill.” Longer-term studies are the next step toward a once-daily male contraceptive pill, she said.

The study was funded by the National Institutes for Health.

This article has been updated to include more information on DMAU.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does refer to other medical treatments aimed at male birth control that are under development, namely “a long-lasting injection or topical gel.” So we’ll give it credit here. We wish it had offered slightly more information here (e.g., are both of those technologies also hormone-based?).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a major change, the American Heart Association said Monday that hands-only CPR - rapid, deep presses on the victim's chest until help arrives - works just as well as standard CPR for sudden cardiac arrest in adults.

Experts hope bystanders will now be more willing to jump in and help if they see someone suddenly collapse. Hands-only CPR is simpler and easier to remember and removes a big barrier for people skittish about the mouth-to-mouth breathing.

"You only have to do two things. Call 911 and push hard and fast on the middle of the person's chest," said Dr. Michael Sayre, an emergency medicine professor at Ohio State University who headed the committee that made the recommendation.

Hands-only CPR calls for uninterrupted chest presses - 100 a minute - until paramedics take over or an automated external defibrillator is available to restore a normal heart rhythm.

This action should be taken only for adults who unexpectedly collapse, stop breathing and are unresponsive. The odds are that the person is having cardiac arrest - the heart suddenly stops - which can occur after a heart attack or be caused by other heart problems. In such a case, the victim still has ample air in the lungs and blood and compressions keep blood flowing to the brain, heart and other organs.

A child who collapses is more likely to primarily have breathing problems - and in that case, mouth-to-mouth breathing should be used. That also applies to adults who suffer lack of oxygen from a near-drowning, drug overdose, or carbon monoxide poisoning. In these cases, people need mouth-to-mouth to get air into their lungs and bloodstream.

But in either case, "Something is better than nothing," Sayre said.

The CPR guidelines had been inching toward compression-only. The last update, in 2005, put more emphasis on chest pushes by alternating 30 presses with two quick breaths; those "unable or unwilling" to do the breaths could do presses alone.

Now the heart association has given equal standing to hands-only CPR. Those who have been trained in traditional cardiopulmonary resuscitation can still opt to use it.

Sayre said the association took the unusual step of making the changes now - the next update wasn't due until 2010 - because three studies last year showed hands-only was as good as traditional CPR. Hands-only will be added to CPR training.

An estimated 310,000 Americans die each year of cardiac arrest outside hospitals or in emergency rooms. Only about 6 percent of those who are stricken outside a hospital survive, although rates vary by location. People who quickly get CPR while awaiting medical treatment have double or triple the chance of surviving. But less than a third of victims get this essential help.

Dr. Gordon Ewy, who's been pushing for hands-only CPR for 15 years, said he was "dancing in the streets" over the heart association's change even though he doesn't think it goes far enough. Ewy (pronounced AY-vee) is director of the University of Arizona Sarver Heart Center in Tucson, where the compression-only technique was pioneered.

Ewy said there's no point to giving early breaths in the case of sudden cardiac arrest, and it takes too long to stop compressions to give two breaths - 16 seconds for the average person. He noted that victims often gasp periodically anyway, drawing in a little air on their own.

Anonymous surveys show that people are reluctant to do mouth-to-mouth, Ewy said, partly because of fear of infections.

"When people are honest, they're not going to do it," he said. "It's not only the yuck factor."

In recent years, emergency service dispatchers have been coaching callers in hands-only CPR rather than telling them how to alternate breaths and compressions.

"They love it. It's less complicated and the outcomes are better," said Dallas emergency medical services chief Dr. Paul Pepe, who also chairs emergency medicine at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.

One person who's been spreading the word about hands-only CPR is Temecula, Calif., chiropractor Jared Hjelmstad, who helped save the life of a fellow health club member in Southern California

Hjelmstad, 40, had read about it in a medical journal and used it on Garth Goodall, who collapsed while working out at their gym in February. Hjelmstad's 15-year-old son Josh called 911 in the meantime.

Hjelmstad said he pumped on Goodall's chest for more than 12 minutes - encouraged by Goodall's intermittent gasps - until paramedics arrived. He was thrilled to find out the next day that Goodall had survived.

On Sunday, he visited Goodall in the hospital where he is recovering from triple bypass surgery.

"After this whole thing happened, I was on cloud nine," said Hjelmstad. "I was just fortunate enough to be there."

Goodall, a 49-year-old construction contractor, said he had been healthy and fit before the collapse, and there'd been no hint that he had clogged heart arteries.

"I was lucky," he said. Had the situation been reversed, "I wouldn't have known what to do."

"It's a second lease on life," he added.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The segment makes clear that the two treatment options for observed adult cardiac arrest are conventional CPR and compression-only CPR. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, April 16, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- People with chronic back pain often try painkillers and other treatments without success. Now, a new study suggests a program of education and exercise may provide relief.

Helping patients think differently about pain and encouraging them to move in ways they previously feared appears to ease pain and improve function, researchers say.

"People with chronic neck and/or back pain should be educated about their pain, [and] should be reassured," said lead researcher Anneleen Malfliet.

They should "learn to put pain into the right perspective, should remain active or increase their activity levels gradually, and should avoid fear of moving," said Malfliet, of Vrije University Brussel in Belgium.

Physical therapists and doctors can guide patients in this process, she added.

"They should also avoid the use of scary, unreassuring labels or diagnoses," and not limit movement in therapy, she said.

To test the experimental approach, Malfliet and her colleagues randomly assigned 22 men and 38 women to the program. They assigned another 25 men and 35 women to standard care -- exercise, and back and neck education.

"The experimental therapy, focusing on functionality, not using pain as a reliable symptom, and not as a guideline to adapt movements or activities, leads to better treatment outcomes," Malfliet said.

The program led to a significant and clinically important reduction of pain, she said.

Patients in the program reported 50 percent less pain after the treatment. They also reported paying less attention to pain.

In general, they also had less disability, a reduced fear of moving, and improvement in mental and physical outlook, according to the study authors.

"These positive effects were found until the last follow-up measurement at one year after treatment," Malfliet said.

The program involves "pain neuroscience education with cognition-targeted motor control training," she said.

What does that mean?

Pain neuroscience education aims to change patients' beliefs about pain, to increase their knowledge of pain and to decrease its threat, Malfliet said.

Besides focusing on the makeup of the spine, the program stressed lifting techniques and stretching. Participants also learned the value of strength, endurance and fitness training.

Many back patients are afraid certain movements will cause them pain, so they avoid them. The new exercises are designed to help overcome that fear, Malfliet said.

The regimen included the best known exercises for back pain and general exercises, she said. It also included group classes, online activities and personalized training sessions.

"Be active, and move without fear of pain or reinjury," Malfliet said. "Your level of activity or way of moving before the chronic pain began should be used as a guideline target."

Whereas back pain studies involving exercise and drugs have shown changes to the brain's gray matter, the program in this study found no brain changes, Malfliet said.

Dr. Kiran Patel is director of neurosurgical pain at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Patel said the dual mental and exercise approach is used to treat phantom pain in patients after a limb amputation. It's rarely used for back pain, she said.

But this study suggests these methods also can help reduce spinal pain, she said.

"The program, however, is quite time-intensive and is not covered by insurance," Patel said.

"Although it's promising, we really have to see the benefit long-term to justify the cost," she added.

The report was published online April 16 in JAMA Neurology.

For more on lower back pain, visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give this a just-passing rating. There are several brief statements about alternatives. Relevant statements include, “People with chronic back pain often try painkillers and other treatments without success” and “They assigned another 25 men and 35 women to standard care — exercise, and back and neck education.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About 400,000 Americans have multiple sclerosis, and up until now, the only drugs offered to them to slow the course of the disease had to be injected or dripped into a vein. But soon, it seems, they will have an alternative to this painful regimen: drugs that can be taken by mouth.

Easier To Take, More Impact

This week's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine reports on two new drugs that can be taken orally to slow the progress of MS. The studies for these drugs, which are not yet on the market, were funded by the drug manufacturers.

Dr. John Richert, executive vice president of research and clinical programs at the National MS Society, says the introduction of these pills will mark a major improvement in the lives of MS patients.

"What we've had available the last 16, 17 years has made a big difference," Richert says, "and what we have coming onboard now, these are going to make even a larger difference. It's really an important advance."

The main benefit of the pills will be that they are easier to take. Richert believes this simpler option will encourage more people to seek treatment.

"People will be more prone to take them early, more prone to stay on the drugs," Richert says.

The new pills also appear to be more effective than most current drugs. In clinical tests they reduced the number of flare-ups by more than half. The drugs now on the market typically reduce flare-ups by only a third. Such relapses reflect underlying nerve damage, so reducing their number is an indicator that less damage is taking place.

Jeffrey Babin, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, was diagnosed with MS nearly seven years ago, when he was 39. He says the discovery shook his world.

"This is a very scary disease. And when you have an episode, it is one of the most life-changing and life-re-evaluating events," Babin says.

He has been free of MS relapses for several years now, an improvement that may be attributed to the drug Copaxone, one of a half-dozen drugs on the market now that can slow the course of MS.

Babin says he is grateful for the drug — but he has to go through the painful process of injecting it every day.

"Injections are no fun; nobody likes to inject themselves," Babin says. "In my case, I wouldn't say there are any major side effects, but I do get those painful welts at the injection sites."

Those painful welts are something he would happily do without — and the new pills could be the answer.

Dr. Peter Calabresi of Johns Hopkins University School of Medical is an author of one new study. He is excited about the new drugs, but cautious.

"It's extremely exciting. I'm happy to have a new choice, especially a pill," Calabresi says. "I think we also have to be careful and not use it too abruptly or too easily."

Calabresi says many people think of pills as safer than injections, but this may not be the case.

"In reality, these are extremely potent pills that have the potential to cause a variety of serious side effects," he says.

These dangers are nothing new — the MS drug Tysabri was pulled from the market after some patients came down with rare brain infections. It was later reintroduced with strict monitoring requirements.

In light of that experience, federal regulators may go slowly with the two new drugs, called fingolimod and cladribine.

When considering changes to his own medicinal regimen, Babin says he will go slowly too.

"In spite of the fact that I hate injections, I probably would not leap at the first pill that comes to market," he says. "You want to be careful to jump into something new and risk the side effects from something you haven't tried before."

Meanwhile, approval of another new oral MS drug may come soon. That drug, called fampridine, does not prevent the nerve damage of MS, but in about a third of patients, it improves their damaged nerves, so they can walk better.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: For a short radio and web piece, the story did a good job of comparing the new drugs with injections (through the story of a patient’s experience) and mentioning the problems with another MS drug Tysbari and mentioning another new oral MS drug that may be approved soon. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can carry serious health risks, but a new study adds to evidence that menopausal women who use the hormones may have lower odds of developing colon cancer.

The study, which followed nearly 57,000 California teachers, found that women who were using HRT at the outset were 36 percent less likely to develop colon cancer over the next decade than those who had never used HRT.

Of the 34,433 HRT users, 193 were diagnosed with colon cancer during the study period; that compared with 151 cases among the 13,778 women who had never used hormone replacement.

HRT — with either estrogen alone or a combination of estrogen and progestin — was linked to a lower colon cancer risk even when the researchers accounted for the women’s age, weight, exercise levels and race.

Older age and African-American race are risk factors for colon cancer, and there is evidence linking obesity and a sedentary lifestyle to the disease as well.

The findings, reported in the American Journal of Epidemiology, support the theory that estrogen offers some protection against colon cancer.

Some past studies have linked not only HRT, but also use of birth control pills, to a lower colon cancer risk. And lab experiments have shown that estrogen may inhibit tumor development in the colon by affecting cell growth, or by lowering levels of a cancer-linked hormone called IGF-1.

However, no one is recommending that women take HRT to ward off colon cancer. Millions of women stopped using the hormones after a large U.S. government study in 2002 found that postmenopausal women given HRT had higher risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots than women given an inactive placebo.

As a result, experts now advise that while HRT is effective at relieving menopausal symptoms — like hot flashes and vaginal dryness — women should take it at the lowest dose and for the shortest time possible.

These latest findings do not alter that advice. But they point to a need for further study into the different effects of HRT on specific organs, write the researchers, led by Dr. Katherine DeLellis Henderson of the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, California.

The findings are based on 56,864 menopausal women who took part in the California Teachers Study, a health study begun in 1995. Most of the women were past menopause at the outset, and 61 percent were currently using HRT.

Over the next decade, 442 women were diagnosed with colon cancer.

While women who were current HRT users at the start of the study showed a lower risk of the disease, the same was not true of those who were former users.

Henderson’s team also found that the beneficial effect of HRT was stronger among women who had had a first-degree relative diagnosed with colon cancer. Among these women, HRT use was linked to a 55 percent lower risk of the disease versus non-use.

The implications of that finding, if any, are not yet clear.

Family history of colon cancer is an established risk factor for the disease, but only one study, according to Henderson’s team, has looked at whether family history affects the link between HRT and colon cancer risk — and it found no evidence that it did.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story at least discussed other colon cancer risk factors: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At some doses, the medication lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, a drug approved to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, was effective compared with placebo in decreasing binge-eating (BE) days in patients with binge-eating disorder (BED), a public health problem associated symptoms of mental illness and obesity and for which there are no approved medications, according to a study published online by JAMA Psychiatry.

BED is characterized by recurrent episodes of excessive food consumption accompanied by a sense of loss of control and psychological distress. Cognitive behavioral therapy, as well as psychotherapy, can reduce BE behavior but implementation of these treatments has not been widespread. Consequently, many patients with BED are undertreated despite having functional impairments and difficulties in their social and personal lives. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not approved pharmacologic treatments for BED, according to background information in the study.

Susan L. McElroy, M.D., of the Research Institute, Lindner Center of HOPE, Mason, Ohio, and coauthors compared lisdexamfetamine with placebo in adults with moderate to severe BED in a randomized clinical trial from May 2011 through January 2012. The study included 259 and 255 adults with BED in safety and intention-to-treat analyses, respectively. The medication was administered in dosages of 30, 50 or 70 mg/day or placebo.

BE days per week decreased in the 50-mg/d and 70 mg/d treatment groups but not in the 30 mg/d treatment group compared with the placebo group, according to the study results. Results also indicate the percentage of patients who achieved four-week BE cessation was lower with the placebo group (21.3 percent) compared with the 50-mg/d (42.2 percent) and 70-mg/d (50 percent) treatment groups.

"In the primary analysis of this study of adults with moderate to severe BED, lisdexamfetamine dimesylate treatment with 50 and 70 mg/d, but not 30 mg/d, demonstrated a significant decrease (compared with placebo) in weekly BE days per week at week 11. Similarly, BE episodes decreased in the 50- and 70-mg/d treatment groups. The one-week BE episode response status was improved in the 50- and 70-mg/d treatment groups, and a greater proportion of participants achieved four-week cessation of BE episodes and global improvement of symptom severity with all lisdexamfetamine dosages. ... Confirmation of these findings in ongoing clinical trials may results in improved pharmacologic treatment for moderate to severe BED," the study concludes.

Editor's Note: Authors made conflict of interest disclosures. This study was supported by Shire Development, LLC, including funding to Scientific Communications & Information and Complete Healthcare Communications, Inc., for support in writing and editing the manuscript. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Media Advisory: To contact corresponding author Susan L. McElroy, M.D., call Jennifer Pierson at 513-536-0316 or email jennifer.pierson@lindnercenter.org
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release identifies cognitive behavior therapy and psychotherapy as alternatives, but offers no comparison in outcomes other than to make the point that few health care providers use the behavioral alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When doctors saw the report on Bill Ludwig’s bone-marrow biopsy, they thought it was a mistake and ordered the test repeated. But the results came back the same: His lethal leukemia had been wiped out by an experimental treatment never before used in humans.

“We were hoping for a little improvement,” remembered the 72-year-old retired New Jersey corrections officer, who had battled the disease for a decade. He and his oncologist both broke down when she delivered the good news in 2010. “Nobody was hoping for zero cancer.”

The pioneering therapy administered to Ludwig and a few other adults at the University of Pennsylvania hospital paved the way for clinical trials with children. Six-year-old Emily Whitehead, who was near death, became the first pediatric recipient in 2012. Like Ludwig, she remains cancer-free.

Such results are why the treatment is on track to become the first gene therapy approved by the Food and Drug Administration. An FDA advisory committee will decide Wednesday whether to recommend approval of the approach, which uses patients’ own genetically altered immune cells to fight blood cancers.

If the panel gives the nod, the agency probably will follow suit by the end of September. That would open the latest chapter in immunotherapy — “a true living drug,” said Penn scientist Carl June, who led its development.

The CAR T-cell treatment, manufactured by the drug company Novartis, initially would be available only for the small number of children and young adults whose leukemia does not respond to standard care. Those patients typically have a grim prognosis, but in the pivotal trial testing the therapy in almost a dozen countries, 83 percent of patients went into remission. A year later, two-thirds remained so.

And childhood leukemia is just the start for a field that has attracted intense interest in academia and industry. Kite Pharma of Santa Monica, Calif., has applied for FDA approval to treat aggressive non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and a similar Novartis application is close behind. Researchers also are exploring CAR T-cell therapy’s use for multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, the disease that afflicted Ludwig. They are also tackling a far more difficult challenge — using the therapy for solid tumors in the lungs or brain, for example.

The excitement among doctors and researchers is palpable. “We’re saving patients who three or four years ago we were at our wit’s end trying to keep alive,” said Stephen Schuster, the Penn oncologist who is leading a Novartis lymphoma study. That study and a Kite trial have shown that the treatment can put about one-third of adults with advanced disease — those who have exhausted all options — into remission.

Yet along with the enthusiasm come pressing questions about safety, cost and the complexity of the procedure.

It involves extracting white blood cells called T cells — the foot soldiers of the immune system — from a patient’s blood, freezing them and sending them to Novartis’s sprawling manufacturing plant in Morris Plains, N.J. There, a crippled HIV fragment is used to genetically modify the T cells so they can find and attack the cancer. The cells then are refrozen and sent back to be infused into the patient.

Once inside the person’s body, the T-cell army multiplies astronomically.

Novartis has not disclosed the price for its therapy, but analysts are predicting $300,000 to $600,000 for a one-time infusion. Brad Loncar, whose investment fund focuses on companies that develop immunotherapy treatments, hopes the cost does not prompt a backlash. “CAR-T is not the EpiPen,” he said. “This is truly pushing the envelope and at the cutting edge of science.”

The biggest concerns, however, center on safety. The revved-up immune system becomes a potent cancer-fighting agent but also a dangerous threat to the patient. Serious side effects abound, raising concerns about broad use.

“Treating patients safely is the heart of the rollout,” said Stephan Grupp of Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, who as director of the hospital’s cancer immunotherapy program led early pediatric studies as well as Novartis’s global trial. “The efficacy takes care of itself, but safety takes a lot of attention.”

One of the most common side effects is called cytokine release syndrome, which causes high fever and flulike symptoms that in some cases can be so dangerous that the patient ends up in intensive care. The other major worry is neurotoxicity, which can result in temporary confusion or potentially fatal brain swelling. Juno Therapeutics, a biotech firm in Seattle, shut down one of its CAR T-cell programs after five patients died of brain swelling. Novartis has not seen brain swelling in its trials, company officials said.

To try to ensure patient safety, Novartis is not planning a typical product rollout, with a drug pushed as widely and aggressively as possible. The company instead will designate 30 to 35 medical centers to administer the treatment. Many of them took part in the clinical trial, and all have gotten extensive training by Grupp and others.

Grupp said he and his staff learned about the side effects of CAR T-cell therapy — and what to do about them — through terrifying experiences that began five years ago with Emily Whitehead.

The young girl, who had relapsed twice on conventional treatments for acute lymphoblastic leukemia, was in grave condition. Grupp suggested to her parents that she be the first child to get the experimental therapy.

“I said, ‘Surely, this has been tried on kids somewhere else in the world,’ ” recalled her father, Thomas Whitehead of Philipsburg, Pa. “But Steve said, ‘Nope, some adults got it, but that was a different kind of leukemia.’ ”

After she received the therapy, Emily’s fever soared, her blood pressure plummeted, and she ended up in a coma and on a ventilator for two weeks in the hospital’s intensive care unit. Convinced his patient would not survive another day, a frantic Grupp got rushed lab results that suggested a surge of the protein Interleukin 6 was causing her immune system to relentlessly hammer her body. Doctors decided to give Emily an immunosuppressant drug called tocilizumab.

She was dramatically better within hours. She woke up the next day, her seventh birthday. Tests showed her cancer was gone.

The approval of CAR T-cell therapy would represent the second big immunotherapy advance in less than a decade. In 2011, the FDA cleared the first agent in a new class of drugs called checkpoint inhibitors. It has approved five more since then.

There are big differences between the two approaches. The checkpoint inhibitors are targeted at solid tumors, such as advanced melanoma and lung and bladder cancer, while CAR T-cell therapy has been aimed at blood disorders. And although checkpoint inhibitors are off the shelf, with every patient getting the same drug, CAR T-cell therapy is customized to an individual. Many immunotherapy experts think the greatest progress against cancer will be achieved when researchers figure out how to combine the approaches.

For the Penn team, the CAR T-cell story goes back decades, starting at the then-National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., where June and a postdoctorate fellow named Bruce Levine worked on new HIV treatments. In the process, they figured out a way to turbocharge T cells to make them more powerful and plentiful.

The pair moved to Philadelphia in 1999 and dove into cancer research. Two years later, June’s wife died of ovarian cancer, something he has credited as spurring him to work even harder in the field. In the years that followed, researchers across the country, including at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, racked up an array of tantalizing discoveries involving T cells.

Fast-forward to 2010, when Ludwig, who lives in Bridgeton, N.J., became Penn’s first patient to receive CAR T-cell therapy. Two other men got the treatment not long after. One is still in remission; the other relapsed and died.

But after those three patients, the Penn researchers ran out of money for more treatments. To try to raise interest and funding, they decided to publish the results of their work. The article that appeared in the New England Journal of Medicine in August 2011 created a “firestorm,” June said — one that brought them new resources. David Porter, a Penn oncologist working with June, was on vacation in western Maryland and had to stop at a Kohl’s to buy a dress shirt for the immediate TV interviews.

The pediatric trial opened the following spring with Emily. Six months later, Penn licensed its technology to Novartis in exchange for financial support, which included a new on-campus cell-manufacturing facility.

With FDA approval seeming imminent, the researchers who were so instrumental in the therapy’s development and testing are almost giddy. Grupp is especially pleased that the advance will be available first to children. “Usually everything is developed first for adults,” he noted recently, “and children are an afterthought.”

‘This is not the end’: Using immunotherapy and a genetic glitch to give cancer patients hope

This 8-year-old is free of cancer — for now — after a ‘breakthrough’ treatment

For a 6-year-old with cancer, a future staked on medicine’s hottest field
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: First of all, the story makes clear that CAR T-cell treatment — if approved — would be available only to those for whom conventional treatments have not worked. That’s a key point. Second, the story does articulate the difference between this form of immunotherapy (which is customized to the patient) and other immunotherapy techniques, which are so-called “checkpoint inhibitors” and are not individualized. As mentioned earlier, we would have liked to have seen more data on the success rates of standard treatment vs these treatments.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A form of ‘mind-body’ therapy that focuses on the role of emotions in physical pain may offer some relief to people with fibromyalgia, a small clinical trial suggests.

The study, of 45 women with fibromyalgia, found that those who learned a technique called “affective self-awareness” were more likely to show a significant reduction in their pain over six months.

Overall, 46 percent of the women had a 30-percent or greater reduction in their pain severity, as measured by a standard pain-rating scale. In contrast, of study participants who were assigned to a wait-list for therapy, none showed a similar decline in pain.

Fibromyalgia is a syndrome marked by widespread pain — including discomfort at specific “tender points” in the body — along with symptoms such as fatigue, irritable bowel and sleep problems. It is estimated to affect up to 5 million U.S. adults, most commonly middle-aged women.

The precise cause of fibromyalgia is unknown — there are no physical signs, such as inflammation and tissue damage in the painful area — but some researchers believe the disorder involves problems in how the brain processes pain signals.

Standard treatments include painkillers, antidepressants, cognitive- behavioral therapy and exercise therapy. However, many people with fibromyalgia find that their symptoms — pain, in particular — persist despite treatment.

Part of that, according to the researchers on the new study, may be because standard treatments do not specifically address the role psychological stress and emotions can play in triggering people’s pain.

That is not to say that the pain people with fibromyalgia feel is “all in their head,” stressed Dr. Howard Schubiner, of St. John Health/ Providence Hospital and Medical Centers in Southfield, Michigan.

“The pain is very real,” Schubiner said in an interview. But, he explained, pain and emotions are “connected in the brain,” and emotional factors may act to trigger “learned nerve pathways” that give rise to pain.

Past studies have found that compared with people without fibromyalgia, those with the disorder have higher rates of stressful life events, such as childhood abuse, marital problems and high levels of job stress. There is also evidence that they are relatively less aware of their own emotions and more reluctant to express their feelings, particularly anger.

For the new study, published in the Journal of General Internal Medicine, Schubiner and his colleagues tested the effects of affective self-awareness — a technique Schubiner developed and uses in treating certain chronic-pain conditions — on fibromyalgia.

They randomly assigned 45 women with the condition to either undergo the therapy or go on a wait-list for treatment, serving as a control group. Women in the treatment group each had a one-on-one consultation, then attended three group meetings to learn the affective self-awareness techniques so that they could carry them out on their own.

The therapy involves an educational component where patients learn about the emotion-pain connection. They learn specific techniques — including mindfulness meditation and “expressive” writing — for recognizing and dealing with the emotions that may be contributing to their pain. Patients are also encouraged to get back to any exercise or other activities that they have been avoiding due to pain.

Schubiner’s team found that six months later, 46 percent of the treatment group had at least a 30-percent reduction in their pain ratings compared with scores at the outset. And 21 percent had a 50-percent or greater reduction.

None of the women in the control group had a comparable improvement.

The study is only the first clinical trial to test affective self-awareness for fibromyalgia, and it had a number of limitations, including its small size. In addition, the control group received no active therapy to serve as a comparison.

That is important because it is possible for patients to benefit from simply receiving attention from a healthcare provider, or being part of small-group sessions with other people suffering from the same condition, for example.

Schubiner also acknowledged that this general “model” for understanding and addressing fibromyalgia pain is controversial.

He said that he and his colleagues have applied for funding to conduct a larger clinical trial comparing affective self-awareness with standard cognitive-behavioral therapy.

Affective self-awareness and cognitive-behavioral therapy have similarities, according to Schubiner. Both, for example, try to show patients that they have the power to improve their own health.

A key difference, Schubiner said, is that affective self-awareness asks people to “directly engage” the emotions that may be helping to drive their symptoms.

Another difference is that, right now, only a small number of healthcare providers practice affective self-awareness, according to Schubiner.

Some components of the technique, such as teachings in mindfulness meditation, are more widely available. But whether those practices in isolation would help fibromyalgia patients’ pain is not clear.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions other common approaches to treatment, including painkillers, antidepressants, CBT and exercise therapy. It also provides some discussion of the overlap between CBT and affective self-awareness, both of which focus on recognizing and modifying maladaptive responses to emotions and thoughts. For comparison purposes, we think it would have been interesting to hear how these other therapies have performed in similarly designed studies of fibromyalgia pain. Nevertheless, the story does enough to earn a satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS - April 18, 2016 - A five-year study shows that Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy (SBRT) to treat prostate cancer offers a higher cure rate than more traditional approaches, according to researchers at UT Southwestern Medical Center Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center.

The study - the first trial to publish five-year results from SBRT treatment for prostate cancer - found a 98.6 percent cure rate with SBRT, a noninvasive form of radiation treatment that involves high-dose radiation beams entering the body through various angles and intersecting at the desired target. It is a state-of-the-art technology that allows for a concentrated dose to reach the tumor while limiting the radiation dose to surrounding healthy tissue.

"The high cure rate is striking when compared to the reported five-year cure rates from other approaches like surgery or conventional radiation, which range between 80 to 90 percent, while the side effects of this treatment are comparable to other types of treatment," said Dr. Raquibul Hannan, Assistant Professor of Radiation Oncology and lead author for the study. "What we now have is a more potent and effective form of completely noninvasive treatment for prostate cancer, conveniently completed in five treatments."
• Prostatectomy, the surgical removal of the prostate gland, which can be done with minimally invasive techniques and robotic assistance;
• Brachytherapy, in which doctors implant numerous small radioactive seeds about the size of a grain of rice into the prostate gland using multiple large needles inserted through the skin in the operating room. Once implanted, the seeds release their radioactivity directly into the prostate gland; and
• External beam radiation, which involves 42 to 45 treatments administered over two or more months, five days a week.

"The current form of radiation is 44 treatments given over nine weeks. In contrast, the SBRT therapy we used allows the delivery of highly focused radiation in only five treatments, allowing patients to return to their normal lives more quickly," said senior author Dr. Robert Timmerman, Director of the Annette Simmons Stereotactic Treatment Center at UT Southwestern, and Professor and Vice Chairman of the Department of Radiation Oncology. "SBRT is both more convenient and has increased potency."

UT Southwestern served as the lead site for the multi-institutional clinical trial, which involved first-time prostate cancer patients diagnosed with stage I or stage II (low and intermediate risk) prostate cancer. A total of 91 patients were treated prospectively and followed for five years, with only one patient experiencing a recurrence of his cancer. The findings are published in the European Journal of Cancer.

Terry Martin of McKinney, Texas, - about an hour outside Dallas - said the fewer number of treatments was a compelling advantage when he was evaluating treatment options.

"I live 45 minutes away from UT Southwestern. The difference between being treated five times versus 44 times is enormous," said Mr. Martin, a retired airline pilot. "I felt that I was back to normal just 10 days after finishing treatment."

In addition to shorter treatment times, researchers found that side effects were not necessarily different compared to other forms of prostate cancer treatment. In the short term, the side effects of SBRT can include urinary issues (urgency, frequency and burning) and rectal irritation, which are often temporary and reverse within four weeks of treatment. Researchers found a small risk of longer-term urinary and rectal complications, which is also comparable to conventional treatments. Decrease in erectile function was seen in 25 percent of patients, fewer than with conventional radiation or surgery, said Dr. Hannan.

To reduce the side effects associated with SBRT, current clinical trials at UTSW are using a unique and biodegradable rectal spacer gel to protect the rectum. UTSW is currently the only accredited site in Texas at which this spacer gel can be used.

Other clinical trials at the UTSW Department of Radiation Oncology are seeking to expand the application of SBRT to high-risk (Stage III) prostate cancer patients. "Our hope is that the high potency of this form of treatment will significantly improve treatment of these patients," says Dr. Hannan, the principal investigator of the high-risk prostate SBRT trial.

UT Southwestern has been a leader in pioneering use of SBRT. Dr. Timmerman, Director of Image-Guided Stereotactic Radiation Therapy, Medical Director of Radiation Oncology, and holder of the Effie Marie Cain Distinguished Chair in Cancer Therapy Research, has served as the lead investigator in several national trials designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of SBRT to treat other types of cancer, including cancer in the lung, liver, and spine. A range of clinical trials of SBRT therapy are under way at Simmons Cancer Center, including new investigations evaluating use of SBRT for cancers in the breast and larynx.

Since 2009, UT Southwestern has trained more than 300 physicians and peers interested in implementing SBRT in their clinical practice. Simmons Cancer Center's arsenal of stereotactic radiotherapy technology includes the cutting-edge Gamma Knife, CyberKnife, Agility, Vero SBRT and TrueBeam technologies.

The SBRT study for prostate cancer was supported by a grant from the U.S. Department of Defense. Additional UTSW researchers involved in the study include Dr. Yair Lotan, Professor of Urology and holder of the Helen J. and Robert S. Strauss Professorship in Urology, and Dr. Xian-Jin Xie, Professor of Clinical Science.

The Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center is the only NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Center in North Texas and one of just 45 NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers in the nation. The Simmons Cancer Center includes 13 major cancer care programs with a focus on treating the whole patient with innovative treatments, while fostering groundbreaking basic research that has the potential to improve patient care and prevention of cancer worldwide. In addition, the Center's education and training programs support and develop the next generation of cancer researchers and clinicians.

The Simmons Cancer Center is among only 30 U.S. cancer research centers and the only cancer center in North Texas to be named a National Clinical Trials Network Lead Academic Participating Site, a prestigious designation by the NCI, designed to bolster clinical cancer research for adults and to provide patients access to cancer research trials sponsored by the NCI, where promising new drugs often are tested.

UT Southwestern, one of the premier academic medical centers in the nation, integrates pioneering biomedical research with exceptional clinical care and education. The institution's faculty has included six who have been awarded Nobel Prizes since 1985. The faculty of almost 2,800 is responsible for groundbreaking medical advances and is committed to translating science-driven research quickly to new clinical treatments. UT Southwestern physicians provide medical care in about 80 specialties to more than 92,000 hospitalized patients and oversee approximately 2.2 million outpatient visits a year.

This news release is available on our home page at http://www.

To automatically receive news releases from UT Southwestern via email, subscribe at http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release gives us some information about this treatment vs. traditional radiation and lists other important alternatives including prostatectomy (surgical removal of the prostate gland), brachytherapy (the implantation of small radioactive seeds), and external beam radiation. One alternative not mentioned — which is appropriate for low-risk cancers — is active surveillance (monitoring the patient and deferring active treatment).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eugene Overton was given two options after being diagnosed with melanoma last year: standard chemotherapy or an experimental treatment.

Overton chose the experiment, an injection he receives every three weeks. The idea is simple: Instead of poisoning the cancer and causing grueling side effects, it signals the patient's immune system to attack malignant cells, much as the body does with viruses and bacteria.

"I figured chemotherapy would, at most, just control the cancer," says Overton, 74, a retired surgeon who lives in Lampasas, about 85 miles north of Austin. "But if my body could be trained to recognize wandering cancers, that might be a cure."

Doctors aren't using the word cure — Overton hasn't even finished treatment — but after years of painstaking research, immunotherapy is starting to show promise as a cancer treatment. Famously unsuccessful in previous decades, it's poised to break through in the near future, say cancer immunologists.

Around the country, about 140 immunotherapy trials are under way, some of them the final hurdle before they go up for Food and Drug Administration approval. Leading the way is the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, which three years ago opened a state-of-the-art immunology research center.

In one high-profile success, one of the therapies has helped keep an M.D. Anderson doctor healthy and thriving nearly 15 months after he was diagnosed with the deadly disease he treats: brain cancer. The cancer, glioblastoma, typically kills within that time.

The greatest promise seems to involve blood and microscopic cancers, but targets for immunotherapies in clinical trials range from lymphoma and brain cancer to cancers of the breast, prostate, colon and lung. More are on the way.

"It's the first time I've seen usually jaded oncologists excited about the prospects with immunotherapy," says Dr. Amy Heimberger, an M.D. Anderson neurosurgeon whose study of the glioblastoma immunotherapy drug won a Young Investigator's Award from the American Association of Neurological Surgeons. "Suddenly, senior doctors who once pooh-poohed immunotherapy are referring patients to junior researchers in the field."

The treatment — shots that grab the immune system and jolt it to fight against rebel tumor cells — has been a dream for more than a century. It dates back to 1891, decades before antibiotics, when New York doctor William Coley inoculated cancer patients with live streptococcal cultures and some experienced remissions.

Over the years, the shot fell by the wayside, a victim of its own inconsistent results and the growing dominance of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. Other attempts flopped, often after grandiose claims by practitioners. By the 1970s, when cancer researchers referred to immunotherapy, it usually was dismissively.

However, in the years after, the first real seeds of the science were being planted via a better understanding of immunology. By the mid-90s, textbooks had grown to 1,000 pages. Researchers began describing early immunotherapy efforts as so crude they really had little in common with the new field.

The challenge was getting the immune system to recognize the enemy. A sort of anatomical turncoat — good cells gone bad — cancer doesn't set off the immune system's attack dogs like germs do. The new knowledge, much of it thanks to the genomics revolution, is helping cancer scientists remedy that.

Specifically, researchers discovered markers unique to cancer cells the immune system can be trained to target. They also found naturally occurring, immune system-boosting compounds that can be produced in the laboratory. As a result, the researchers are now giving one-two punches of drugs that energize the immune system and direct it to go after cancer cells it had hardly noticed.

"It's made a big difference," says Dr. Jeff Molldrem, an M.D. Anderson professor of blood and marrow transplantation. "It's like suddenly having the cancer's postal address and being able to activate the immune system to deliver its blow there."

Some early returns have been impressive. One therapy at M.D. Anderson produced complete responses in a clinical trial for patients with acute myeloid leukemia for which no other intervention had been successful. Another, the trial involving glioblastoma, found that median survival for 23 participants significantly surpassed that for patients treated with the most current chemotherapy and radiation regimen.

At the Mary Crowley Medical Research Center in Dallas, scientists developed an immunotherapy that produced responses — sometimes years-long remission — in half of trial participants with a kind of lung cancer that typically kills within four to six months. And at the National Cancer Institute, a mix of cancer-specific T cells and a booster produced unheard-of improvement in patients with advanced melanoma.

Surprisingly, some research shows immunotherapy works best in conjunction with chemotherapy or radiation, which suppress the immune system. An M.D. Anderson study found immunotherapy helped fight an aggressive form of lymphoma, even though prior chemotherapy had eliminated virtually all the B cells thought necessary to mount a defense.

Because it doesn't inflict the damage to healthy tissue caused by chemotherapy and radiation, immunotherapy's great appeal is its nontoxicity. Overton, for instance, boasts he's not only had no recurrence of his melanoma, he's also had no side-effects from the treatment.

Despite the endorsements, not everyone is ready to proclaim immunotherapy the future of cancer treatment.

"So many claims have been made about immunotherapy that have not borne out," says Dr. Steven Rosenberg, an NCI scientist who conducted the melanoma study but also published a review about the lack of randomized trials in support of the therapy. "The field is promising, but there's always danger in making claims before the real data's in."

Researchers acknowledge immunotherapy's promise is furthest from realization for bulky solid tumors, perhaps too advanced for the immune system to beat. They say the greatest strides are being made against cancers where the immune system can fight them in manageable stages, such as in the blood or lymph nodes.

That's why immunotherapy's greatest successes will come when it can be used early in treatment, they say. Now, because drugs are mostly tested on patients whose cancer has resisted previous treatment, it's usually used on tumors advanced to often fatal stages.

If all goes well, researchers hope to learn enough to not just trigger the immune system to fight cancer, but to prevent it. A few such cancer vaccines exist — notably, the recently approved cervical cancer vaccine — but they prevent viruses that cause those cancers, and most cancers aren't caused by viruses. Such research already is under way — a potential antidote for people whose genetics seemingly fate them for cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions chemotherapy and radiation as alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a few months time, those suffering from skin cancer may find an unlikely hero in their treatment regimen: herpes. A modified version of the Herpes Simplex 1 virus (known for causing cold sores and some cases of genital herpes) called T-Vec has successfully been used to treat melanoma in a phase III clinical trial. That means it's just waiting for a final okay from the FDA before the Amgen product can hit the market. The results of the trial were published Tuesday in Journal of Clinical Oncology.

[Personalized cancer vaccines have already helped treat three patients]

In a study of 436 patients with inoperable melanoma, Talimogene Laherparepvec had 16.3 percent of patients showing results at the six-month mark, compared to 2.1 percent taking the control therapy. Some patients were continuing to respond to T-VEC three years later.

Patients with stage III and early stage IV melanoma treated with T-VEC (163 people in all) lived an average of 41 months. This compared with an average survival of 21.5 months in the 66 earlier-stage patients who received the control immunotherapy. Immunotherapy, where agents are used to boost a body's natural defense against a tumor, are already the best treatments against melanoma. But this is the first time a modified virus has been successful in carrying out that treatment.

[One day, doctors might prescribe viruses instead of antibiotics]

Using a virus as a drug isn't a new idea. Phage therapy, where viruses that attack certain bacteria are used in place of antibiotics, is commonly used in Europe and on the rise in the United States. But cancer therapies like the one described in the new paper take things a step further, manipulating existing viruses to turn them into cancer-fighting tools.

Kevin Harrington, Professor of Biological Cancer Therapies at The Institute of Cancer Research and head of the trial, has been working on this particular virus for about a decade. Before he signed onto the project, it was primarily being investigated as a breast cancer treatment. But Harrington brought head, neck, and skin cancer patients into the mix, and melanoma seemed to have the best responses of all.

Here's how T-VEC works: It starts with the herpes virus, which is magnificent at proliferating itself within cells and then causing them to burst (that's where the cold sores come from). But T-VEC has had two key genes removed. These keep it from replicating within healthy cells, which can quickly spot it because of the missing genes.

But cancer cells aren't as savvy, and T-VEC has its run of them. Meanwhile, T-VEC has also been modified to produce a molecule called GM-CSF, which serves as a red flag waved at the immune system.

So in addition to the destructive power of the T-VEC cells themselves, the therapy summons the immune system right to where it's needed -- the tumor.

[Watch how the body’s ‘serial killers’ stalk and attack cancer cells]

"This is a first in class agent, a brand new therapy," Harrington said. "But it's just the farthest along of what we hope will be many more."

Harrington expects the FDA to clear T-VEC within the year, and it could potentially be available to patients right away.

But there's more work to be done to determine just how T-VEC can fit into the cancer-treatment landscape. When the latest trial was started, Harrington explained, there was no standard of treatment for melanoma -- so it's compared to a treatment that no one expected to outpace T-VEC. Now that other therapies -- ones that target specific mutations in patients' cancer cells -- are showing more success than what was available when the trial was formed, researchers will have to see how T-VEC compares.

"The next steps are exciting, and already underway," he said. "The next big frontier will be to combine this with existing immunotherapies. There's a strong rationale that other drugs on the market could act synogistically with ours."

Trials are also underway to determine how T-VEC might do with other cancers. In the meantime, other researchers will continue to crack the codes of other viruses to make them do our bidding.

Want more science? Give these a click:

Personalized cancer vaccines have already helped treat three patients

Smartwatches might cause cancer, says article based on ‘expert’ who pushes holistic breast cancer treatments

Sun damage keeps happening even after you go inside, new study says
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: While the story does not compare the treatment with current standard treatments, it does explain that those comparisons were not done in the paper and that they need to be done now. Ideally this would have been communicated much higher up in the story, as this isn’t an afterthought–it is the key information to determine how this agent should be used. Otherwise, one is left with the impression that everyone with melanoma will be getting this treatment if and when it is approved by the FDA. That is far from the truth.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 7, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An investigational drug called pridopidine seems an effective and safe treatment for people with the progressive movement disorder Huntington's disease, researchers report.

Huntington's patients have an imbalance in the signaling chemical dopamine. The new drug stabilizes dopamine signaling in areas of the brain that control movement and coordination.

According to the study authors, this is the first drug shown to improve patients' loss of ability to move their muscles voluntarily. The only drug currently approved for Huntington's is tetrabenazine, which treats only involuntary movements and can cause serious side effects.

The results of the phase 3 clinical trial, conducted by Spanish researchers led by Dr. Justo Garcia de Yebenes, of the department of neurology, Hospital Ramon y Cajal in Madrid, appear in the Nov. 7 online edition of The Lancet Neurology.

The study included 437 Huntington's disease patients from eight European countries. The participants took either pridopidine (45 milligrams once daily or 45 mg twice daily) or a placebo for 26 weeks.

After six months of treatment, patients taking the higher dose of pridopidine showed improvements in motor function -- specifically in eye and hand movements, involuntary muscle contractions (dystonia), and gait and balance -- compared with patients taking the placebo.

More than 70 percent of the patients taking the higher dose of the drug showed a significant benefit, according to the researchers. Side effects among patients taking the drug were similar to the placebo group.

"Pridopidine has the potential to complement available treatments by improving a different range of motor deficits. Its lack of severe side-effects . . . suggests that pridopidine might be useful even for those patients who are treated at sites that are not centers of excellence for Huntington's disease," the researchers concluded.

One U.S. neurologist agreed that the drug seems promising against a disease with few treatment options.

"There has been a great deal of attention for this drug, as it is one of the few molecules that in preliminary studies was found to have some efficacy in Huntington's disease," said Dr. Alessandro Di Rocco, professor in the department of neurology and chief of the division of movement disorders at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.

"However, this is the first large study to show evidence of a positive result in treating the motor symptoms of this devastating disease. And, though the compound is apparently well tolerated without significant side effects, the benefit is modest and limited to the motor symptoms of the disease and it is unknown how long the improvement observed could last," he added.

Still, pridopidine does not get at the underlying cause of Huntington's disease, Di Rocco said.

"Unfortunately, Huntington's is a progressive disease and this drug is not a treatment of the disease itself but only improves some of its symptoms," he explained. "Nevertheless, it is a welcome addition because there is very little else yet available to treat the symptoms. The challenge for scientists and clinicians is to discover therapies that actually slows or halts the progression of the disease."

Another expert agreed that new treatment options for patients are sorely needed.

"A well-tolerated drug that produces even small benefits for patients with Huntington's disease would be a very welcome addition to the currently available treatments for this debilitating disorder," Andrew Feigin, from The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research in New York City, wrote in an accompanying commentary.

The study was funded by European pharmaceuticals company NeuroSearch A/S.

We Move has more about Huntington's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions tetrabenazine – the only drug on the market for Huntington’s disease – and adds that it can “cause serious side effects.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New pathway to the heart

Electrical stimulation of the spinal column may ease cardiac problems without drugs

In a possible new way to treat heart failure, Houston surgeons implanted a device and wire in a Pearland man Monday that will electrically stimulate portions of his spinal cord.

The method, commonly used to treat pain, activates nerves that Methodist Hospital doctors think will improve the heart's ability to pump effectively, lowering blood pressure, reducing the amount of irregular heartbeats and stopping stress hormones from overreacting and causing cardiac damage.

"Despite the development of drugs that treat heart failure, patients continue to deteriorate," said Dr. Guillermo Torre-Amione, a Methodist heart failure specialist and leader of the effort. "This is a new concept that could increase therapeutic efficacy without adding new medications."

Hollis Bardwell, 61, sounded excited about the possibility Monday evening, five hours after surgeons finished putting the pacemaker-like device in the side of his lower back and threading an attached 35-inch wire up his spine. He said he hopes the therapy will give him greater mobility while he waits for a heart transplant.

"I'm looking forward to rocking and rolling again," said Bardwell.

Doctors said Bardwell was doing well Monday evening and should be able to leave the hospital tonight.

Bardwell hasn't worked since November because his condition, inherited, makes breathing so difficult. He was hospitalized 14 times in 2009, always to have fluid drained from his lungs so he could breathe. He went on the heart transplant waiting list two months ago.

Monday's implantation marked the beginning of Torre's Phase 1 clinical trial of the therapy, the first time what is known as neurostimulation has been used to treat heart failure.

There is considerable data showing connections between the brain, nervous system and heart, said Torre, but until now, no one has attempted to take advantage of the relationship therapeutically.

If the experiment proves successful, it would provide an entirely different approach to heart failure, a chronic, progressive disease that affects nearly 6 million Americans.

Characterized by the heart's inability to supply sufficient blood flow to meet the body's needs, heart failure can lead to shortness of breath, fluid and retention, lung congestion and rapid or irregular heartbeats. It is usually ultimately fatal.

The condition is currently treated by oral medications, almost all of which lower blood pressure. A typical heart failure patient is on seven such drugs, which Torre characterized as "the limit." Because new drugs can only be tested on top of existing therapy, introducing potentially better drugs is difficult.

Neurostimulation works by sending low-intensity electrical impulses to targeted portions of the spinal cord.

The hope is that such stimulation will modulate nervous system responses, such as toning down the release of hormones that typically occur at times of stress and increasing the flow of blood.

The study calls for Torre to implant the system, done through small puncture holes in the lower back, in 20 patients with advanced heart failure, then conducting tests on them after one, two and three months to measure heart function.

Torre said though patients may feel some euphoria in the early days, it likely will take about a month before doctors have a good idea whether the therapy is working.

The therapy passed a first test Monday evening as doctors adjusted the electrical impulse level to Bardwell's satisfaction.

"It's really mild," said Bardwell. "The most I feel is a tingle like when your hand is going to sleep on you. When it's set low, I don't feel anything at all."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says heart failure is currently treated by oral medications, almost all of which lower blood pressure, and it adds that Mr. Bardwell is on the heart transplant list — another option for advanced heart failure patients. It could have mentioned the availability of the left ventricular assist device, or LVAD, which also can play a role.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dominic Gessler lifts two squirming mice from their cages. Sherri Epstein flinches, but Gessler coaxes her to hold out her hands. He places the small animals in her palms, and they skitter in tiny circles, tickling her skin. “Now,” says Gessler. “Which one used to have Canavan disease?”

A few miles away, at Epstein’s home in Worcester, Massachusetts, a young woman lies in bed, her thin limbs bent and still, her curly red hair splayed across a pillow. This is Rachel, Epstein’s 17-year-old daughter, born with Canavan disease—a debilitating, fatal brain disorder. As a newborn, Rachel opened her mouth as if to scream but made no sound. As an infant, she never moved in her sleep. When Rachel failed to lift her head by six months of age, an early intervention therapist suspected she had cerebral palsy. Epstein wishes it had been so. Instead, Rachel had inherited a mutated version of a gene called ASPA from each of her parents. Without a healthy copy of that gene, her cells could not produce a protein needed to break down acid in the brain. So the acid built up, then slowly ate away at the insulation protecting Rachel’s neurons, turning her white matter into a sponge pocketed with fluid-filled sacs. As a result, Rachel does not talk; she cannot see or control her limbs or other bodily functions; she has seizures and will likely not live to adulthood.

There is no treatment and no cure for Canavan disease. Yet standing in a room at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, Epstein holds a mouse that once had the same symptoms as Rachel—but now runs effortlessly over her outstretched fingers. Weeks before, the mouse was treated with a single intravenous injection of a gene therapy drug developed in the lab of Gessler’s doctoral adviser, microbiologist Guangping Gao. The drug is the fruit of Gao’s 23-year career in gene therapy.

Gao did not always believe the drug would ever make it out of the laboratory, because the field of gene therapy has been plagued with seemingly insurmountable obstacles, including the deaths of test subjects. Over the past five years, however, there has been a resurgence of gene therapy in neuroscience. Scientists now argue it is our best, and perhaps only, chance at curing many diseases of the brain. And attuned to the multibillion-dollar potential of this new class of drugs, large pharmaceutical companies including Novartis, Shire, AstraZeneca and GSK are joining the fray. More than 20 biotech companies are currently developing viral gene therapies while others are working to directly edit genes.

“Gene therapies are coming along fast and furious. They’re going to earn their place,” says Kevin Starr, co-founder of Third Rock Ventures, a venture capital firm invested in three gene therapy companies. “We are probably in the greatest innovative period of understanding human disease and how to make cures ever.”

The concept of gene therapy is straightforward, beautiful even: Fix an illness caused by a faulty gene by replacing or supplementing a healthy new copy of the gene. In other words, use genes as medicine. For example, one of the earliest human tests of gene therapy was in 1990, when two young girls with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) received repeated infusions of their own white blood cells modified to fix a defective gene. It worked—with continued treatments, both children showed signs of a restored immune system and went on to lead normal lives.

Gao first met a Canavan patient in 1993, at a party celebrating his discovery of the gene and mutations that caused the disorder. A family wheeled over their 6-year-old with Canavan disease to the young scientist, who realized that the boy had donated tissue to his research project. “I’d held his DNA in my hands. I had found what was wrong with his DNA,” recalls Gao, then a Ph.D. student. Yet he had no way to fix it. At that moment, “I knew what I would do for the rest of my life—find a cure for the disease,” says Gao. “And other than gene therapy, there was no other way.”

Gene therapy is well-suited for treating inherited brain diseases. First, most drugs can’t get through the brain’s formidable blood-brain barrier, but something small, like a virus with a healthy gene tucked inside, can do it. Additionally, the brain is a closed compartment, so the risks of gene therapy are minimized—other parts of the body, the liver or the lungs, say, are undisturbed.

In the early ’90s, Gao was a student without a lab of his own. So he sought out James Wilson at the University of Pennsylvania, a rising star in the field of gene therapy. For the next 13 years, Gao would work for Wilson, engineering new and better viruses for the therapies, called “viral vectors.” These molecular FedEx trucks can be loaded with healthy versions of genes and deliver them to the correct location in the body.

Gao was in the right place at the right time. By 1999, more than 115 gene therapy clinical trials were approved in the U.S, ranging in illnesses from cancer to blood disorders to graft-versus-host disease. Wilson eagerly moved from the lab into human trials, starting with five studies utilizing a modified version of an adenovirus, a common virus known to cause respiratory infections in people. One of those trials enrolled a teenager named Jesse Gelsinger.

Gelsinger suffered from a genetic liver condition kept under control with pills and diet, but he volunteered for the study to help find a cure for infants with a fatal form of his disorder. When Gelsinger received the gene therapy in September 1999, the adenoviral vector triggered a violent immune response that damaged his liver and shut down his lungs. Four days after the injection, he was dead.

His death shuttered gene therapy funding and research in the United States. Europeans continued on, buoyed by an announcement in 2000 that gene therapy had cured a group of 20 children with SCID. But within a few years, five of them had developed leukemia from the treatment. One died, and scientists fled the field. Gao, who was not directly involved in the clinical trial that led to Gelsinger’s death, doesn’t like to talk about it now, saying only that he doesn’t blame Wilson. Gao kept his head down and quietly continued to work on other types of safer viral vectors.

The most promising candidate was adeno-associated virus (AAV)—a virus that grows in the presence of adenovirus but is a completely different type. AAVs are not quite as efficient as adenoviruses at getting genes into human cells, but they are much safer: The human immune system barely notices the virus’s outer coat or “dress,” as Gao calls it. And AAVs do not integrate into the genome of human cells, which is what caused leukemia in some of the SCID patients.

In 2008, Gao struck out on his own, taking a job as director of a brand-new gene therapy center at UMass. The paint on his office walls was still wet when Sherri Epstein walked in. A part-time administrative assistant in the building next door, Epstein had seen Gao’s appointment in a local newspaper. Epstein introduced herself and told Gao about Rachel and her previous attempt at gene therapy. Five years earlier, doctors running the first-ever Canavan gene therapy trial drilled six tiny holes into Rachel’s skull, inserted thin catheters and delivered their drug to parts of her brain. It was safe, but it didn’t work.

Not long after that initial meeting, Epstein brought Rachel to visit the lab. Once again, Gao was standing in front of a desperate parent and dying child.

At the time, only one gene therapy had been commercially approved in the world: a cancer drug in China. Regulators in the U.S. and Europe were highly skeptical of the safety and efficacy of such treatments. Gao knew he had to be careful and was determined to not repeat the errors of his predecessors by rushing into human trials. Instead, he spent the next eight years methodically producing a novel gene therapy for Canavan disease. He has spent over $2 million in federal and university research funds developing and testing it in hundreds of mice with the disease.

Gao's graduate student Seemin Ahmed initiated the lab work in 2010, and accomplished a proof-of-concept with a first-generation gene therapy that could partially rescue the disease, based on AAV9, an ideal AAV vector to get into the brain. The AAV9 therapy is so good at slipping into the brain that one can deliver the drug intravenously into the blood, and it passes through the blood-brain barrier to penetrate all areas of the brain. No drilling into the skull required. Gessler, a young German scientist studying to be a neurosurgeon, joined the project in 2012 and has since built on Ahmed's work, optimization the therapy with an improved gene construct that produces 10 times as many copies of the needed protein as earlier versions.

Gessler will never forget the first time he tested the optimized therapy in a live animal. He injected it into a young, sick mouse, hunched over with no control over its muscles. When Gessler returned to assess the results, he couldn’t find the mouse. He worried he had mislabeled a cage. He hadn’t. The mouse was there, acting just as healthy as the control mice.

Today, the treatment has cured Canavan disease in two different strains of mice engineered to have the disease. A dozen freezers line the long hallway in Gao’s laboratory, each filled to the brim with preserved tissues and viruses. “We have the therapy. We are ready,” says Gao, grinning like a schoolchild. The last barrier is financial but not impossible to overcome. Gao estimates it will require $10 million to $12 million to launch the first human clinical trials—but the potential profits are already attracting biotech attention. Two companies, which Gao declined to name, have approached him about getting involved in the effort.

The office of Voyager Therapeutics in Cambridge, Massachusetts, epitomizes a trendy startup: glass doors, whiteboard walls, minimalist orange-accented décor and a communal area with free drinks and snacks. It smells like caffeine and money.

But unlike tech startups, this office is flanked on either side by laboratories full of microscopes and viruses. The company is developing gene therapies for a handful of central nervous system disorders, including Parkinson’s, Huntington’s and Lou Gehrig’s disease. Voyager CEO Steven Paul has worked in the pharmaceutical industry developing drugs for brain disorders for over 35 years and witnessed the tribulations of gene therapy. He’s ardent that now is finally the right time.

Investors agree. Venture firms have invested more in gene therapy since 2010 than they did during the whole previous decade, and therapies for the brain far and away lead the pack, according to Dow Jones VentureSource. Last February, when Voyager was just a year old, it inked a deal with Genzyme for $100 million up front and up to $745 million in future milestone payments, including for the company’s severe brain disease programs. Voyager followed that with $60 million in investor financing in April and an $81 million initial public offering in November. Philadelphia-based Spark Therapeutics, developing gene therapies for rare eye diseases, accumulated $268 million in funding after going public in just two years and scoring a sizable licensing deal with Pfizer. Cambridge-based Bluebird Bio ended last year with a whopping $866 million in cash and cash equivalents.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story is explicit that at least some of the diseases mentioned have no alternative treatments.
However, we did want to note that only at the end does the story explain that this type of is not appropriate for all conditions of the brain, especially those that involve multiple genes.
We would have preferred to have that read that at the start of the story, to better balance the blanket statement in the headline (“GENE THERAPY MIGHT BE THE BEST, AND PERHAPS ONLY, CHANCE AT CURING BRAIN DISEASES.”)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hamilton, ON August 11, 2016 - A study led by McMaster University researchers has found that, contrary to recent reports, flu nasal sprays provide similar protection against influenza as standard flu shots.

Published today in the scientific journal Annals of Internal Medicine, the study shows that the nose spray had a similar effect to the standard flu shot. Previous recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) had previously called for nasal sprays, or live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV), not be used during the 2016-2017 flu season.

Dr. Mark Loeb, lead author of the study, says his team's findings challenge the ACIP's recommendations towards flu shots, or inactivated vaccines.

"Our study is the first blinded randomized controlled trial to compare the direct and indirect effect of the live vaccine versus the inactivated vaccine," said Loeb, a professor in McMaster's Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine.

"Our results are important because in previous years the live vaccine had first been preferred for children. In fact, as late as June 2014, the live vaccine was preferred. Then, subsequently, it was no longer preferred and now not recommended at all. Our trial showed no difference between the two in protecting entire communities."

For the study, Loeb's team conducted a three-year trial in a Hutterite colony, where people live communally and are relatively isolated from cities and towns, to determine whether vaccinating children and adolescents with the flu nasal spray provided better direct and community protection than the standard flu shot.

The researchers randomly assigned 1,186 children in 52 Hutterite colonies in Alberta and Saskatchewan, Canada to receive either the nasal spray vaccine or the flu shot and also followed 3,425 community members who did not receive a flu vaccine.

Average vaccine coverage among children in the nasal spray group was 76.9 per cent versus 72.3 per cent in the flu shot group.

The original intention of the study was to show that nasal spray vaccines would provide better protection than flu shots, but Loeb says the conclusions of the study are now especially important, given the ACIP's recommendations.

"The ACIP's decision was an unprecedented decision in influenza vaccine policy-making for children. Our study challenges previous studies because our results show conclusively that the vaccines show similar protection when both direct and indirect effects are taken into account."

Loeb says his team will continue to study herd immunity with different vaccine formulations by vaccinating children. They are also looking at the effect of repeated vaccination of children.

This study was funded by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.

A downloadable photo of Dr. Mark Loeb is available here
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Since the study looked a two forms of influenza vaccine administration, it obviously addresses the question of comparing alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Worcester, Mass. - When the standard malaria medications failed to help 18 critically ill patients, the attending physician in a Congo clinic acted under the "compassionate use" doctrine and prescribed a not-yet-approved malaria therapy made only from the dried leaves of the Artemisia annua plant. In just five days, all 18 people fully recovered. This small but stunningly successful trial offers hope to address the growing problem of drug-resistant malaria.

Details of the cases are documented in the paper "Artemisia annua dried leaf tablets treated malaria resistant to ACT and i.v. artesunate: case reports" by an international team lead by Pamela Weathers, PhD, professor of biology and biotechnology at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI), who has pioneered the use of dried leaves of Artemisia annua (DLA) as a malaria therapy.

"To our knowledge, this is the first report of dried-leaf Artemisia annua controlling ACT-resistant malaria in humans," the authors of the Phytomedicine paper note, adding that more comprehensive clinical trials on patients with drug-resistant malaria are warranted. "Successful treatment of all 18 ACT-resistant cases suggests that DLA should be rapidly incorporated into the antimalarial regimen for Africa," they added, "and possibly wherever else ACT resistance has emerged."

Watch a video about research at WPI related to this study.

The report documents the experiences of 18 patients in the North Kivu province of the Democratic Republic of Congo who showed symptoms of malaria and were originally treated with the recommended medication: artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), which blends artemisinin, a chemical extract from Artemisia annua, with one or more other drugs that attack the malaria parasite in different ways.

The 18 patients, ranging in age from 14 months to 60 years, did not respond to the standard ACT treatment, and all lapsed into severe malaria, defined by symptoms that can include loss of consciousness, respiratory distress, convulsions, and pulmonary edema. One patient, a five-year-old child, became comatose. All were then treated with intravenously administered artesunate, the frontline medication for severe malaria, but again they showed no improvement.

As a last resort, doctors turned to dried-leaf Artemisia (DLA), a therapy developed and extensively studied by Weathers and her team at WPI. After five days of treatment with tablets made from only the dried and powered leaves of Artemisia (which has been prepared and analyzed using methods developed by Weathers and postdoctoral fellow Melissa Towler), all 18 patients fully recovered. Laboratory tests showed they had no parasites remaining in their blood. (Weathers noted more than 100 other drug-resistant patients also have been successfully treated with DLA tablets.)

"These 18 patients were dying," Weathers said. "So to see 100 percent recover, even the child who had lapsed into a coma, was just amazing. It's a small study, but the results are powerful."

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), more than 212 million people contracted malaria in 2015 and some 429,000 died, with young children and pregnant women being particularly vulnerable. Caused by a mosquito-borne parasite, the illness is reported in nearly 100 countries and threatens nearly half of the world's population. ACT, the current recommended therapy, is expensive to produce and is in short supply in areas hit hardest by the disease. In addition, while the combination therapy is designed to be less prone to the drug resistance that has rendered previous antimalarial agents ineffective, increasingly the malaria parasite is showing signs of resistance to ACT, particularly in Southeast Asia.

Weathers began her research on artemisinin and Artemesia annua (also known as sweet wormwood) more than 25 years ago. In recent years, she has turned her attention to the use of DLA as an alternative to conventional antimalarial drugs. Noting that Artemisia annua, which is classified as a generally regarded as safe (GRAS) herb, has been consumed by humans and used as an herbal therapy for thousands of years, often in the form of a tea, she became intrigued by the potential for using the dried plant, rather than just a chemical extract, as a malaria treatment. A study she published in Photochemistry Reviews in 2011 was the first to demonstrate that dried leaves of the Artemisia annua plant delivers 40 times more artemisinin to the blood than does the drug based on the chemical extract of the plant.

In a paper published in PLOS ONE the following year, Weathers and her team showed that not only does DLA have antimalarial properties, it is more effective in knocking out the parasite and reduced the level of parasite infection more completely in mice. In a 2015 study in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, the WPI researchers, with colleagues at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, showed that dried Artemisia leaves cured rodents infected with malaria strains that were known to be resistant to artemisinin. And, in an experiment that accelerated the evolution of the malaria parasite by passing it through up to 49 generations of mice, the parasite showed no signs of resistance to DLA.

Weathers says the superior performance of DLA in comparison to ACT, as well as its ability to kill drug-resistant parasites and avoid the resistance trap, itself, is likely due to the synergistic effects of a complex array of phytochemicals contained in the plant's leaves, several of which are also known to have antimalarial properties and others of which may act both to enhance the absorption of artemisinin into the bloodstream and bolster its effectiveness against malaria. In effect, the dried leaves constitute a robust natural combination therapy, one whose benefits far surpass those of ACT and other combination drugs.

"We have done a lot of work to understand the biochemistry of these compounds, which include a number of flavonoids and terpenes, so we can better understand the role they play in the pharmacological activity of the dried leaves," Weathers said. "The more we learn, the more excited we become about the potential for DLA to be the medication of choice for combatting malaria worldwide. Artemisia annua is known to be efficacious against a range of other diseases, including other tropical maladies and certain cancers, so in our lab we are already at work investigating the effectiveness of DLA with other diseases."

Another advantage of DLA over conventional malaria treatments is its low cost and the relative simplicity of its manufacture, Weathers said. While the processes for manufacturing ACT is costlier and requires a higher degree of expertise, producing DLA tablets can be accomplished with simpler equipment and a modest amount of training. Growing Artemisia annua and producing and testing the tablets, Weathers noted, are ideal local business that can provide jobs in impoverished areas and greatly expand access to antimalarial therapy.

In fact, she has already established a supply chain in Africa that includes growing and harvesting high-producing cultivars in East Africa, along with GMP (Good Manufacturing Practice) processing operations in Uganda where the leaves are dried, pulverized, and homogenized, where the powder is compacted into tablets, and where the tablets are tested to verify their dosage. This supply chain helped produce the tablets used to treat the 18 patients in the Democratic Republic of Congo. "This simple technology can be owned, operated, and distributed by Africans for Africans," Weathers said.

Founded in 1865 in Worcester, Mass., WPI is one of the nation's first engineering and technology universities. Its 14 academic departments offer more than 50 undergraduate and graduate degree programs in science, engineering, technology, business, the social sciences, and the humanities and arts, leading to bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees. WPI's talented faculty work with students on interdisciplinary research that seeks solutions to important and socially relevant problems in fields as diverse as the life sciences and bioengineering, energy, information security, materials processing, and robotics. Students also have the opportunity to make a difference to communities and organizations around the world through the university's innovative Global Projects Program. There are more than 40 WPI project centers throughout the Americas, Africa, Asia-Pacific, and Europe.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release states all patients had previously received artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), followed by intravenously administered artesunate, a medication for severe malaria, but did not respond to either.
The study is perhaps different than most because these patients had exhausted other therapies available to them and received this new therapy under experimental “compassionate use” rules.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have developed a new HPV (human papilloma virus) vaccine which protects against nine types of the virus - seven of which cause most cases of cervical cancer. The new vaccine offers significantly greater protection than the current vaccine, which protects against only two cancer causing types of HPV.

A pivotal international clinical trial compared the safety and efficacy of the new vaccine, Gardasil 9, with the current vaccine, Gardasil, in more than 14,200 women aged between 16 and 26 years old. The findings indicate that if uninfected populations are vaccinated with Gardasil 9, approximately 90 per cent of all cervical cancers worldwide could be prevented.

Published in the New England Journal of Medicine, the study found that, among uninfected women, Gardasil 9 was 97 per cent effective at preventing high-grade cervical, vulvar and vaginal disease caused by HPV 31, 33, 45, 52 and 58, and was equally effective as the current Gardasil vaccine in preventing diseases caused by HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18.

Professor Jack Cuzick of Queen Mary University of London, who co-authored the report and participated in the design and analysis of the study, and served on the Trial Advisory Board, comments: "This is a significant achievement. The new vaccine, Gardasil 9, is not only safe but will offer greatly improved protection against cervical and other cancers. Eventually this will mean less screening is needed, as women will have greater protection from the outset.

"Gardasil 9 offers the potential to increase overall cervical cancer prevention from 70 to 90 per cent, nearly eliminating this cancer among vaccinated women. However, it's crucial to remember that vaccination must be done before exposure to the virus. Our focus for prevention must be on girls aged 12-13, as the current UK vaccine programme is doing, but the vaccine may also be appropriate for women 25-45 as part of a screening appointment."

Until late last year, there were two available vaccines to protect against HPV related disease (Cervarix and Gardasil). The UK currently uses Gardasil which protects against four HPV types and offers about 70 per cent protection against cervical cancer, and also significantly reduces the risk of other types of cancer and genital warts.

However, researchers have been trying to find methods to completely eliminate cervical cancer and other HPV related disease and by adding five more cancer related HPV types. The development of the new Gardasil 9 vaccine makes an important step in that direction.

HPV is the most common sexually transmitted virus. Many people infected with HPV clear it from their systems with no lasting health concerns and some types of the virus are low risk, causing warts or verrucas. However, other types are high risk, causing cervical cancer (and less commonly vulvar, vaginal, penile, anal, and throat cancers). Almost all cases of cervical cancer occur as a result of infection with high risk types of HPV.

Cervical cancer is still the fourth most common cancer in women, with over 500,000 cases and 250,000 deaths per year worldwide. In the UK around 3,000 women a year are diagnosed with cervical cancer and in 2011 there were around 970 deaths.

In the UK, all girls aged 12 to 13 are offered HPV vaccination as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme.

Professor Jack Cuzick concludes: "Following these important findings, this vaccine has been licenced in the USA and approval is currently being sought in the UK and other countries. It is encouraging that the Joint committee on Vaccines and Immunisation is reviewing Gardasil 9 in light of this new evidence."

This clinical trial was funded by Merck.

Charli Scouller 

PR Manager (School of Medicine and Dentistry) 

Queen Mary University of London 

c.scouller@qmul.ac.uk 

Tel: 020 7882 7943

Queen Mary University of London (QMUL) is one of the UK's leading universities, and one of the largest institutions in the University of London, with 20,260 students from more than 150 countries.

A member of the Russell Group, we work across the humanities and social sciences, medicine and dentistry, and science and engineering, with inspirational teaching directly informed by our research - in the most recent national assessment of the quality of research, we were placed ninth in the UK (REF 2014).

We also offer something no other university can: a stunning self-contained residential campus in London's East End. As well as our home at Mile End, we have campuses at Whitechapel, Charterhouse Square and West Smithfield dedicated to the study of medicine, and a base for legal studies at Lincoln's Inn Fields.

We have a rich history in London with roots in Europe's first public hospital, St Barts; England's first medical school, The London; one of the first colleges to provide higher education to women, Westfield College; and the Victorian philanthropic project, the People's Palace based at Mile End.

QMUL has an annual turnover of £350m, a research income worth £100m, and generates employment and output worth £700m to the UK economy each year.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does point out that there are two older vaccines that are available. It notes that the quadrivalent vaccine protects against 4 strains of HPV, offering about 70 percent protection against cervical cancer, whereas the 9-valent vaccine protects against 9 strains and can prevent up to 90 percent of all cervical cancers. The release also mentions in passing that the vaccine can be discussed as part of a screening program in women ages 25 to 45. We feel that the release could have emphasized this more.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It’s the person who wakes up at the crack of dawn on the weekend, puts on shiny spandex and disappears with a mountain bike for hours at a time. It’s the guy who heads to the pool one night a week and endures a workout that might make Michael Phelps gasp for air. It’s the weekly rock climbers and double spin class-takers schvitzing their Sunday away. These weekend warriors cram the recommended amount of exercise into one or two days, while the rest of us faithfully head to the gym multiple times a week for a half-hour hamster run on the treadmill.

Related: Americans keep getting fatter, new report shows

A paper published January 9 in JAMA Internal Medicine suggests these warriors may be onto something. In a study based on nearly 64,000 adults, researchers in the U.K. found that weekend exercise appears to be just as effective at preventing heart disease and cancer as exercise done more frequently. This is great news for anyone who feels too busy on weekdays to work out but enjoys outdoor activity on the weekend.

“I think that the weekend warrior physical activity pattern is beneficial because they are actually doing a large proportion of vigorous intensity activity. And vigorous activity makes you fit, and fitness reduces your risk of disease and death,” says Gary O’Donovan, a researcher in physical activity and sedentary behavior at England’s Loughborough University and lead author of the paper.

O’Donovan and fellow researchers looked at data on middle-aged adults who responded to a government-sponsored household survey conducted from 1994 to 2012. The survey included questions about health history and fitness habits. The researchers then cross-referenced this information with health department death records.

They found the risk of death from all causes was about 30 percent lower for weekend warriors, compared with adults who maintained a sedentary lifestyle. And the warriors had a 40 percent lower risk of cardiovascular death and an 18 percent lower risk for cancer-related death. The mortality rates of weekend warriors were roughly the same as those who claimed to exercise more than two days a week but for shorter durations.

However, there are also some limitations to this study, the researchers say. More than 90 percent of the subjects were white. The information about physical activity was reported by the participants, and it’s likely that many were too generous in their estimates of how much time they spent at the gym. Unfortunately, taking 20 minutes in locker room to put on your sneakers doesn’t count as a workout.

Related: Severe childhood obesity is on the rise in the U.S.

It’s recommended that people get 150 minutes (or two and half hours) of exercise each week, based on guidelines from the American Heart Association, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other medical authorities. This could be something as simple as a brisk walk or other low-impact options for vigorous exercise about 20 minutes a day. (Experts often encourage recreational athletes to not exercise more than an hour a day.) “In theory, someone who did one bout of 150 minutes of moderate exercise is a weekend warrior,” says O’Donovan.

This study shows that it doesn’t matter how you decide to split up the recommended weekly amount of exercise. You just need to do it.

However, experts caution that it is possible to overdo it, and more exercise than two and a half hours a week can actually be unhelpful and even harmful. One study, published in 2014 in the journal Heart, suggests that in people with existing heart disease, the risk for cardiac arrest and stroke was the same for people who exercised more than an hour a day compared with those who didn’t exercise at all. The coronary heart disease patients who stuck with the recommended 150 minutes a week had the lowest risk for heart attack and stroke.

Related: Post-workout cold immersion likely won’t help you heal

There are risks that come with a weekend warrior exercise schedule, especially for people who aren’t used to being active. “I would be more concerned about what’s happening at the point of exercise—not the long-term benefits,” says Dr. Howard Andrew Selinger, chair of family medicine at Quinnipiac University. He says someone who is not in good shape is at risk for sudden cardiac arrest or acute injury, such as spraining muscles or putting too much stress on joints.

O’Donovan encourages aspiring weekend warriors to start slowly to avoid any health problems. He says middle-aged adults should exercise moderately during the first 12 weeks and then slowly build up to more vigorous activity.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Although the focus of the story was the “weekend warrior,” several comments were included suggesting alternative exercise strategies, including: “This could be something as simple as a brisk walk or other low-impact options for vigorous exercise about 20 minutes a day.  “In theory, someone who did one bout of 150 minutes of moderate exercise is a weekend warrior,” says O’Donovan. This study shows that it doesn’t matter how you decide to split up the recommended weekly amount of exercise. You just need to do it.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Giving babies and toddlers antibiotics when doctors are certain they have ear infections can help speed up their recovery, supporting current treatment guidelines for children between the ages of 6 months and 23 months.

However, antibiotics do come with significant side effects including diarrhea, rashes, yeast infections and vomiting. Overuse of drugs also contributes to antibiotic resistance, so careful selection of who should take antibiotics is necessary according to 2 studies published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine.

According to one of the studies, ear infection, or acute otitis media, is the most frequently diagnosed illness in children in the United States, and most children with these ear infections are routinely given antibiotics.

But just 2 months ago, a new study confirmed practice guidelines from 2004, which recommend that children older than 2 with a confirmed diagnosis of an acute ear infection do not need to be given antibiotics because the drugs do not significantly speed up recovery.

The foundation for the "watchful waiting" treatment recommendation instead of taking drugs is based on this and previous studies that did not have very many children under age 2 in the clinical trials. This made concluding that the same treatment works in the youngest age group very difficult.

These 2 new studies were designed to provide the research to fill the gap, and clarify treatment recommendations for babies and toddlers. The children in these latest trials had their ear infections confirmed by experts (otoscopists). Researchers found that the youngsters who received a placebo did not recover as quickly as those getting the amoxicillin-clavulanate, an antibiotic that has been shown to be effective for earaches.

However the differences were not huge. In the United States study, 80% of the children on antibiotics felt better on the seventh day of treatment; 74% of the children taking a placebo also felt better on the seventh day.

Dr. Jerome Klein, a pediatric infectious disease specialist from Boston University's Medical School, says in an accompanying editorial that these two studies resolve the controversy over giving antibiotics versus watchful waiting in kids with confirmed ear infections.

"More young children with a certain diagnosis of acute otitis media recover more quickly when they are treated with an appropriate antimicrobial agent," Klein wrote.

Dr. Richard Rosenfeld, who is a professor and chairman of otolaryngology at SUNY Downstate and Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn, New York, has been charged with reviewing the 2004 American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines for treating ear infections. He, too, has been eagerly awaiting the results of these 2 studies.

One of the strengths of both studies, Rosenfeld said, is that the researchers took the time to make a solid diagnosis. Only children who really had ear infections were included in the trials. But Rosenfeld doesn't see the results as black and white as Klein.

"Medicine is about gray zones and balancing the risks and benefits," Rosenfeld says. "Parents and doctors need to understand what the benefits and what the downside of treatments are."

"If you received a placebo and you have a 74% chance of having symptoms go away or improvement [of illness]" – compared with the 80% in the antibiotic group ... "as a parent, how impressed are you about a 6% difference?" In treatment outcomes for pain, there was no difference, he notes.

In both studies, children taking the real drugs had more side effects. The study authors caution about the overuse of these drugs and the risk of antibiotic resistance. The Finnish noted that limiting use of antibiotics may reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and increase the chance the future use of antibiotic will be effective.

Rosenfeld says it's never wrong to prescribe an antibiotic for a well-diagnosed ear infection. "If the child has high fever, severe ear pain, the child is really miserable, has a fever or draining from the ear or double ear infection and is under 2 years old, then prescribing antibiotic is probably the right thing to do."

But waiting to take the antibiotic isn't a bad idea either. He says he frequently writes a prescription for parents but tells them to hold off from filling it for 3 days. If the child still has symptoms 3 days later, then they should get the antibiotic and start giving it to their child. If you do that, 2 out of 3 parents don't fill out the prescription."

Which is why he says what to do is still not clear-cut. He also points out that if antibiotics don't relieve a child's pain, pain medications will.

Rosenfeld believes these latest studies reinforce an important message: "It's an opportunity for a conversation with your pediatrician." Parents need to weigh the benefits of what antibiotics can do in terms of killing the bacteria (if the ear infection is caused by a bacteria and not a virus) and the side effects their child may have to endure, as well as the possibility that exposing bacteria to antimicrobials may make the drugs less effective in the future.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the rationale supporting watchful waiting, which is the primary alternative to antibiotics for an acute ear infection.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A genetically modified poliovirus may help some patients fight a deadly form of brain cancer, researchers report.

The experimental treatment seems to have extended survival in a small group of patients with glioblastoma who faced a grim prognosis because standard treatments had failed, Duke University researchers say.

"I've been doing this for 50 years and I've never seen results like this," says Dr. Darell Bigner, the director emeritus of the The Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center at the Duke Cancer Institute, who is helping develop the treatment.

But the researchers and other brain-cancer doctors caution the research is at a very early stage. In the study, only 21 percent of patients experienced a prolonged survival. Much more follow-up research is needed to better assess and hopefully improve the treatment's effectiveness, the researchers say.

"We have to be careful," says Annick Desjardins, a Duke neuro-oncologist who helped conduct the study. "But we have long-term survivors. We are seeing something we don't normally see with patients with glioblastoma."

Dr. David Reardon, clinical director of the Center for Neuro-Oncology at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, says the Duke group's results may represent "a good, solid, important step forward" for patients with no alternatives.

"Unfortunately, for most patients this is not going to be the answer yet," says Reardon, who used to work at Duke but wasn't involved in the new research. "My fear is that every patient and family dealing with the devastating disease of glioblastoma is going to think the poliovirus is the cure. Unfortunately, the patients who are benefiting do reflect a relatively small percentage of the population."

The Duke results were published online Tuesday by the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with their presentation at the 22nd International Conference on Brain Tumor Research in Norway.

Glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive malignant brain tumor in adults. It's the cancer that killed former Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., and former Vice President Joe Biden's son Beau. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., is fighting glioblastoma.

The Duke researchers decided to try to use a genetically modified version of the poliovirus, which can cause a devastating form of paralysis, because of the virus's ability to infect nervous system cells.

The scientists removed one of the virus's genes to prevent it from causing polio and replaced that gene with one from a harmless virus known as a rhinovirus, which ordinarily causes the common cold.

The engineered virus was then infused directly into tumors in patients' brains with a tube inserted through a hole in the skull. The modified virus retains the ability to infect and kill brain tumor cells, and also appears to trigger the patient's own immune system cells to attack the tumors, the researchers say.

Between 2012 and 2017, the researchers treated 61 patients, trying various doses of the modified virus to determine which was safest and most effective.

There are substantial risks. The treatment can cause a dangerous swelling in the brain that can lead to seizures and other complications, the researchers found. One patient suffered a life-threatening blood clot in the brain that required surgery.

But overall, the median length of survival was 12.5 months for patients treated with poliovirus, compared with 11.3 months for a similar group of patients treated in the past, the researchers report. And starting at two years after treatment, the two groups' survival rate began to diverge, the researchers reported.

After 24 months, 21 percent of the patients treated with the virus had survived compared with 14 percent of the historical comparison group. After three years, 21 percent of the poliovirus treated patients survived, compared with 4 percent of the other group, according to the researchers.

Two patients have survived more than six years, Bigner says. One has survived more than five years.

"You just don't see this percentage of long-term survivors with this disease," Bigner says. "Those that have survived more than two years are in remission, and we expect them to continue to be long-term survivors."

Some other researchers praised the results.

"We're extraordinarily encouraged by what we see with this data," says Mitchel Berger, chairman of neurosurgery at the University of California, San Francisco and director of its center for brain tumors. "It's phenomenal."

But some cancer doctors caution that comparing the outcomes for patients receiving the virus treatment to what would have happened to similar patients in the past could produce misleading conclusions.

The Duke researchers have started a follow-up study combining the treatment with a chemotherapy drug to try to improve the results. They also plan to combine the treatment with other drugs, including some called checkpoint inhibitors, to harness the immune system to fight cancer.

In addition, the researchers are planning to try the approach on children with brain cancer, as well as other types of cancer, including melanoma and breast cancer. "We believe we are going to be able to increase the results even more significantly," Bigner says.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned standard treatment without getting specifics, and also mentioned plans to combine this treatment with chemotherapy and other drugs. It could have also mentioned other studies that are attempting to find a cure for glioblastoma.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Chicago — A single breath may be all it takes to identify the return of lung cancer after surgery, according to a study posted online today by The Annals of Thoracic Surgery.

Exhaled breath contains thousands of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that vary in composition and pattern depending on a person’s health status. A subset of four VOCs—called carbonyl compounds because of their carbon base—have been discovered in the exhaled breath of lung cancer patients. Being able to identify this lung cancer “signature” through a simple breath test has emerged as one of the most promising ways to diagnose the disease. Now the test is being used to monitor for disease recurrence.

Erin M. Schumer, MD, MPH, Victor van Berkel, MD, PhD, and colleagues from the University of Louisville analyzed breath samples collected before and after surgery from 31 lung cancer patients and compared their carbonyl VOCs levels with samples from 187 healthy patients.

The researchers found a significant decrease in overall carbonyl VOC levels following surgery; in fact, three of the four carbonyl VOCs normalized after surgery, matching levels in the control group.

“The rapid normalization of almost all of the four compounds after surgery provides strong evidence that they are directly produced by the tumor environment,” said Dr. Schumer. “This study confirms that the technology is accurate.”

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death. The American Cancer Society (ACS) estimates that more than 224,000 Americans will be diagnosed with lung cancer this year, and more than 158,000 lung cancer patients will die—that translates to 433 lung cancer deaths per day in the United States.

Dr. Schumer said those grim statistics underscore the need for early detection, “We hope that breath analysis will allow us to diagnose patients with primary or recurrent lung cancer long before they suffer from symptoms, when we have more options for treating them, giving them the best chance for cure.”

Currently, lung cancer patients are followed after surgery with chest computed tomography (CT) scans, which can be inconvenient, expensive, and expose the patient to radiation. “We hope that the breath analysis can serve as the primary screening tool for cancer recurrence and a CT scan ordered only if the breath test suggests that there has been a change,” said Dr. van Berkel.

How the Breath Test WorksThe process of breath analysis is relatively simple. The patient blows a single breath into a specialized balloon. The balloon is then connected to a pump that pulls the breath over a small microchip (smaller than a quarter), trapping the chemicals. The microchip is sent to the lab, where the chemicals are analyzed within hours. Breath collection can be performed in the doctor’s office. The pump is reusable; the balloon, microchip, and lab test together cost around $20, all supporting the increasing acceptance of breath tests as a cost-effective, easy-to-perform, non-invasive, and rapid option for the diagnosis of lung cancer.

“The great potential with breath analysis is detecting lung cancer at any point, both as a primary screening tool and to follow patients after disease has been treated,” said Dr. van Berkel. “The technology is pretty robust. Our next step is getting approval from the FDA.”

Note: This work was supported by the Coulter Foundation, V Foundation, National Science Foundation, and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. In addition, Drs. Bousamra, van Berkel, and Fu disclose a financial relationship with Breath Diagnostics, Inc.

For a copy of The Annals article, contact Jennifer Bagley at 312-202-5865 or jbagley@sts.org.

Founded in 1964, The Society of Thoracic Surgeons is a not-for-profit organization representing more than 7,200 cardiothoracic surgeons, researchers, and allied health care professionals worldwide who are dedicated to ensuring the best possible outcomes for surgeries of the heart, lung, and esophagus, as well as other surgical procedures within the chest. The Society’s mission is to enhance the ability of cardiothoracic surgeons to provide the highest quality patient care through education, research, and advocacy.

The Annals of Thoracic Surgery is the official journal of STS and the Southern Thoracic Surgical Association. It has a 5-year impact factor of 4.104, the highest of any cardiothoracic surgery journal worldwide.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This release effectively points out that current practice uses periodic CT scans as the method of monitoring the potential recurrence of lung cancer in patients. It states that the breath analysis might be a substitute for the more expensive imaging procedure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ASCO Perspective

“This is one more example of how immunotherapy is making steady gains against a number of cancers. Immunotherapy has been shown to be effective in other types of lung cancer, and now we’re seeing encouraging improvements in advanced squamous lung cancer, which historically has been very difficult to treat,” said ASCO Expert David Graham, MD, FASCO.

CHICAGO – Initial findings from a randomized phase III clinical trial show that patients with advanced squamous non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) benefit more from initial treatment with PD-L1 targeted immunotherapy atezolizumab (Tecentriq®) and chemotherapy than from chemotherapy alone -- 29% had a reduced risk of disease worsening or death compared with those who received chemotherapy alone. At 12 months, cancer had not worsened in twice as many patients who received atezolizumab plus chemotherapy compared to those who only received chemotherapy. This benefit was observed across all PD-L1 expressing sub-groups.

The findings will be featured in a press briefing today and presented at the 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Annual Meeting.

“Until now, there have been few treatment advances for squamous non-small-cell lung cancer. Our findings may provide a new potential treatment option for this type of cancer,” said lead study author Robert M. Jotte, MD, PhD, Medical Director and Co-Chair, USON Thoracic Committee, Rocky Mountain Cancer Centers in Denver, CO. “We used to think that chemotherapy just knocked down the patient’s immune system and that it would be irrational to combine it with immunotherapy, but growing research, including this study, shows that chemotherapy can help trigger the immune response to the tumor, helping the immunotherapy treatment work better.”

Squamous NSCLC, which accounts for 25-30% of NSCLCs, is very difficult to treat. Fewer than 15% of people with advanced squamous NSCLC survive a year after diagnosis, and less than 2% survive five years.

Recent studies have also found a benefit of combining immunotherapy with chemotherapy in non-squamous lung cancer. Given those findings, along with the results from this trial, a rapid change in clinical practice is expected, noted Dr. Jotte.

About the Study

 The IMpower131 trial enrolled 1,021 patients with stage IV squamous NSCLC. Tumors were tested for PD-L1 expression, but patients were included in the trial regardless of tumor PD-L1 expression level. Patients with EGFR or ALK gene changes in the tumor received targeted treatments before starting therapy on this trial. The study participants were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups. Outcomes for only two of the groups, however, are being reported in this presentation:

Outcome data for the third treatment group, which received atezolizumab with a slightly different chemotherapy regimen (carboplatin and paclitaxel), are not yet available.

Key Findings 

 In this study, 29% of all patients, regardless of PD-L1 expression, had a reduced risk of disease worsening or death, compared with those who received chemotherapy alone. Importantly, there was a doubling of progression-free survival (PFS) benefit with this combination: at 12 months, cancer had not worsened in 24.7% patients receiving immunotherapy and chemotherapy, compared to 12% of those receiving chemotherapy alone.

Improved progression-free survival was observed in all groups of patients who received immunotherapy and chemotherapy, including those with PD-L1-negative tumors and liver metastases. Overall survival data are not yet mature.

This is the first phase III trial of an immunotherapy-based combined modality treatment to show a significant improvement in progression-free survival in advanced squamous NSCLC, according to the authors. Although the difference between treatment groups is modest, a statistically significant improvement shows that, overall, people with advanced squamous lung cancer can benefit when immunotherapy is added to standard treatment, according to the authors.

Although the rate of severe side effects was higher with the combined modality treatment than with chemotherapy alone (68% vs. 57%), it had a manageable safety profile, consistent with known safety risks of the individual therapies. The most common side effects of atezolizumab included skin rash, colitis, and low thyroid hormone.

At this interim analysis a statistically significant overall survival (OS) benefit was not observed (median OS was 14 months for atezolizumab plus chemotherapy vs. 13.9 months for chemotherapy alone). Researchers are continuing to follow patients and anticipate a subsequent analysis later this year.

Next Steps

 More research is needed to determine which patients benefit the most from the addition of immunotherapy to standard chemotherapy. The researchers will explore tumor PD-L1 expression and other molecular markers, such as tumor mutational burden (TMB), that may predict whether a patient will benefit from this treatment regimen.

This study received funding from F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.

View the disclosures for the 2018 ASCO Annual Meeting News Planning Team.

ATTRIBUTION TO THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY ANNUAL MEETING IS REQUESTED IN ALL COVERAGE.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This trial is a direct comparison with existing treatment.
As it turns out, a similar trial involving squamous cell lung cancer patients, also presented at ASCO, that used a different immunotherapy drug, did report improved overall survival, but those results were not public when this release was written.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, April 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A vaccine to prevent breast cancer's return in women with a history of the disease has triggered the desired immune response in early research.

The vaccine under development is aimed at preventing recurrence in women who have a form of tumor known as HER2-positive, according to researcher Dr. Diane Hale, a research resident in general surgery at Brooke Army Medical Center at Fort Sam Houston, in San Antonio.

She is set to present results of the study on Monday at the annual meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research in Chicago.

The vaccine, known as the "HER2-based peptide vaccine AE37," is designed to harness the power of the patient's immune system, based on its reaction to a cancer-linked peptide (protein).

"The theory is that once you form that [immune] response to the specific peptide, if the body has a recurrence, it will recognize that cancer as a bad thing, a foreign thing," Hale explained in an association news release.

The study is a phase 2 study, meant to evaluate the vaccine's effectiveness and any side effects. Phase 3 studies are needed before the vaccine could be approved.

The science is early, Hale stressed, and it will take at least five years before the vaccine could conceivably be available if ongoing studies bear out.

HER2-positive breast cancer tests positive for a protein known as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, or HER2, which promotes the tumor cell growth. About one of every five breast cancers involves cancer cells that churn out an excess of HER2 due to a genetic mutation. HER2-positive breast cancers are often more aggressive than other types, according to the American Cancer Society.

The goal of the vaccine, Hale said, is to educate the body to respond to that HER2-based peptide, so it will recognize the cancer when it recurs and attack it.

"If your immune system has been educated by the vaccine to recognize the tumor cells, we think it will allow the immune system to take care of any individual [cancer] cells trying to set up shop," explained Dr. Elizabeth Mittendorf, a surgical oncologist at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. She is the principal investigator on the trial.

The study involved 217 breast cancer survivors who had gone through their treatment and were free of disease at the start of the trial. The women were randomly assigned to receive either the vaccine paired with an immune stimulant, or the immune stimulant alone.

The women received monthly injections for six months. The researchers then conducted a variety of tests to gauge each woman's immune system response.

The investigators found that in the vaccinated group, 86 percent of patients showed a significant response, compared with 27 percent of those in the "control" group who did not get the injection.

How to explain the 27 percent who responded without the vaccine? "For the controls, even without having their immune systems 'educated' towards HER2 specifically, they may still mount a response because they have previously seen HER2 within their own cancer," Hale said.

Those who were vaccinated also displayed a decrease in certain cells that suppress the immune system. That is a good thing, Hale said, because "an increase in these cells has been found to be associated with [cancer] recurrence."

Don Diamond, director of translational vaccine research and a professor of virology at the City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center in Duarte, Calif., reviewed the findings and said, "Their approach is well thought out and makes sense."

Still, the study remains very preliminary, he cautioned. "Whether it actually has an increase in survival remains to be seen," he said.

That study will be done, Hale said, and they plan to follow the women for three years and look at survival differences.

But until the vaccine is linked to an actual survival benefit or improvement in tumor status, Diamond said, no one can say if it helps the patients in a meaningful way.

Numerous vaccines to prevent breast cancer recurrence are currently under study, he noted.

Findings presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

To learn more about immune-based cancer therapies, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Barely satisfactory – the story at least mentioned that “Numerous vaccines to prevent breast cancer recurrence are currently under study.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Yoga enthusiasts link the practice to a long list of health benefits, including greater flexibility and range of motion, stronger muscles, better posture and balance, reduced emotional and physical stress, and increased self-awareness and self-esteem.

But definitively proving these benefits is challenging, requiring years of costly research. A pharmaceutical company is unlikely to fund a study that doesn’t involve a drug, and in any event, the research requires a large group of volunteers tracked over a very long time.

The subjects must provide health measurements at the outset, learn the proper poses, continue to do them regularly for years and be regularly evaluated.

No one knows these challenges better than Dr. Loren M. Fishman, a physiatrist at Columbia University who specializes in rehabilitative medicine. For years, he has been gathering evidence on yoga and bone health, hoping to determine whether yoga might be an effective therapy for osteoporosis.

The idea is not widely accepted in the medical community, but then, researchers know comparatively little about complementary medicine in general. So in 2005, Dr. Fishman began a small pilot study of yoga moves that turned up some encouraging results. Eleven practitioners had increased bone density in their spine and hips, he reported in 2009, compared with seven controls who did not practice yoga.

Knowing that more than 700,000 spinal fractures and more than 300,000 hip fractures occur annually in the United States, Dr. Fishman hoped that similar findings from a much larger study might convince doctors that this low-cost and less dangerous alternative to bone-loss drugs is worth pursuing.

Those medications can produce adverse side effects like gastrointestinal distress and fractures of the femur. Indeed, a recent study published in Clinical Interventions in Aging found that among 126,188 women found to have osteoporosis, all of whom had Medicare Part D drug coverage, only 28 percent started bone drug therapy within a year of diagnosis.

Many of those who avoided drugs were trying to avoid gastrointestinal problems.

On the other hand, yoga’s “side effects,” Dr. Fishman and colleagues wrote recently, “include better posture, improved balance, enhanced coordination, greater range of motion, higher strength, reduced levels of anxiety and better gait.”

Weight-bearing activity is often recommended to patients with bone loss, and Dr. Fishman argues that certain yoga positions fit the bill.

“Yoga puts more pressure on bone than gravity does,” he said in an interview. “By opposing one group of muscles against another, it stimulates osteocytes, the bone-making cells.”

Most experts argue that it’s difficult, perhaps impossible, for adults to gain significant bone mass. Undeterred, Dr. Fishman invested a chunk of his own money and with three collaborators — Yi-Hsueh Lu of The Rockefeller University, Bernard Rosner of Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and Dr. Gregory Chang of New York University — solicited volunteers worldwide via the Internet for a follow-up to his small pilot study.

Of the 741 people who joined his experiment from 2005 to 2015, 227 (202 of them women) followed through with doing the 12 assigned yoga poses daily or at least every other day. The average age of the 227 participants upon joining the study was 68, and 83 percent had osteoporosis or its precursor, osteopenia.

The 12 poses, by their English names, were tree, triangle, warrior II, side-angle, twisted triangle, locust, bridge, supine hand-to-foot I, supine hand-to-foot II, straight-legged twist, bent-knee twist and corpse pose. Each pose was held for 30 seconds. The daily regimen, once learned, took 12 minutes to complete.

The researchers collected data at the start of the study on the participants’ bone density measurements, blood and urine chemistry and X-rays of their spines and hips. They were each given a DVD of the 12 yoga poses used in the pilot study and an online program in which to record what they did and how often.

A decade after the start of the study, bone density measurements were again taken and emailed to the researchers; many participants also had repeat X-rays done. The findings, as reported last month in Topics of Geriatric Rehabilitation, showed improved bone density in the spine and femur of the 227 participants who were moderately or fully compliant with the assigned yoga exercises.

Improvements were seen in bone density in the hip as well, but they were not statistically significant.

Before the study, the participants had had 109 fractures, reported by them or found on X-rays.

At the time the study was submitted for publication, “with more than 90,000 hours of yoga practiced largely by people with osteoporosis or osteopenia, there have been no reported or X-ray detected fractures or serious injuries of any kind related to the practice of yoga in any of the 741 participants,” Dr. Fishman and his colleagues wrote.

“Yoga looks like it’s safe, even for people who have suffered significant bone loss,” Dr. Fishman said in an interview.

Furthermore, a special study of bone quality done on 18 of the participants showed that they had “better internal support of their bones, which is not measured by a bone density scan but is important to resisting fractures,” Dr. Fishman said.

The study has many limitations, including the use of self-selected volunteers and the lack of a control group. But all told, the team concluded, the results may lend support to Dr. Fishman’s long-held belief that yoga can help reverse bone loss.

Even if bone density did not increase, improvements in posture and balance that can accrue from the practice of yoga can be protective, Dr. Fishman said.

“Spinal fractures can result from poor posture, and there’s no medication for that, but yoga is helpful,” he said.

In addition, “Yoga is good for range of motion, strength, coordination and reduced anxiety,” he said, “all of which contribute to the ability to stay upright and not fall. If you don’t fall, you greatly reduce your risk of a serious fracture.”

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions the tolerability of osteoporosis drugs, though the study wasn’t a comparison between the two.  While the study didn’t examine this, comparing yoga’s effects against alternative weight-bearing exercise forms (running, walking) might merit a mention.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new cold and flu test can precisely diagnose a dozen winter ailments and reduce unneeded use of antibiotics, says the company that sells it. Physicians say the test is accurate and the most comprehensive available, but some say its long processing time limits usefulness in emergency rooms.

Doctors currently diagnose colds and flus through a patchwork of testing, observation and process of elimination. But many of the current tests available are not very sensitive, and most test for only one or two viruses at a time. According to a 2006 study in the New England Journal of Medicine of some 3,000 children under 5 years old, only 17% who had the flu were properly diagnosed in doctors' offices, clinics and emergency rooms. Poor diagnosis can result in a missed opportunity to prescribe a flu medicine, and also sometimes results in an unneeded antibiotic if doctors wrongly think the illness is caused by bacteria.

The new test, called the xTAG respiratory panel, approved earlier this year by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is the most comprehensive FDA-approved virus-panel to date. It tests for a dozen viruses, including several types of influenza, two types of respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, three types of parainfluenza, adenovirus and even rhinovirus, which causes the common cold. According to manufacturer Luminex Corp. , Austin, Texas, the viruses in the panel are expected to account for about 85% of the viral illnesses in the U.S. this year.

The test is expected to be used mainly in hospitals and emergency rooms, but doctors can send the swab to a local lab.

To use it, doctors take a swab from the nose or throat. In the lab, genetic material from the swab is magnified millions of times and then bound to fluorescent markers, which are then read by a machine. According to data submitted to the FDA, the test detects each virus 78% to 100% of the time, depending on the type, and has few false positives. For example, the FDA-submitted data say it detects RSV, a common cause of infant pneumonia, 100% of the time, while giving false positives 2% of the time.

"This is really the gold standard. It is very sensitive," says Kathryn M. Edwards, a Nashville pediatric infectious-disease specialist and co-author of the New England Journal study.

The downside is that the test is expensive, about $300 to $400, but is covered by most insurers. It also needs extensive processing in the lab. And patients will have to wait at least six to seven hours -- maybe a day or two depending on staffing at the hospital laboratory. "Emergency departments are going to have to think twice about a test like that," says Michael Shannon, senior physician in emergency medicine at Children's Hospital Boston. Currently available tests can yield results in a half hour, though accuracy varies and they typically screen for only one or two viruses.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This article covers all of the bases on treatment diagnosis and treatment option.  The flu can be diagnosed based upon clinical observations of signs and symptoms or by other available flu tests.  Treatment options, flu medicine, antibiotics or no treatment, are clearly indicated.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Giving school children access to chilled, self-serve water may help chip away at childhood obesity, a new study of more than one million New York City school students suggests.

The study, published in JAMA Pediatrics, analyzed data collected from 1,227 elementary and middle schools across New York City - some with and some without "water jets." The large, clear, electrically cooled jugs with a push lever for fast dispensing were placed in 483 school cafeterias, about 40 percent of schools during the 2008-2009 and the 2012-2013 school years.

Schools with water dispensers saw a modest weight drop among students, according to the study by researchers from NYU Langone Medical Center, New York University's Institute for Education and Social Policy, and the Center for Policy Research at Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs.

"We associated these water dispensers with almost a one percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being overweight for boys and a little over a half a percentage point reduction for girls," said lead researcher Brian Elbel, an associate professor of population health and health policy at NYU School of Medicine.

"Even a small, straightforward, relatively inexpensive policy intervention was associated with a small but statistically significant drop," Elbel told CBS News.

Water jets also were linked with a decrease in the amount of half-pints of milk students bought, which could be a potential mechanism of weight reduction, the researchers found.

Modern water dispensers may be more effective than old-fashioned water fountains since water quality and cleanliness may deter kids from using older fountains, and they're not as efficient at serving large numbers of children, experts noted in an accompanying editorial.

The editorial, entitled "Power of a Simple Intervention to Improve Student Health: Just Add Water," said the study's findings are significant.

"Sometimes, a very simple intervention can have a powerful effect," wrote Lindsey Turner, of Boise State University, in Idaho, and Erin Hager, from the University of Maryland School of Medicine, in Baltimore.

"The study by Schwartz and colleagues in this issue of JAMA Pediatrics adds to a growing body of evidence supporting the importance of providing drinking water access in schools. In this study, the findings demonstrate that water access in schools can promote healthy weight outcomes among students," Turner and Hager said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story explains how water jets may be more effective than old-fashioned water fountains, due to concerns over water quality and fountain cleanliness. Drinking fountains also are less efficient at serving large numbers of children, the article adds.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Max, Rowan and Charlie Vertin’s muscles have been slowly collecting damage since the day they were born. Someday, they will not be able to walk. They will not be able to stand. Eventually, they will not be able to live. The brothers, ages 6 through 11, suffer from a debilitating and deadly genetic condition called Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD).

Yet on September 28, Max, Rowan and Charlie Vertin got dressed up. In dark suits and blue shirts, with serious expressions on their round faces, they walked to stand next to their mother in a very beige room outside Washington, D.C. The people in that room, they believed, could change the course of their lives.

For years, the Vertin brothers have been participating in a clinical trial for a new medication called ataluren, intended to keep the progression of their disease at bay. By October 24, they’ll know if they will be able to keep taking that drug. That is the deadline for the Food and Drug Administration to make a choice. The agency could approve the drug, allowing the brothers and others like them to continue to take it. Or it could reject the drug for the third time and throw them into an uncertain future.

An FDA committee has already voted that data about the drug’s effectiveness was inconclusive. The agency’s final decision almost always echos the decisions of its committees. So, if this were any other kind of drug at any other time in FDA history, the FDA’s final answer would be a very predictable no.

If they do say no, the Vertins could lose access to the drug that has stabilized their condition. But there’s still a chance the FDA could approve the drug. Input from people affected by DMD may have convinced the agency once before to approve a drug for the condition despite iffy data. That is what the Vertins—and the company that produces the drug—are hoping will happen again.

“It started out so innocent,” his mother, Betty Vertin, told Newsweek. Max was a big infant, born 10 lbs, 3 oz and nearly two feet long. “When he was missing milestones, I just thought it was because it was a big baby.” Even doctors assumed that he would eventually catch up. But when he started preschool, the difference between Max and other children became more obvious. “When other kids were running and jumping and climbing, Max wasn’t doing those things. He was just behind, physically.”

When Max was 4, in 2010, a genetic test confirmed that he had DMD. Betty had never heard of it. “Before we started living this life, I was clueless,” she said.

DMD is one of a class of similar genetic disorders. About 15 boys out of every 100,000 in the United States under 24 years old have DMD or a milder form, called Becker muscular dystrophy. (Most of the children affected are boys.) The illness affects the way their legs, heart, and lungs work.

Max’s diagnosis was devastating for Betty. “I feel like I walked into the room with a healthy four-year-old boy and I walked out with a child that was dying,” she said.

But the family’s struggles with DMD were just beginning. At the time, Rowan was 2, and Betty suspected that he also had the disease; she’d seen how her son struggled to stand up onto a stepstool in the bathroom to brush his teeth. She was also ten weeks pregnant with Charlie.

Genetic tests eventually confirmed both Rowan and Charlie also had DMD. Betty’s two daughters, Lexi, 16, and Mary, 2, as well as a fourth son, Chance, 10, do not.

“I felt like we had a year and a half of the same horrible diagnosis over and over and over again,” she said. “It was the hardest 18 months I’ve ever had and I hope I ever had.”

DMD always results in muscle weakness due to a lack of a protein called dystrophin. Some of the newest treatments for the condition try to fix that. One drug, which the FDA approved in 2016, works for people whose illness springs from a mutation in the gene that codes for dystrophin.

The drug, called Exondys 51 or eteplirsen, allows the genetic machinery that produces the protein to skip over the mutated part to make something that will work better. About 13 percent of people with DMD have this particular mutation, according to the FDA.

The Vertin brothers are not among them; the drug shouldn’t help them at all. So they tried ataluren. (The drug’s brand name is Translarna.) The company that produces ataluren, PTC Therapeutics, says that its drug forces cells to make the proteins in spite of a different kind of mutation called a nonsense mutation. Instead of having an error in the protein, the protein is accidentally cut short. This is the kind of mutation that three of Betty Vertin’s children have.

The Vertins have received the drug free through the clinical trial, and expenses for their trip from Nebraska to Washington, D.C. were paid by PTC Therapeutics.

Ataluren works by ordering a cell to use a slightly different piece to build the protein—as if someone spray-painted the word “don’t” on the molecular version of a stop sign. Exactly how it does that is still mysterious. A paper published by the company’s scientists in the Proceedings of the National Academies of Science said it probably affected the ribosome, a key part of how proteins are put together in a cell. (Researchers not affiliated with the company did not find the same kind of activity.)

Regardless of what mutation causes the illness, most people with DMD die in their 20s. Betty was told to expect her oldest son, Max, to be in a wheelchair full-time by the time he was 9 or 12.

Max is 11 now. His 12th birthday is in early November. He uses an electric mobility scooter for long distances, but he can still walk. He rides a bike without training wheels and without any modifications. He has a part in a school play and goes up and down stairs to get to the stage. He even plays a trumpet in his school’s band. “He’s got the lung capacity to blow that thing, very loudly,” Betty said.

For that, Betty credits ataluren, which Max started three years ago.

“His life is—it’s not like his peers, but he’s getting a lot of the experiences that his peers are having,” she said. “He’s living a sort of a typical sixth-grade life and that diagnosis—I didn’t know what it would look like for him. I didn’t expect it to look like this.”

But not everyone considers ataluren to be a miracle drug—with good reason. The clinical trial results haven't been great. Most of the company’s studies tested how fast a child could go about 30 feet or walk up and down stairs, or how far they could walk in six minutes. They did see some slight positive results, many of which came from a study done with the specific kind of patient the company discovered benefited most in a previous trial.

The FDA needs good data to make their decision, because when the agency approves a drug is sends a signal to the world. An approval is the FDA saying, “this drug is safe and effective. You could use it for your child, too.”

PTC Therapeutics has tried to get FDA approval for the drug twice before. Both times the agency refused to even consider the application. This time, the application for approval was filed over the FDA’s protest. (The drug has been conditionally approved in Europe.)

Part of the reason that the drug has struggled is because of this requirement: if the drug is effective, the data should show it. But that hasn't happened consistently with ataluren. Many of the clinical trials failed to satisfy the statistical requirement to prove a drug works—at least not for the main outcome the company was looking at. Other, secondary measurements did seem to have good statistics. Certain groups of children seemed to have better results than others, too.

PTC Therapeutics founder and CEO Stuart Peltz says the statistics aren't a reason to reject the drug. Just because a drug doesn’t measure up in that way, he says, “doesn’t mean the drug is not effective.”

But even if the FDA agrees to overlook some of the negative data about ataluren, insurers may not. That could be a million-dollar issue for the families with affected children.

“If the evidence isn’t good, then insurance companies won’t pay for [drugs],” said National Center for Health Research (NCHR) president Diana Zuckerman. Two recently approved drugs have run into this problem: Spinraza, a drug for spinal muscular atrophy, and Exondys 51. Both drugs cost hundreds of thousands of dollars a year. Pharmaceutical companies traditionally will not discuss prices before drugs are approved; that said, ataluren costs about £220,000 in Britain. During clinical trials, participants like the Vertins normally do not pay for the treatment.

The NCHR also presented at the FDA meeting in September to discuss ataluren, urging the agency to not approve the drug without more research. The organization’s statement also raised concerns about side effects associated with the drug, specifically about the chance that it raises blood pressure and cholesterol levels in children. The company says these shifts are small and "not clinically significant."

In an e-mailed statement, FDA spokesperson Sandy Walsh confirmed that the FDA’s decisions are all “based on an assessment of the available data and whether the benefits of the drug outweigh its risks.” That data can include the experience of patients like Max, Rowan and Charlie.

To Betty, the benefits are clear, even if they aren’t easily quantified. Rowan’s gait seems better. Max still doesn’t need to use a wheelchair all the time, bucking the prediction she heard when he was first diagnosed.

However, financial analysts who track the biotech sector are not optimistic about ataluren’s immediate prospects. Matthew Eckler, a senior biotechnology analyst at RBC Capital Markets, said that analysts and investors are betting the FDA will not approve the drug.

The FDA hasn’t said no yet. The agency still has nearly two more weeks to make a decision. Until then, Betty and her sons are living with a lot of uncertainty. “I’m really scared that my boys will have to go off [ataluren],” she said. Will they have access to the drug if it’s rejected? Would their conditions deteriorate if they didn’t? What other options do they have?

Betty has no good answers. She is hoping she won’t need to come up with them.

“DMD is a progressive disease, and my boys are stable,” Vertin said. “If we can just have a few more years with our boys or buy some time until there is a cure out there, that’s huge.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There is no known cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  The story does devote some space to another drug, Exondys 51, which has been approved by the FDA, but the text is clear that the type of DMD that afflicts the three boys is not responsive to that drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Boston) -- To date, there are no methods that can quickly and accurately detect pathogens in blood to allow the diagnosis of systemic bloodstream infections that can lead to life-threatening sepsis. The standard of care for detecting such blood-borne infections is blood culture, but this takes days to complete, only identifies pathogens in less than 30% of patients with fulminant infections, and it is not able to detect toxic fragments of dead pathogens that also drive the exaggerated inflammatory reactions leading to sepsis.

Biomarkers that report elevated inflammation are used clinically in the treatment of patients with sepsis; however, they fail to distinguish inflammation triggered by infectious pathogens from that induced by non-infectious causes, such as burns, traumas and surgeries.

Now, a Wyss Institute team led by Donald Ingber reports in eBioMedicine that it has filled this void with a rapid and specific diagnostic assay that could help physicians decide within an hour whether a patient has a systemic infection and should be hospitalized for aggressive intervention therapy. The potential of this assay to detect pathogen materials was demonstrated in both animal studies and a prospective human clinical study, whose results also suggest that it also could serve as a companion diagnostic to monitor the success of antibiotic and dialysis-like sepsis therapies.

"Our pathogen detection technology solves both dilemmas: it quickly reports whether infectious pathogens are present in the body, even at early stages of infection before sepsis develops. And it can more specifically identify patients who have excessive inflammation due to systemic infection, rather than other causes," said Donald Ingber, M.D., Ph.D., the Wyss Institute's Founding Director, the Judah Folkman Professor of Vascular Biology at Harvard Medical School and the Vascular Biology Program at Boston Children's Hospital, and Professor of Bioengineering at the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. "This assay could become a real game changer in this clinical area, and it also should lead to more judicious use of antibiotics, helping to decrease the worrisome rise we are seeing in antibiotic-resistant organisms."

"In a cohort of emergency room patients with suspected sepsis, we saw that the assay picked up infection within an hour in 85% of patients who exhibited clinical symptoms of sepsis, and equally importantly, it did not falsely predict infection in healthy subjects or patients with inflammation triggered by other causes, such as trauma. On the other hand, blood cultures that we performed in parallel using the same samples only detected pathogens in 18% of the cases," said Nathan Shapiro, M.D., Ph.D., Director of Translational Research in the Center for Vascular Biology Research at BIDMC, who worked with Ingber's team to conduct the clinical study. "This highlights the advance this technology represents."

The diagnostic assay is built on FcMBL, a genetically engineered pathogen-binding protein previously developed by Ingber and Michael Super, a Wyss Senior Staff Scientist who co-leads the Institute's pathogen-detecting effort. FcMBL binds to pathogens and pathogen-released fragments, known as Pathogen-Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs) by recognizing carbohydrate molecules on their surface.

Previous efforts in Ingber's team at the Wyss Institute have established FcMBL as a key component of an advanced dialysis-like, pathogen-extracting therapeutic device, and of a method for the fast retrieval of infectious pathogens from complex clinical samples to enable their identification and antibody susceptibilities.

"In our latest work, we show that the FcMBL-based pathogen-detecting assay is considerably faster and more accurate than any other available assay for systemic infection. We are currently working to ready it for high-throughput use in clinical and point of care situations and to accelerate it even further," said Mark Cartwright, Ph.D., a Staff Scientist at the Wyss Institute and a lead-author on the study.

As a prerequisite to their clinical study, the Wyss Institute's team had successfully tested the assay in rat and pig models of infection with pathogenic E. coli bacteria.

"The animal models clearly told us that the assay can sensitively trace spikes of PAMPs released during antibiotic therapy, or residual infectious PAMP materials, even when no living bacteria circulate anymore in blood but they remain hidden inside internal organs. Thus, this assay could be an excellent tool for monitoring ongoing infection and responses to antibiotics and dialysis-like therapies for severe infections and sepsis," said Mike Super, Ph.D.

Together, the findings suggest that the FcMBL-based pathogen detection technology with its rapid handling time, high sensitivity and broad specificity towards infection-causing pathogens could provide a real-world advance to diagnose life-threatening infections in both clinical microbiology laboratories and point-of-care settings.

The work was funded by the Wyss Institute and the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA).

The Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University uses Nature's design principles to develop bioinspired materials and devices that will transform medicine and create a more sustainable world. Wyss researchers are developing innovative new engineering solutions for healthcare, energy, architecture, robotics, and manufacturing that are translated into commercial products and therapies through collaborations with clinical investigators, corporate alliances, and formation of new startups. The Wyss Institute creates transformative technological breakthroughs by engaging in high risk research, and crosses disciplinary and institutional barriers, working as an alliance that includes Harvard's Schools of Medicine, Engineering, Arts & Sciences and Design, and in partnership with Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, the University of Massachusetts Medical School, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston University, Tufts University, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, University of Zurich and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

The Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center is a patient care, teaching and research affiliate of Harvard Medical School and consistently ranks as a national leader among independent hospitals in National Institutes of Health funding. BIDMC is in the community with Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Milton, Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Needham, Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Plymouth, Anna Jaques Hospital, Cambridge Health Alliance, Lawrence General Hospital, Signature Healthcare, Beth Israel Deaconess HealthCare, Community Care Alliance and Atrius Health. BIDMC is also clinically affiliated with the Joslin Diabetes Center and Hebrew Rehabilitation Center and is a research partner of Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center and The Jackson Laboratory. BIDMC is the official hospital of the Boston Red Sox.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes some alternatives to this new technology. It describes briefly that current blood cultures are often not adequate, both from a timing and sensitivity perspective. It would have been even more thorough to note that there are other diagnostic tools in the research pipeline.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OAK BROOK, Ill. - Cardiac hybrid imaging with CT and nuclear stress testing is an excellent long-term predictor of adverse cardiac events like heart attacks in patients being evaluated for coronary artery disease, according to a study published in the journal Radiology.

Coronary artery disease is a leading cause of death and disability worldwide. Invasive coronary angiography (ICA) is considered the gold standard for determining the percent of stenosis, or narrowing, due to plaque in a coronary artery. However, the degree of stenosis on ICA is not always an accurate predictor of heart attack risk because it gives no information on perfusion, or the flow of blood into the heart muscle. Inadequate perfusion, also known as ischemia, is a potential danger to the patient.

"In lesions with less than 50 percent narrowing, one in five lesions still produce an ischemia," said study coauthor Philipp A. Kaufmann, M.D., professor and chair of nuclear medicine, and director of cardiac imaging at University Hospital Zurich in Switzerland.

Cardiac hybrid imaging combines coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) and myocardial perfusion imaging with single photon emission tomography (SPECT) to provide information on both stenosis and perfusion. The approach has shown promise in studies focusing on short-term observations, but information is lacking on long-term outcomes.

The research team looked at 428 patients who underwent hybrid imaging. During a median follow-up of 6.8 years, a total of 160 major adverse cardiac events, including 45 deaths, were observed in the final study population. Patients with matched findings--stenosis of 50 percent or more on CCTA with evidence of ischemia on SPECT in the area of the heart to which the blocked vessel was supplying blood--had more than five times the risk of adverse events than those with normal findings. Patients with unmatched findings, or evidence of ischemia but not in the area of the heart being fed by the stenotic artery, had three times the risk. Major adverse cardiac event rates were 21.8 percent for matched findings and 9.0 percent for unmatched--considerably higher than the 2.4 percent rate for normal findings.

The results show that cardiac hybrid imaging is an excellent long-term predictor of adverse cardiac events in patients evaluated for coronary artery disease. Dr. Kaufmann said that hybrid imaging findings could help guide treatment decisions, such as whether or not a patient should have a revascularization procedure such as bypass or angioplasty.

"In patients with multiple lesions or complex coronary anatomy, it is, in many cases, very difficult to correctly identify the culprit lesion," he said. "In a previous multicenter trial, with hybrid imaging we were able to see that about one in five patients should be revascularized in another coronary artery than originally planned. The present study now documents the prognostic importance of the comprehensive assessment provided by hybrid imaging."

The study supports CCTA use for an initial, noninvasive evaluation of patients with known or suspected stable coronary artery disease. No additional imaging would be necessary if the results were normal. If a lesion was evident, then clinicians could employ a nuclear scan to assess ischemia and take advantage of both modalities by fusing the results together to make a hybrid image.

"The strategy of direct referral to invasive coronary angiography without noninvasive imaging is obsolete," Dr. Kaufmann said. "Even after documenting coronary artery disease with coronary CT angiography, we need further noninvasive evaluation before deciding upon revascularization versus medication."

The researchers hope to run a trial to show that hybrid imaging can have a positive impact on patient outcomes. They are also looking at what they call "triple hybrid" imaging, which combines the CCTA/SPECT hybrid with information on coronary artery shear stress. The shear stress information could help identify lesions that do not yet have an impact on ischemia but will in the future.

"Hybrid SPECT Perfusion Imaging and Coronary CT Angiography: Long-Term Prognostic Value for Cardiovascular Outcomes." Collaborating with Dr. Kaufmann were Aju P. Pazhenkottil, M.D., Dominik C. Benz, M.D., Christoph Gräni, M.D., Michael A. Madsen, M.D., Fran Mikulicic, M.D., Elia von Felten, M.D., Tobias A. Fuchs, M.D., Beatrice Hirt Moch, M.D., Julia Stehli, M.D., Thomas F. Lüscher, M.D., Oliver Gaemperli, M.D., and Ronny R. Buechel, M.D.

Radiology is edited by David A. Bluemke, M.D., Ph.D., University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wis., and owned and published by the Radiological Society of North America, Inc.

RSNA is an association of over 54,200 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release is clear that the study is testing an alternative to the standard approach for evaluating cardiovasular risk in patients with suspected coronary artery disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (March 21, 2018)--Advanced stage liver tumors may be safely treated through image-guided injections of an immunotherapy approved for melanoma, according to a study presented today at the Society of Interventional Radiology's Annual Scientific Meeting.

Researchers found that talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC)--a genetically modified version of the herpes virus--can be safely administered into active cancer in the liver and stimulate the immune system to destroy cancer cells throughout the body.

"Advanced stage liver tumors, including ones that have spread from other locations, have limited treatment options because the patients can be in poor health; further, the complex structure of the organ can make it difficult to target with standard approaches," said Steven S. Raman, M.D., professor of radiology, surgery and urology at the David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, and lead author of the study. "This minimally invasive treatment offers patients a novel way to directly and indirectly attack the cancer cells."

Using image-guided needle injections, researchers at centers in the United States, Switzerland and Spain, treated 14 advanced-stage cancer patients with liver metastases, including those with cirrhosis. Patients were given escalating doses of T-VEC, up to the maximum FDA-approved dose for melanoma. Injection volume was based on lesion size. Researchers found the patients tolerated the treatment well with expected side effects, including temporary flu-like symptoms.

As part of the study, researchers will follow patients for up to two years, and new trials to investigate the effectiveness of the drug in treating advanced cancer in the liver are being planned. Additional investigation is also planned to test the therapy in combination with a checkpoint inhibitor to activate a stronger immune response.

"Image-guided treatments have expanded the options available for patients with liver cancer from innovative approaches to biopsies to resections to chemo," said Raman. "This is an exciting way to look to the future, but patients living with advanced liver cancer should understand that this treatment will not be available for several years, except through clinical trials."

The authors note several limitations of the current study, including the preliminary nature of the results, as well as the number of patients tested.

Amgen, the pharmaceutical company that makes T-VEC, was a sponsor of the trial.

Abstract 375: Early safety from a phase 1, multicenter, open-label clinical trial of talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC) injected into liver tumors. S. Raman; M. Pless; A. Cubillo; A. Calvo; R. Hecht; C. Liu; E. Chan; J. Chesney; A. Prat; David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA;, Department of Oncology, Kantonsspital Winterthur, Winterthur, Switzerland; HM Universitario Sanchinarro, CIOCC, Madrid, Spain; Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain; Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA; James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY; Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. SIR Annual Scientific Meeting, March 17-22, 2018. This abstract can be found at sirmeeting.org

The Society of Interventional Radiology is a nonprofit, professional medical society representing more than 7,500 practicing interventional radiology physicians, trainees, students, scientists and clinical associates, dedicated to improving patient care through the limitless potential of image-guided therapies. SIR's members work in a variety of settings and at different professional levels--from medical students and residents to university faculty and private practice physicians. Visit sirweb.org.

The Society of Interventional Radiology is holding its Annual Scientific Meeting March 17-22, 2018 at the Los Angeles Convention Center in Los Angeles, Calif. Visit sirmeeting.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release rightly quotes the study’s lead author saying that there are “limited treatment options” for patients with advanced liver cancer. It notes researcher’s future plans to combine the  therapy with a checkpoint inhibitor to activate a stronger immune response.
There’s no cure for advanced liver cancer, although chemotherapy and low-dose radiation may be used to slow its spread and relieve pain. The drug sorafenib (Nexavaris) has been shown to improve survival.
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA), transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), and the targeted therapy sorafenib (Nexavar) may be other options for select patients with liver cancer. For patients whose cancer originated elsewhere and spread to the liver, chemotherapy specific to the primary cancer may be appropriate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Many women with severe menopausal symptoms are not being treated for them even though safe, effective remedies are available, a study from Australia suggests.

The findings may be applicable to other countries, too, according to senior author Dr. Susan R. Davis from Monash University in Melbourne.

“From my interactions with colleagues from across the globe, I do not believe that what we have observed is Australian-specific,” she told Reuters Health by email. “The management of menopause has been relatively similar in the UK, the USA and in Australia.”

Up to half of women in menopause experience so-called vasomotor symptoms, such as hot flashes and night sweats. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT), which generally combines estrogen plus progestin, is very effective. But after the initial findings of the Women’s Health Initiative study showed that HRT can increase the risk of breast cancer, stroke and other serious problems, many women stopped using it.

As reported in the journal Menopause, in 2013 and 2014 Davis and her team analyzed survey responses from nearly 1,500 women ages 40 to 65.

Seventeen percent were having moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms, and 18 percent reported moderate to severe sexual symptoms.

But most were not receiving any kind of treatment. Only 11 percent reported use of HRT, and less than 1 percent were using any type of therapy that didn’t involve hormones.

The women who did use hormones were mostly taking pills containing estrogen, rather than preparations that are absorbed into the skin and that are potentially safer, the researchers found.

“Extrapolating our findings to 3.7 million Australian women aged 40 to 64 years, we found that 455,000 women are likely to have moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms, with most women (385,000) remaining untreated,” they write.

In addition, very few women were receiving vaginal estrogen therapy for sexual symptoms. Vaginal dryness is common with menopause and affects sexual functioning. Vaginal estrogen preparations are very safe and effective for this problem but were prescribed to less than 5 percent of the women, the authors say.

Why are so few women being treated?

“Overall, there is the uncertainty of women and of doctors as to what the options are, what is and is not safe, and of the safe options - what and how to prescribe them,” Davis said.

There is also, she said, a complete lack of understanding that for most women, these symptoms are not fleeting.

“It isn’t ‘grin and bear it for a few months’ and it will all pass, as many women suffer severe symptoms for five-plus years,” she said. “Women and doctors simply are not aware that symptoms can last this long.”

Finally, many women don’t realize that non hormonal options can be safe and effective, she added.

Dr. Wulf H. Utian, medical director of the North American Menopause Society, agrees that many reasons may underlie the lack of treatment. “It is partly ‘fall out’ from the controversy over hormone therapy,” he told Reuters Health in an email.

But overall, he said, it is a combination of patients not wanting therapy or not having information about it, and also the provider not prescribing it.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here. The story mentions systemic estrogen therapies, topical creams, and non-hormonal treatments. As noted above, we wish there had been more detailed comparisons of these treatments. Even some links telling people where to get more information would have been helpful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Weight training or cardio? For older adults trying to slim down, pumping iron might be the way to go.

A new study by researchers at Wake Forest University suggests combining weight training with a low-calorie diet preserves much needed lean muscle mass that can be lost through aerobic workouts.

The findings, "Effect of Exercise Type During Intentional Weight Loss on Body Composition in Older Adults with Obesity," appear in the November issue of the journal Obesity.

"A lot of older adults will walk as their exercise of choice," said Kristen Beavers, assistant professor of health and exercise science at Wake Forest and lead author of the study. "But this research shows that if you're worried about losing muscle, weight training can be the better option."

In this 18-month study of 249 adults in their 60s who were overweight or obese, restricting calories plus resistance training in the form of weight-machine workouts resulted in less muscle loss, but significant fat loss, when compared to weight loss plus walking or weight loss alone.

Losing weight is generally recommended for those with obesity, but preserving muscle - while losing fat - is particularly important for older adults in order to maximize functional benefit, Beavers said.

"Surprisingly, we found that cardio workouts may actually cause older adults with obesity to lose more lean mass than dieting alone."

Loss of lean mass could have important consequences given the high risk of physical disability among the growing population of older adults.

+ Total fat loss was much greater when participants combined diet plus walking (about 16 pounds) and diet plus weight training (about 17 pounds). Diet alone resulted in about 10 pounds of fat lost over 18 months.

+ Muscle mass loss was greatest with diet plus walking (about 4 pounds) compared with diet alone or diet plus weight training (each about 2 pounds). Put another way, the percentage of weight loss coming from muscle mass was 20% in the weight loss plus walking group, 16% in the weight loss alone group, and 10% in the weight loss plus weight training group.

+ Loss of fat was associated with faster walking speed, while loss of muscle was associated with reduced knee strength.

These results may be even more important for older adults who gain and lose weight with frequency, because seniors typically don't regain muscle - they regain fat mass - which is "all the more reason for older adults to try and preserve muscle mass during weight loss," Beavers said.

This is the latest study from the Cooperative Lifestyle Intervention Program (CLIP-II), a single-blind, randomized controlled trial. The participants were randomly assigned to one of three groups: a weight-loss-only group, who followed a calorie-restricted diet with no exercise regimen; a weight loss plus cardio (i.e., walking) group; and a weight loss plus weight-training group.

Co-authors on this paper included W. Jack Rejeski and Anthony Marsh, co-principal investigators of the CLIP-II study, and Jessica Sheedy, Beverly Nesbit and Jill Gaukstern, all of the Wake Forest University Department of Health and Exercise Science; and Walter Ambrosius, Michael Walkup, Jonathan Burdette and Barbara Nicklas of the Wake Forest School of Medicine.

The research was funded by a grant from the National Institutes of Health/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Partial support also comes from grants by the National Institute on Aging.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The way that this study was designed compared the intervention of weight training and a weight loss diet (calorie-restricted dieting), diet and walking, and diet alone. Both walking and weight training were much more successful for weight loss than dieting alone. However, the release could have made the distinction in benefits a bit more clear. While seniors lost similar amounts of weight when walking and participating in weight training, the study showed that much of the weight lost from walking was coming from muscle mass, while the weight loss from lifting was from fat.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new biologic agent--the most potent of its kind so far--is showing early promise as part of a potential new strategy for treating HIV. The drug, known as 10-1074, may also offer a new way to prevent viral infection in people who are at high risk to acquire HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

The drug belongs to a class of molecules called broadly neutralizing antibodies, which are naturally found in HIV-infected people whose immune systems have a rare ability to fight off the virus. These antibodies are a major area of study in the laboratory of Rockefeller University investigator Michel Nussenzweig, who is Zanvil A. Cohn and Ralph M. Steinman Professor and head of the Laboratory of Molecular Immunology. Marina Caskey, an Assistant Professor of Clinical Investigation, leads clinical studies on these antibodies.

"This was the first human trial of 10-1074," says Till Schoofs, an Instructor in Clinical Investigation in Nussenzweig's lab. "The antibody binds to a different part of the virus than the other antibody we've studied. In addition, it's one of the most potent broadly neutralizing antibodies described to date."

Today, HIV is typically treated with antiretroviral therapy, a drug regimen that became available in the 1990s. Although it has been a lifesaver for people infected with the virus, antiretroviral medications have significant drawbacks: they can cause severe side effects, and patients have to take them for life. This is why researchers continue to look for other ways to control the virus--and broadly neutralizing antibodies could prove to be part of an alternate treatment strategy.

The study of 10-1074, an early-stage clinical trial, included 19 individuals who were infected with HIV and 14 who were not. The purpose was to determine whether the antibody was safe and whether it had antiviral activity in humans. The majority of the people in the trial were enrolled at The Rockefeller University Hospital, while some of the HIV-1 infected participants received the antibody at the University of Cologne, in Germany. "It has been challenging to find trial participants with high levels of the virus here in New York," Caskey says, "so our collaboration with the University of Cologne has been very valuable."

The investigators found that among 13 HIV-infected people who received the highest dose of 10-1074, 11 showed a rapid decline in the amount of virus. Although these patients were found to have some resistant virus in their blood, further research in the lab showed that those viruses were still sensitive to other broadly neutralizing antibodies, including 3BNC117, that target different parts of the pathogen. The results were published in January in Nature Medicine.

Caskey, Schoofs, and their team also analyzed the uninfected participants' blood samples, and found that 10-1074 may be an effective way to prevent infection in people who are exposed to the virus. Currently, people who do not have HIV but are at substantial risk of getting it--because they have multiple sexual partners, for example, or an HIV-infected partner--can receive antiviral medications to prevent disease, a strategy called pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP). But just like the antiviral medications used to treat infection, PrEP can have severe side effects and must be taken daily to be effective, which poses significant challenges to adequate compliance.

"Based on our findings we think these types of antibodies could be a viable substitute for the drugs currently used in PrEP," says Caskey. "But to clearly demonstrate that these antibodies have an advantage over the pill that's currently used, we would need to test them in large numbers of people and show that they remain active for a prolonged period of time in the body."

In an effort to accomplish this, the investigators are looking into modified variants of the antibodies with prolonged activity, so that they would need to be given less often in the PrEP setting. And they are already moving forward with new clinical studies using 10-1074 together with 3BNC117, with the hope that combining two antibodies targeting different parts of HIV will be more effective than either antibody on its own.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that broadly neutralizing antibodies may eventually be an alternative to currently available antiviral therapy as well as pre-exposure prophylaxis, PrEP, (a lower dose of antiviral therapy taken as prevention). The current study doesn’t look at clinical outcomes so the comparison may be premature, although it’s presented in a pretty general way.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A scientifically based approach that includes a tooth-decay risk assessment, aggressive preventive measures and conservative restorations can dramatically reduce decay in community dental practices, according to a study by researchers at UC San Francisco.

The findings, which support earlier research demonstrating positive results of the assessment and treatment method in a university setting, have the potential to transform dental care for high-risk patients at a lower cost to both patients and dental clinics and practices. Results appear online Jan. 22, 2018, in Advances in Dental Research.

"We put the 2012 UCSF clinical study into the real world and showed it works," said lead author Peter Rechmann, DMD, PhD, professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences in the UCSF School of Dentistry. "The patients at high caries risk who used prescription products went down significantly over time in their risk level. Those in the control group also reduced their risk to a lesser degree, simply by using over-the-counter products that also protect teeth and affect the bacteria."

Dental caries (tooth decay) is caused by bacteria on the tooth surface feeding on carbohydrates, then making acids as waste. These acids destroy the protective tooth enamel and the dentin layer beneath it. If not halted or reversed, this leads to a cavity.

CAries Management By Risk Assessment (CAMBRA?) is an evidence-based approach to preventing or treating dental caries at its earliest stages. It was launched in 2003 through the UCSF School of Dentistry by the paper's senior author, John Featherstone, PhD, MSc, former dean of the school and distinguished professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences.

A dentist who uses CAMBRA obtains the patient's dental and medical history and conducts a clinical exam to assess caries early enough to reverse or halt progression and to determine caries risk factors. These factors include, among other things, acid-producing bacteria, frequent eating and drinking of fermentable carbohydrates ("snacking"), and abnormally low saliva flow and function.

From this assessment, the dentist utilizes behavioral approaches and chemical treatments to optimize protective factors. The treatment plan typically incorporates remineralization through the use of fluoride and/or antibacterial therapies such as chlorhexidine and xylitol, minimally invasive restorative procedures to conserve tooth structure, and regular patient follow up.

The authors published their initial validation of CAMBRA for ages 6 through adult in 2006, followed by several additional years of data published in 2011, 2012, 2015 and 2016. Since then, more than half of the U.S. schools and colleges of dentistry have adopted CAMBRA in one form or another as part of their standard curriculum. The authors said now that this has been shown to be effective in a non-academic clinical setting, there also is potential for insurance companies to reimburse CAMBRA and other preventive therapies for adults, thereby lowering patient costs while increasing profits for dental practices.

In the Advances in Dental Research study, Rechmann and his colleagues recruited 20 dentists - 17 in private practice, three in community clinics - to participate in a two-year CAMBRA trial of 460 patients ages 12-65 years old, with 239 in a CAMBRA group and 221 in a control group.

In the CAMBRA group, high-risk patients received prescription fluoride toothpaste, chlorhexidine antibacterial rinse, xylitol mints and fluoride varnish. The control group received regular fluoride toothpaste, an assumed inactive mouth rinse, sorbitol candies and a non-fluoride varnish.

Follow-up visits occurred at six, 12, 18 and 24 months, in which new caries lesions or changes in caries risk level were recorded. Overall, the researchers found that a significantly greater percentage of high-risk participants were classified at lower risk after receiving CAMBRA preventive therapies. Dental decay was low in both groups.

Among 242 patients (137 intervention, 105 control) initially identified as high risk for caries, only a quarter of the patients remained at high risk in the CAMBRA group at 24 months, while just over half (54 percent) of the control group did. Of the 192 low-risk participants (93 intervention, 99 control), most participants remained low risk, indicating that the assessment correctly identifies who is at risk for caries.

The researchers said the risk reduction among the control group may have been caused by the fluoride toothpaste enhancing tooth repair, as well as the mouth rinse enhancing saliva flow and having bactericidal effects. While not as significant as the CAMBRA group in this study, the risk level of these patients dropped more dramatically over time than for those in the 2012 UCSF CAMBRA study.

"It was surprising to see the benefits gained by the control group," Rechmann said. "More research is needed to see if the products and treatment administered to this group function in the way we speculate, and if so, they might be made easily available to dental patients. Doing so can change the whole picture of caries control."

Among the study limitations, the researchers noted a high study attrition (65 percent), which partly may have contributed to observed declines in risk level at each subsequent recall visit.

Co-authors on the paper were Benjamin Chafee, DDS, MPH, PhD, assistant professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences and director of the Global Oral Health program, and Beate Rechmann, research associate, both from the UCSF School of Dentistry. Funding was provided by the National Institutes of Health National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, PacifiCare/United Healthcare, DentaQuest and California Dental Association. Proctor & Gamble, 3M Espe and Epic provided products for study participants at reduced or no cost.

UC San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with nationally renowned programs in basic, biomedical, translational and population sciences; and a preeminent biomedical research enterprise. It also includes UCSF Health, which comprises three top-ranked hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals in San Francisco and Oakland, and other partner and affiliated hospitals and healthcare providers throughout the Bay Area. Please visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: In the strictest possible way, the release does not directly talk about all the different ways of preventing dental caries. But we were glad that the release discussed the improvements that happened for some patients in the control group who received fewer products. We are glad the release talks about possibly following up on this, in case the lesser products could still benefit many patients.
Excerpt:
The researchers said the risk reduction among the control group may have been caused by the fluoride toothpaste enhancing tooth repair, as well as the mouth rinse enhancing saliva flow and having bactericidal effects. While not as significant as the CAMBRA group in this study, the risk level of these patients dropped more dramatically over time than for those in the 2012 UCSF CAMBRA study.
It was surprising to see the benefits gained by the control group,” Rechmann said. “More research is needed to see if the products and treatment administered to this group function in the way we speculate, and if so, they might be made easily available to dental patients. Doing so can change the whole picture of caries control.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE: 11 A.M. (ET), THURSDAY, JULY 20, 2017

The commentary, “YAG Laser Vitreolysis—Is It as Clear as It Seems?,” by Jennifer I. Lim, M.D., of the University of Illinois at Chicago; and Editor, JAMA Ophthalmology, also is available at the For The Media website.

To place an electronic embedded link to this article in your story Link will be live at the embargo time: http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamaophthalmology/fullarticle/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2017.2388

Patients reported improvement in symptoms of eye floaters after treatment with a laser, according to a study published by JAMA Ophthalmology.

Floaters become more prevalent with age and although most patients grow accustomed to them, many find them bothersome, and they can worsen visual quality. Three management options exist for floaters: patient education and observation; surgery; and the laser procedure, YAG vitreolysis, of which there are limited published studies on its effectiveness for treating floaters.

Chirag P. Shah, M.D., M.P.H., and Jeffrey S. Heier, M.D., of the Ophthalmic Consultants of Boston, randomly assigned 52 patients (52 eyes) to receive YAG laser vitreolysis (n = 36) in one session or a sham (placebo) laser treatment (control; n = 16).

Six months after treatment, the YAG group reported significantly greater improvement in self-reported floater-related visual disturbance (54 percent) compared with sham controls (9 percent). A total of 19 patients (53 percent) in the YAG laser group reported significantly or completely improved symptoms vs 0 individuals in the sham group. Several measures of quality of life also improved compared with those in the sham laser group, including general vision and independence. No differences in adverse events between groups were identified.

A limitation of the study was its small sample size and short follow-up period.

“Greater confidence in these outcomes may result from larger confirmatory studies of longer duration,” the authors write.

For more details and to read the full study, please visit the For The Media website.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions three treatment options for eye floaters — patient education and observation, surgery, and laser treatment — but didn’t comment on how these treatments compared in effectiveness. That’s probably because the study did not compare laser surgery against other treatments for eye floaters.
The American Association of Opthalmology, as of 2015, viewed the evidence for laser treatment benefits as too limited to offer its official support.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You know your cholesterol, your blood pressure ... your heart gene score?

Researchers say a new way of analyzing genetic test data may one day help identify people at high risk of having a heart attack at a young age in time to help.

Today, gene testing mostly focuses on rare mutations in one or a few genes, like those that cause cystic fibrosis or sickle cell disease, or the BRCA gene responsible for a small fraction of breast cancer. It is less useful for some of the most common diseases, such as heart disease or diabetes, because they are influenced by vast numbers of genes-gone-wrong working together in complicated ways.

On Monday, researchers revealed a new way to measure millions of small genetic variations that add up to cause harm, letting them calculate someone's inherited risk for the most common form of heart disease and four other serious disorders. They estimated that up to 25 million Americans may have triple the average person's risk for coronary artery disease even if they haven't yet developed warning signs like high cholesterol.

"What I foresee is in five years, each person will know this risk number, this 'polygenic risk score,' similar to the way each person knows his or her cholesterol," said Dr. Sekar Kathiresan, who led the research team from the Broad Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School.

If the approach pans out and doctors adopt it, a bad score wouldn't mean that you'd get a disease, just that your genetic makeup increases the chance — one more piece of information in deciding on care. For example, when the researchers tested the system using a DNA database from Britain, less than 1 percent of people with the lowest risk scores were diagnosed with coronary artery disease, compared with 11 percent of people with the highest risk score.

"There are things you can do to lower the risk," Kathiresan said — the usual advice about diet, exercise, cholesterol medication and not smoking helps.

On the flip side, a low-risk score "doesn't give you a free pass," he added. An unhealthy lifestyle could overwhelm the protection of good genes.

The scoring system can also predict an increased risk of Type 2 diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, breast cancer and an irregular heartbeat called atrial fibrillation, the team reported in the journal Nature Genetics — noting that next steps include learning what might likewise lower those risks.

It doesn't require the most sophisticated type of genetic testing. Instead, Kathiresan can calculate risk scores for those five diseases — eventually maybe more — simply by reanalyzing the kind of raw data people receive after sending a cheek swab to companies like 23andMe.

A geneticist who specializes in cardiovascular disease, he hopes to open a website where people can send in such data to learn their heart risk, as part of continuing research. Kathiresan and co-author Dr. Amit Khera, a Mass General cardiologist, are co-inventors on a patent application for the system.

Other scientists and companies have long sought ways to measure risk from multiple, additive gene effects — the "poly" in polygenic — and Myriad Genetics has begun selling a type of polygenic test for breast cancer risk.

But specialists in heart disease and genetics who weren't involved with the research called the new findings exciting because of their scope.

"The results should be eye-opening for cardiologists," said Dr. Charles C. Hong, director of cardiovascular research at the University of Maryland School of Medicine. "The only disappointment is that this score applies only to those with European ancestry, so I wonder if similar scores are in the works for the large majority of the world population that is not white."

Hong pointed to a friend who recently died of a massive heart attack despite being a superfit marathon runner who'd never smoked, the kind of puzzling death that doctors have long hoped that a better understanding of genetics could help to prevent.

"Most of the variation in disease risk comes from an enormous number of very tiny effects" in genes, agreed Stanford University genetics Professor Jonathan Pritchard. "This is the first time polygenic scores have really been shown to reach the level of precision where they can have an impact" on patient health.

First, the Boston-based team combed previous studies that mapped the DNA of large numbers of people, looking for links to the five diseases — not outright mutations but minor misspellings in the genetic code.

Each variation alone would have only a tiny effect on health. They developed a computerized system that analyzed how those effects add up, and tested it using DNA and medical records from 400,000 people stored in Britain's UK Biobank. Scores more than three times the average person's risk were deemed high.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does offer the following: “Other scientists and companies have long sought ways to measure risk from multiple, additive gene effects — the “poly” in polygenic — and Myriad Genetics has begun selling a type of polygenic test for breast cancer risk.”  And there are multiple other methods for assessing the risk of a person developing specific diseases, although the story doesn’t offer any comparison between those methods and the new one it touts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Dec. 7, 2018─Vitamin C may reduce the harm done to lungs in infants born to mothers who smoke during their pregnancy, according to a randomized, controlled trial published online in the American Thoracic Society’s American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine.

In “Oral Vitamin C (500 mg/day) to Pregnant Smokers Improves Infant Airway Function at 3 Months: A Randomized Trial,” Cindy T. McEvoy, MD, MCR, and her co-authors report that at three months of age, the infants whose mothers took 500 mg of vitamin C in addition to their prenatal vitamin had significantly better forced expiratory flows (FEFs). FEFs measure how fast air can be exhaled from the lung and are an important measure of lung function because they can detect airway obstruction.

The researchers also discovered an association between the infant FEFs and a genetic variant some of the mothers possessed that appeared to amplify the negative impact of nicotine on the babies before they were born. Other studies have linked this genetic factor, specifically for the α5 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, to increased risk of lung cancer and obstructive lung disease.

“Smoking during pregnancy reflects the highly addictive nature of nicotine that disproportionately affects the most vulnerable populations,” said Dr. McEvoy, lead study author and professor of pediatrics at Oregon Health & Science University. “Finding a way to help infants exposed to smoking and nicotine in utero recognizes the unique dangers posed by a highly advertised, addictive product and the lifetime effects on offspring who did not choose to be exposed.”

In a previous study, the authors had shown that 72 hours after birth, babies of mothers who smoked had better lung function if their mothers were randomized to vitamin C (500 mg/day) during their pregnancies compared to those born to mothers who smoked and were randomized to placebo. That study used passive methods to measure lung function, and the authors note that FEFs provide a more direct assessment of airway function and are similar to methods used to diagnose lung disease in adults and older children.

In the current study, 251 pregnant women who smoked were randomly assigned at 13 to 23 weeks of gestation to either receive vitamin C (125 women) or a placebo (126 women). Smoking was defined as having had one or more cigarettes in the last week. All participants received smoking cessation counseling throughout the study, and about 10 percent of the women quit smoking during the study.

The researchers wrote that study results support the hypothesis that oxidative stress caused by cigarette smoking reduces the amount of ascorbic acid, a component of vitamin C, available to the body. At the time they enrolled in the study, the women had lower levels of ascorbic acid than have been reported among women who do not smoke. Those levels rose in study participants who received vitamin C to become comparable to women who do not smoke.

Infants in this study will continue to be followed to track their lung function and respiratory outcomes. The authors believe that future trials of vitamin C supplementation in pregnant smokers should determine whether the benefits are greater if the supplementation starts earlier and continues postnatally in the babies themselves.

Summing up the findings of the current study, Dr. McEvoy said that a relatively low dosage of vitamin C may present “a safe and inexpensive intervention that has the potential to help lung health of millions of infants worldwide.”

However, she added, helping mothers quit smoking should remain the primary goal for health professionals and public health officials. “Although vitamin C supplementation may protect to some extent the lungs of babies born to mothers who smoke during pregnancy, those children will still be at greater risk for obesity, behavioral disorders and other serious health issues,” she said.

This study was funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the Office of Dietary Supplements.

“For mothers who smoke during pregnancy, vitamin C may reduce harm #smoking causes to their babies’ #lungs, finds new study of #vitaminC supplementation. #Nosmokingduringpregnancy.”

About the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine

The AJRCCM is a peer-reviewed journal published by the American Thoracic Society. The Journal takes pride in publishing the most innovative science and the highest quality reviews, practice guidelines and statements in pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine. With an impact factor of 15.239, it is one of the highest ranked journals in pulmonology. Editor: Jadwiga Wedzicha, MD, professor of respiratory medicine at the National Heart and Lung Institute (Royal Brompton Campus), Imperial College London, UK.

Founded in 1905, the American Thoracic Society is the world's leading medical association dedicated to advancing pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine. The Society’s more than 16,000 members prevent and fight respiratory disease around the globe through research, education, patient care and advocacy. The ATS publishes three journals, the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, the American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology and the Annals of the American Thoracic Society.

The ATS will hold its 2019 International Conference, May 17-22, in Dallas, Texas, where world-renowned experts will share the latest scientific research and clinical advances in pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We were glad to see this important caveat relating to an alternative intervention included:
“Helping mothers quit smoking should remain the primary goal for health professionals and public health officials.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, June 30, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Adding to the ongoing debate on the usefulness of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test for prostate cancer, new research from Sweden finds the screen cuts lives lost to the disease by almost half.

The argument over whether PSA screening saves men's lives or merely leads to the overdiagnosis of very slow-growing cancers (with attendant worry and overtreatment) has bedeviled the medical world for years.

According to recently revised guidelines from the American Cancer Society, men at average risk for prostate cancer should discuss the PSA test with their doctor, starting at age 50. For men at high risk for the disease -- blacks and men who have a father, brother or son found to have prostate cancer at an early age (before 65) -- that discussion should start at age 45.

"Because prostate cancer grows slowly, those men without symptoms of prostate cancer who do not have a 10-year life expectancy should not be offered testing since they are not likely to benefit," the society notes on its Web site.

Ambivalence over the test hasn't been confined to the United States.

"In Europe, we have been reluctant to recommend that all men get PSA testing as we have felt that there has been a lack of knowledge," agreed lead researcher Dr. Jonas Hugosson, a professor of urology at the University of Gothenburg.

However, he believes that with the results of the new 14-year study, "it feels ethically difficult not at least to inform all men over the age of 50 about PSA and its possibilities. Personally, I would recommend my friends check their PSA," Hugosson added.

The report is published in the June 30 online edition of The Lancet Oncology.

For the still-ongoing study, Hugosson randomly assigned some 20,000 men to either PSA screening once every two years or no screening. The men were between 50 and 65 at the start of the study.

Men whose PSA levels were above normal were offered more tests, such as a digital rectal exam and prostate biopsies.

Over 14 years of follow-up, deaths from prostate cancer dropped by 44 percent among the screened men, compared with unscreened men, the researchers found. Overall, 44 of the men who had PSA testing died from prostate cancer, compared to 78 men who had not had been screened.

Among screened men, 11.4 percent were diagnosed with prostate cancer, compared with 7.2 percent of unscreened men. Of the men in the screened group diagnosed with prostate cancer, nearly 79 percent were diagnosed because they took part in the study, the researchers noted.

In addition, men in the screened group were more likely to have their cancer diagnosed while it was in an early stage. In the screened group, 46 men were diagnosed with advanced cancer, compared with 87 men in the unscreened group, Hugosson's team found.

"Our study has a longer follow-up than previous studies, but shows that in those men invited [to the study], the risk of dying is only half of that in the control group. In men younger than 60 at study entry, the effect was even more pronounced -- only one-quarter of expected deaths occurred," Hugosson said.

Moreover, the risk of over-diagnosis was less than previously thought, with just 12 men needed to be diagnosed to save one life. However, since the benefit of PSA screening requires at least 10 years to be borne out, it still seems questionable to test PSA for men over 70, the researchers noted.

Dr. David E. Neal, a professor of surgical oncology at the University of Cambridge in the U.K. and author of an accompanying editorial, believes that, "PSA testing detects prostate cancer early in its natural history when it causes no symptoms. By doing so, it can save the lives of some men who would otherwise have died of the disease."

This study adds to previous evidence that PSA testing and screening for prostate cancer saves lives, he said. Still, the PSA test remains "a blunt instrument," when it comes to determining the aggressiveness of a particular tumor, Neal said. "We need better tests that identify more accurately those men destined to develop problems in the future from this disease," he said.

In the United States, PSA testing remains a routine part of most physical exams, according to Dr. Nelson Neal Stone, a professor of urology and radiation oncology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City.

"I would say 70 to 80 percent of physicians now order a PSA test," he said. "So it is more or less the standard to care in America to get a PSA done."

Stone noted that screening detects a lot of early cancers, which do not need to be treated. "When we see patients with low-risk disease we don't treat them, we observe them," he said.

"Younger men benefit most from screening, because they have the greatest risk of dying," Stone said. "This study clearly supports PSA screening to prevent prostate cancer deaths."

Another expert, Dr. Anthony D'Amico, chief of radiation oncology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, added that "people in good health will benefit from [PSA] screening, but people in poor health may not benefit at all." That's because if their prostate tumor is not aggressive they are more likely to die from the other, more serious conditions, he explained.

For more information on prostate cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION:  The entire story was about whether PSA screening is better than no screening. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MAYWOOD, IL - Robotic surgery is as effective as traditional open surgery in treating bladder cancer, according to a landmark study published in the journal Lancet.

Three Loyola Medicine urologists, Marcus Quek, MD, Gopal Gupta, MD, and Alex Gorbonos, MD, are co-authors of the study. First author is Dipen Parekh, MD, of the University of Miami.

Loyola is among 15 centers that participated in the nationwide trial of 350 patients, who were randomly assigned to undergo robotic surgery or open surgery to remove cancerous bladders.

After two years, there was no significant difference between the two groups in survival without disease progression. Robotic surgery was associated with less blood loss and shorter hospital stays, but longer surgeries. There were no significant differences in complication rates or in patients' quality of life. The study is called RAZOR (randomized open versus robotic cystectomy trial) and was funded by the National Cancer Institute.

A robotic system allows a surgeon to perform operations through a few small incisions. Movements by the surgeon's hand or wrist are translated into highly precise movements of the surgical instruments. Every maneuver is directed by the surgeon, in real time, as the surgeon views a magnified, 3D, high-definition image of the surgical site.

Since robotic surgery was introduced in 2000, it has spread rapidly and has been used in about four million surgeries worldwide. But apart from the RAZOR trial, there have been no prospective, randomized multicenter trials to assess how robotic surgery compares to open surgery in cancer survival.

The RAZOR trial found that two years after surgery, 72.3 percent of patients in the robotic surgery group were alive, with no disease progression and essentially cured, compared with 71.6 percent in the open surgery group. Sixty-seven percent of robotic surgery patients experienced adverse effects such as urinary tract infections and intestinal obstructions, compared with 69 percent in the open surgery group.

Robotic surgery patients stayed a median of six days in the hospital, compared with seven days in the open surgery group. Robotic surgery patients lost less than half as much blood as open surgery patients, but spent more time in the operating room (seven hours, eight minutes compared with six hours, one minute).

Researchers wrote that the findings "underscore the need for further high-quality trials to assess surgical innovation before this surgical technique is widely adopted in clinical practice."

Dr. Gupta added that the study provides evidence demonstrating that the robotic approach performs at least as well as the open approach. "It is important to conduct these trials before widespread adoption of technology, as has been the case with robotic prostatectomy (removal of the prostate)," he said.

The study is titled "Robot-assisted radical cystectomy versus open radical cystectomy in patients with bladder cancer (RAZOR): an open-label, randomized, phase 3, non-inferiority trial."

Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men, but it is less common in women. The American Cancer Society estimates this year there will be about 81,000 new cases in the United States, and about 17,000 people will die of the disease.

The standard surgical treatment of invasive bladder cancer is a radical cystectomy (removal of the bladder). Three main techniques are used to replace the bladder: construct a new bladder (neobladder) from the patient's intestine; place a pouch inside the body to act as an artificial bladder; or place a bag outside the body to collect urine. Loyola Medicine offers both open and robotic radical cystectomy and all three bladder replacement techniques. There are pros and cons to each surgical technique, and Loyola physicians help patients decide which option best fits their lifestyle and health status.

Loyola Medicine is nationally recognized for its expertise in diagnosing and treating a broad range of urologic conditions and providing integrated services for optimal patient care. Loyola's department of urology is ranked 39th in the country by U.S. News and World Report.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The comparison of robot-assisted to open surgery was the main point of the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ROSEMONT, Ill. (May 1, 2018)--An estimated 45 percent of people are at risk of developing knee osteoarthritis (OA) in their lifetime. According to a network meta-analysis research article published in the May 1, 2018 issue of the Journal of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (JAAOS), the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) naproxen was ranked most effective in individual knee OA treatment for improving both pain and function, and is considered a relatively safe and low-cost treatment method.

Nonsurgical treatments for knee OA supported by previous research evidence include strength training, low-impact aerobic exercises, NSAIDs, and weight loss in individuals with a body mass index over 25. This new research analyzed data from multiple trials to determine the relative effectiveness of various nonsurgical treatments for knee OA. The treatments that were compared and ranked included acetaminophen; ibuprofen; intra-articular (IA) or joint injections of cortisone; platelet-rich plasma (PRP); hyaluronic acid (HA); several NSAIDs, such as naproxen, celecoxib, and diclofenac; and both oral and IA placebo.

"This is the first comprehensive mixed-comparison analysis comparing best-evidence scientific research and excluding lower quality studies that can bias the outcomes," said lead author and orthopaedic surgeon David Jevsevar, MD, MBA. "Using a statistical ranking technique, we worked to provide evidence regarding which of the most common NSAIDs are most likely to decrease pain and improve function, and we attempted to fill in the gaps in evidence for more inconclusive treatments such as HA, PRP, and corticosteroids."

Authors analyzed 53 randomized controlled trials that examined knee OA treatments for at least 28 days and included a minimum of 30 participants per study group. Knee OA treatments were ranked on a scale of one to five, with one being the most effective. They found the following:
• For pain reduction, cortisone injections provided the greatest short-term (4 to 6 weeks) pain relief, followed by ibuprofen, PRP injections, naproxen, and celecoxib.
• Naproxen ranked the highest for probability for improving function, followed by diclofenac, celecoxib, ibuprofen, and PRP injections.
• Naproxen was ranked the most effective individual knee OA treatment for improving both pain and function followed by cortisone injections, PRP injections, ibuprofen and celecoxib.
• HA injections did not achieve a rank in the top five treatments for pain, function, or combined pain and function. An analysis of 12 articles also found that results with HA are not significantly different from those with IA placebo for treatment of knee OA.

"Because knee OA has both a high disease burden and high treatment costs, additional prospective studies using similar outcomes, timelines, and measures of clinically important changes are needed," explained Dr. Jevsevar. "While the information in this analysis is helpful to physicians, patients also can benefit from these findings and use it with their doctors to weigh all possible treatment options."

Although the use of NSAIDs for arthritic conditions such as knee OA has potential risks, including heart attack and stroke, existing evidence indicates that naproxen has less potential for adverse cardiovascular events.

More information about the AAOS and JAAOS

Follow the AAOS on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram 

Follow the conversation about JAAOS on Twitter

From the Department of Orthopaedics, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH (Dr. Jevsevar), American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, Rosemont, IL (Mr. Shores, Mr. Mullen, Ms. Schulte, and Dr. Cummins), and Franciscan Orthopedic Associates, Tacoma, WA (Dr. Brown). J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2018; 26:325-336. DOI: 10.5435/JAAOS-D-17-00318
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: A comparison of existing alternatives is the point of the journal article. The news release highlights the comparisons in clear language.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MILAN, ITALY, Sept. 12, 2017 - An antibody treatment reduces the rate of flare-ups by nearly 20 percent in patients with a subgroup of treatment-resistant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), according to the results of two large international trials presented today at the European Respiratory Society International Congress in Milan, Italy, and simultaneously published in the New England Journal of Medicine.

"The goal of precision medicine is to give the right treatment to the right patient," said lead author Frank Sciurba, M.D., director of the Center for COPD and Emphysema and UPMC Pulmonary Function Exercise Physiology Laboratory, and visiting professor in the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. "These findings are the first example of a precision therapy that is uniquely effective in a subgroup of patients with treatment-resistant COPD."

"There is significant variation between patients in the cells and other proteins responsible for lung inflammation, so there are actually many different subtypes of COPD," said Sciurba.

One subgroup called eosinophilic predominant COPD is present in as many as 40 percent of patients and is characterized by elevated levels of a type of white blood cell known as eosinophils, he said.

The new study reports the results from two Phase III clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of mepolizumab, an antibody treatment that reduces the number of eosinophils in the blood, in moderate to severe treatment-resistant eosinophilic COPD by blocking the pro-inflammatory effects of interleukin-5.

Patients included in the trials were still having flare-ups despite a year of a standard treatment known as "triple inhaled therapy" that includes bronchodilators and glucocorticoids.

"These patients already have been given every treatment we have to offer them and are still having flare-ups that significantly interfere with their quality of life and can lead to deterioration in lung function and higher mortality," said Sciurba. "We hoped to be able to offer them an option."

Mepolizumab is already approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to reduce symptom flare-ups and improve quality of life in eosinophilic asthma.

The first trial, termed METREX, was conducted at 117 sites in 15 countries from 2014 to 2017. A total of 837 COPD patients were stratified by blood eosinophil counts and randomized to receive either 100 milligrams of mepolizumab or placebo, delivered under the skin every four weeks for one year.

The patients with high eosinophil counts who received mepolizumab had a statistically significant 18 percent lower rate of moderate/severe exacerbations (1.4 per year compared to 1.7 per year) than those in the placebo group. The exacerbation rate in the low eosinophil group treated with the biologic did not differ from placebo. The time to the first exacerbation also was higher with mepolizumab than placebo, but only in the high eosinophil group.

In a second, simultaneous trial, termed METREO, the team assessed the effect of a higher dose of mepolizumab in 675 patients with elevated eosinophil levels. Patients were randomized to receive 100 or 300 milligrams of mepolizumab or placebo, with the same delivery method and schedule as METREX.

Similar to METREX, the exacerbation rate was reduced by 20 percent in the high eosinophil group after 100 milligrams of mepolizumab. The METREO results narrowly missed statistical significance. The 300-milligram dose did not provide an advantage over the lower dose.

An analysis of data from both trials found that as baseline blood eosinophil counts increased, so did mepolizumab's reduction in the annual exacerbation rate. This finding indicates that patients with higher initial eosinophil counts benefited more from mepolizumab than those with lower eosinophil counts, Sciurba said. The safety profile of mepolizumab did not differ from placebo in either trial.

"In addition to providing a new treatment option for patients with treatment-resistant, moderate to severe COPD, the new results also are important because they identify a potential biomarker for the disease and demonstrate that eosinophilic inflammation plays a role in flare-ups in COPD," Sciurba said.

Pitt's Division of Pulmonology, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine has a legacy of pioneering treatments for lung disease. UPMC also is home to a leading lung transplant program.

"The findings in these trials exemplify what we hope to achieve not only in COPD but across all lung diseases with regards to a precision approach to treatment," said division chief, Rama Mallampalli, M.D.

Funding for both trials was provided by GlaxoSmithKline, which plans to seek approval from the FDA for the use of mepolizumab in eosinophilic COPD.

Additional authors on the study are Ian Pavord, F.Med.Sci. D.M., University of Oxford, UK; Pascal Chanez, M.D., Ph.D., CIC Nord Aix-Marseille University, France; Gerard Criner, M.D., Temple University; Huib Kerstjens, M.D., Ph.D., University of Groningen, the Netherlands; Stephanie Korn, M.D., Ph.D., Mainz University Hospital, Germany; Njira Lugogo, M.D., Duke University; Jean-Benoit Martinot, M.D., CHU UCL Namur, Belgium; Hironori Sagara, M.D., Ph.D., Showa University, Japan; and Frank Albers, M.D., Ph.D., Eric Bradford, M.D., Stephanie Schweiker Harris, B.Sc., Bhabita Mayer, M.Sc., David Rubin, M.D., and Steven Yancey, M.Sc., all of GlaxoSmithKline.

Patients wishing to learn more about the research being performed at the Center for COPD and Emphysema can call 866-948-2673 or email ecrc@upmc.edu.

About the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine

As one of the nation's leading academic centers for biomedical research, the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine integrates advanced technology with basic science across a broad range of disciplines in a continuous quest to harness the power of new knowledge and improve the human condition. Driven mainly by the School of Medicine and its affiliates, Pitt has ranked among the top 10 recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health since 1998. In rankings recently released by the National Science Foundation, Pitt ranked fifth among all American universities in total federal science and engineering research and development support.

Likewise, the School of Medicine is equally committed to advancing the quality and strength of its medical and graduate education programs, for which it is recognized as an innovative leader, and to training highly skilled, compassionate clinicians and creative scientists well-equipped to engage in world-class research. The School of Medicine is the academic partner of UPMC, which has collaborated with the University to raise the standard of medical excellence in Pittsburgh and to position health care as a driving force behind the region's economy. For more information about the School of Medicine, see http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release notes the standard treatments for COPD are “triple inhaled therapy” including bronchodilators and glucocorticoids.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“I’m very favorably impressed they were able to pull this study off so successfully, and it clearly shows the importance of early intervention,” said Dr. William T. Carpenter, a professor of psychiatry at the University of Maryland School of Medicine, who was not involved in the study.

Dr. Mary E. Olson, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, who has worked to promote approaches to psychosis that are less reliant on drugs, said the combined treatment had a lot in common with Open Dialogue, a Finnish program developed in the 1980s. “These are zeitgeist ideas, and I think it’s thrilling that this trial got such good results,” Dr. Olson said.

In the new study, doctors used the medications as part of a package of treatments and worked to keep the doses as low as possible minimizing their bad effects. The sprawling research team, led by Dr. John M. Kane, chairman of the psychiatry department at Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, randomly assigned 34 community care clinics in 21 states to provide either treatment as usual, or the combined package.

The team trained staff members at the selected clinics to deliver that package, and it included three elements in addition to the medication. First, help with work or school such as assistance in deciding which classes or opportunities are most appropriate, given a person’s symptoms. Second, education for family members to increase their understanding of the disorder. And finally, one-on-one talk therapy in which the person with the diagnosis learns tools to build social relationships, reduce substance use and help manage the symptoms, which include mood problems as well as hallucinations and delusions.

For example, some patients can learn to defuse the voices in their head — depending on the severity of the episode — by ignoring them or talking back. The team recruited 404 people with first-episode psychosis, mostly diagnosed in their late teens or 20s. About half got the combined approach and half received treatment as usual. Clinicians monitored both groups using standardized checklists that rate symptom severity and quality of life, like whether a person is working, and how well he or she is getting along with family members.

The group that started on the combined treatment scored, on average, more poorly on both measures at the beginning of the trial. Over two years, both groups showed steady improvement. But by the end, those who had been in the combined program had more symptom relief, and were functioning better as well.The researchers expect to have lowered average doses in the combined program but had not yet finished analyzing that data.

“One way to think about it is, if you look at the people who did the best — those we caught earliest after their first episode — their improvement by the end was easily noticeable by friends and family,” Dr. Kane said. The gains for those in typical treatment were apparent to doctors, but much less obvious.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There were good explanations of the two alternatives being compared by the research itself — the drug-focused standard and the more comprehensive integrated care.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE: 11 A.M. (ET) TUESDAY, AUGUST 16, 2016

Media Advisory: To contact Paul D. Miller, M.D., call 303-925-4514 or email millerccbr@aol.com. To contact editorial co-author Anne R. Cappola, M.D., Sc.M., email Abbey Anderson at Abbey.Anderson@uphs.upenn.edu.

To place an electronic embedded link to this study and editorial in your story These links will be live at the embargo time: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jama.2016.11136 http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jama.2016.11032

Among postmenopausal women with osteoporosis at risk of fracture, daily injection of the drug abaloparatide for 18 months significantly reduced the risk of new vertebral and nonvertebral fractures compared with placebo, according to a study appearing in the August 16 issue of JAMA.

Osteoporosis is associated with substantial social, economic, and public health burdens. Based on 2010 U.S. Census data, a study estimated the prevalence of osteoporosis among women 50 to 69 years of age at 3.4 million. It has been estimated that the lifetime risk of osteoporotic fracture for a 60-year-old woman is 44 percent. Additional therapies are needed for prevention of osteoporotic fractures. As a result of its mechanism of action, it has been hypothesized that the drug abaloparatide, a synthetic peptide, would have a more pronounced anabolic (i.e., bone growing) action on bone compared with the osteoporosis drug teriparatide.

Paul D. Miller, M.D., of the Colorado Center for Bone Research, Lakewood, Colo., and colleagues randomly assigned postmenopausal women with osteoporosis to receive daily injections for 18 months of placebo (n = 821); abaloparatide (n = 824); or teriparatide (n = 818). The trial was conducted at 28 sites in 10 countries.

Among 2,463 women (average age, 69 years), 1,901 completed the study. New vertebral fractures occurred less frequently in the active treatment groups vs placebo: in 0.58 percent (n = 4) of participants in the abaloparatide group; in 0.84 percent (n = 6) of participants in the teriparatide group; and in 4.22 percent (n = 30) of those in the placebo group. The estimated event rate for nonvertebral fracture was lower with abaloparatide vs placebo: 2.7 percent in the abaloparatide group; 3.3 percent in the teriparatide group; and 4.7 percent in the placebo group.

Bone mineral density (BMD) increases were greater with abaloparatide than placebo. Incidence of hypercalcemia (the presence of abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood) was lower with abaloparatide (3.4 percent) vs teriparatide (6.4 percent). Overall, there were no differences in serious adverse events between the treatment groups.

“Further research is needed to understand the clinical importance of risk difference, the risks and benefits of abaloparatide treatment, and the efficacy of abaloparatide vs other osteoporosis treatments,” the authors write.

: This study was funded by Radius Health. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, etc.

Editorial: Osteoporosis Therapy in Postmenopausal Women With High Risk of Fracture

“Ultimately, which therapy is selected for osteoporosis treatment may be less important than identifying and initiating an approved treatment,” write Anne R. Cappola, M.D., Sc.M., of the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, and Associate Editor, JAMA, and Dolores M. Shoback, M.D., of the University of California, San Francisco, in an accompanying editorial.

“The bar is high for any preventive treatment—in the efforts to prevent a fracture that may or may not ever occur, prescribers do not want to prescribe a therapy that causes a new problem. The way forward for fracture prevention involves not only the development of better therapies to prevent fracture and easier delivery systems but also improved adoption of existing osteoporosis therapies for patients with prior fractures and minimization of adverse effects, particularly those associated with long-term use.”

: Both authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study itself was a comparison of two drugs and a placebo. The release explains that. The only thing that would have been better than this would have been an explanation of other ways the condition is treated.
This treatment is often viewed as a second-line one because it involves the inconvenience of injections under the skin. For most individuals, there are simpler oral treatments that are effective and have a long track record. The treatments studied here are for those with higher risks, especially those who did not respond to or did not tolerate the existing therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A saliva test may someday be able to diagnose a concussion and predict how long symptoms last, according to a study published Monday in the JAMA Pediatrics.

In their study, Penn State College of Medicine researchers found five small molecules called microRNAs in saliva with real potential for identifying concussive symptoms in children, teens and young adults. MicroRNAs influence protein activities throughout the body, and they are easily measured in biofluids, including blood, cerebrospinal fluid and saliva, according to the authors.

Dr. Steve Hicks, senior author of the study and an assistant professor of pediatrics at Penn State College of Medicine, said the "five microRNAs in saliva could predict with approximately 85% accuracy which concussed children would have symptoms one month later. In comparison, standard survey measures that are typically used in clinics were approximately 65% accurate."

The study was funded in part by Quadrant Biosciences, a biotech company that hopes to bring a saliva test for concussion to market in the next 12 to 24 months, Hicks said.

"It's frustrating for both parents and physicians that we can't accurately and objectively predict how long a child's concussion symptoms might last, what those symptoms are likely to consist of and when it might be safe for them to return to sports or school," said Hicks, who, as a practicing pediatrician, has routinely cared for kids with concussions.

For the study, Hicks and his co-authors looked at 52 patients between the ages of 7 and 21, with an average age of 14.

MicroRNA expression was measured in saliva spit into a cup by the patients, who had been injured mostly in sports or car accidents, when they arrived at Penn State Hershey Medical Center for an evaluation. Of the 52, 30 had prolonged symptoms and 22 had short-term symptoms of mild traumatic brain injury.

"We found three microRNAs that were highly associated with specific symptoms one month after injury, such as headache, fatigue and memory difficulties," Hicks said. He added that creating an actual test for use by doctors will require collaboration on the part of researchers.

"Fortunately, the technology required to measure saliva RNA is already employed in medicine; we use it to check patients for upper respiratory viruses in our hospitals and clinics every day," Hicks said. "Modifying this approach for patients with concussions could potentially provide a rapid, objective tool for managing brain injury."

'Way too early to know'

However, the editorial authors, Dr. William P. Meehan III of Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention at Boston Children's Hospital in Massachusetts and Dr. Rebekah Mannix of Brain Injury Center at Boston Children's Hospital, noted that "the relatively small sample size in this study requires larger-scale studies to determine the reliability" of the results.

For example, they noted that the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications is common among those with more severe injury. In the study, those who had used anti-inflammatory medications were the ones with longer-term symptoms. Possibly, then, the drugs may be a potential 'confounding' variable, they wrote, meaning that medication may influence test results and symptoms, adding an element of confusion to the study and its possible interpretation.

Still, "the findings are promising, representing potential biomarkers for the diagnosis, recovery, and prognostic assessment of a sport-related concussion."

Dr. Jeffrey Kutcher, a neurologist and National Director of The Sports Neurology Clinic at The CORE Institute, said that "work like this is important because it does provide potential for tests that can be helpful in the clinical setting."

"I think the main caveat is, this is way too early to know what this type of tool can do for us," added Kutcher, who was not involved in the new research. "The main reason is that there's a difference between simply having a brain that experiences force and being concussed."

The saliva biomarker may be showing that neurons experienced force and not that a there is a concussion, with which the brain cannot perform its typical functions within a normal range, he said: "I would hesitate to assign too much potential groundbreaking science."

Other biomarkers, including blood, are being investigated as potential concussion tests, he said, though "nothing is at this stage or beyond this."

There are also tools that look at the electrical networks that brains form, he said, disclosing that he is consulting for a company working on one such technology. A patient undergoes an electroencephalogram while doing a cognitive task, and the EEG records how the brain responds.

"By actually (measuring) the brain network activity directly, you can look at really what is the functional health of the brain," he said.

In addition, some scientists are exploring functional MRI techniques to look at the metabolic function of different areas of the brain to gain insight into concussion, he said.

Hicks said he and his colleagues are collaborating with others to examine saliva biomarkers in adult athletes and members of the armed services.

"Because the markers we identified in this study are not correlated with patient age, we are hopeful they may be applied in adult populations, as well," he said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: As noted earlier, the story explicitly compared accuracy rates for the saliva test versus the survey tool doctors currently use. In addition, the story mentioned that researchers also are testing for concussion-related biomarkers in blood, using EEG records and “exploring functional MRI techniques to look at the metabolic function of different areas of the brain.” The story discusses all of these approaches as preliminary investigations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have developed a score that predicts an individual's risk of dying within 5 years for people aged between 40 and 70 years old in the UK, according to new research published in The Lancet.

The score, which uses measures that can be obtained by simple questionnaires without any need for physical examination, such as self-rated health and usual walking speed, could be used by individuals to improve awareness of their health status, and by doctors to identify high-risk individuals for further treatment, say the authors.

Individuals can calculate their personalised 5-year mortality risk and what the study authors call an 'Ubble age' [1]?the age where the average mortality risk in the population is most similar to the estimated risk of the individual?through an online questionnaire, using the dedicated interactive website [2]. The site was developed with Sense About Science [3], a UK charity that that equips people to make sense of scientific and medical claims in public discussion.

"The Ubble website allows anybody in the UK between forty and seventy years old to calculate their 'Ubble age' and their risk of dying within the next five years compared to the general population, using a simple set of a dozen or so questions," says study co-author Professor Erik Ingelsson from Uppsala University, Sweden. "This is the first study of its kind which is based on a very large study sample, and is not limited to specific populations, single types of risk, or requiring laboratory testing." [4]

To create the score, Professor Ingelsson and Dr Andrea Ganna, from the Karolinska Institutet in Sweden, analysed data collected between 2006 and 2010 from nearly half a million adults aged between 40 and 70 years from the UK Biobank [5]. They used a statistical survival model to assess the probability that 655 specific demographic, lifestyle, and health measurements could predict death from any cause and six specific causes, in men and women separately.

The results allow researchers to compare the predictive ability of a large number of health-related risk factors which were formerly studied separately and using different populations, although the predictive ability of risk factors does not necessarily imply they are causally related to the risk of dying.

For example, the research shows that self-reported information, such as usual walking pace and illness and injuries in the past 2 years, is generally a stronger predictor of death and survival than biological measurements, such as pulse rate and blood pressure. Surprisingly, self-reported walking pace is a stronger predictor of death risk in both men and women than smoking habits and other lifestyle measurements.

Self-rated overall health [6] emerged as the single most powerful predictor of death in men, and previous cancer diagnosis the strongest predictor in women (see figure 1 of the Article). When excluding individuals with serious diseases or disorders, smoking habits were the strongest predictors of mortality from any cause (figure 3).

Using these findings, the researchers then developed an easy-to-calculate risk score for an individual's risk of dying in the next 5 years, based on the most predictive self-reported information, including 13 questions for men and 11 for women. The performance of the score was validated in 35810 participants enrolled at two Scottish centres which were not used to develop the score, and was found to have around 80% accuracy in men and women (table 2). UK life tables and census information were used to calibrate the score for the overall UK population.

According to study co-author Dr Ganna, "The fact that the score can be measured online in a brief questionnaire, without any need for lab tests or physical examination, is an exciting development. We hope that our score might eventually enable doctors to quickly and easily identify their highest risk patients, although more research will be needed to determine whether it can be used in this way in a clinical setting. Of course, the score has a degree of uncertainty and shouldn't be seen as a deterministic prediction. For most people, a high risk of dying in the next five years can be reduced by increased physical activity, smoking cessation, and a healthy diet." [4]

Writing in a linked Comment, Simon Thompson and Peter Willeit from the University of Cambridge in the UK say, "One appealing aspect of the website is the representation of an individual's estimated 5 year mortality risk as what the authors call "Ubble age" (the age where the average risk in the population is most similar to the estimated risk of the individual); this concept is similar to that of heart age developed for communicating cardiovascular risk. Whether this will help individuals improve self-awareness of their health status, however, or only lead to so-called cyberchondria, is a moot point. Moreover, 5 year mortality is easier to predict than long-term morbidity, or quality of life and life expectancy, all of which are more important to individuals and to society."

This study was funded by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council.

[2] For preview login details for the Ubble website, please email daisy.barton@lancet.com.

[3] See http://www. for more information.

[4] Quotes direct from author and cannot be found in text of Article.

[5] UK Biobank http://www. recruited half a million people aged between 40 and 69 years in 2006-10 from across the country. Information on sociodemographics, physical measures, health and lifestyle factors, medical history, and blood measurements were taken. All participants agreed to have their health followed. The resource has been open to bona fide health researchers for 18 months. So far more than 1800 scientists have registered with UK Biobank to study a wide range of diseases.

"UK Biobank will only be limited by the imagination of the researchers using it," said Professor Rory Collins, UK Biobank Principal Investigator. "As an open access resource, scientists will be able to scrutinise each other's work, build upon their results or undertake their own novel studies to improve the health of future generations."

[6] Assessed using the question: In general how would you rate your overall health? Excellent/Good/Fair/Poor.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study and its press release make much of the potential advantage of predicting death via self-report questions rather than biological tests. So the text makes an overt comparison, admittedly without data.
The release could also have included the comparison to doing nothing. Whether providing any risk information (this version or another) or no risk information makes a difference is a legitimate question.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Maryland medical group has started treating autistic children in South Florida with shots of a drug used for chemical castration, a therapy widely panned by mainstream experts.

The group gives children the cancer drug Lupron to stop their bodies from making testosterone, saying the drug helps expel toxic mercury and quells aggressive or sexually explicit behavior by kids with excessive levels of the male hormone.

A Boca Raton mother who just put her 18-year-old son on the drug said it seems to help.

But numerous physicians, researchers and therapists insist there's no proof mercury causes autism, that Lupron removes mercury or that autistic kids have excessive testosterone. What's more, the drug carries a risk of bone damage, stunted growth and heart trouble, and can render children impotent.

These experts contend that Lupron, costing about $5,000 a month but seldom covered by insurance, is one of many treatments that cash in on the desperation of parents trying to cope with an incurable condition for which medicine has few good answers outside of painstaking behavioral therapy.

"Not only is there no scientific backing whatsoever for Lupron treatments, there are several major concerns for the children's health," said neurologist BethAnn McLaughlin, an adviser to the Dan Marino Foundation autism group in Weston and the mother of two developmentally disabled children.

"These people are preying on the fears of parents. We cannot be using these children who are so vulnerable as guinea pigs in a medical experiment."

Untested autism treatments have flourished while science struggles to explain the disorder, which disrupts the abilities to speak, concentrate, connect with people and control impulses.

For unknown reasons, autism has been on the rise for the past few decades, with an estimated 675,000 children – about one in 100 – now having mild to severe symptoms. Scientists believe it stems from genetic defects that may only cause problems after an environmental trigger.

A vocal subset of parents and activists blame vaccines, especially those with the mercury-based preservative thimerosal, which has been banned from virtually all as a precaution. Numerous studies have found no connection between autism and vaccines or thimerosal.

Lupron therapy grew from the mercury camp. Baltimore researcher Dr. Mark Geier started using the drug in 2005 on the theory – disputed by mainsteam doctors – that testosterone binds mercury in the body and that many autistic kids have high levels of the hormone.

Lupron halts production of the female hormone estrogen, which the body uses to make testosterone. The drug mainly is used to treat endometrial cancer in women and prostate cancer in men, and sometimes to chemically castrate sex offenders.

Geier's promotional materials said he has treated hundreds of children with Lupron and has launched nine ASD Centers in eight states. In his latest, he teams with Dr. David Clayman, a Boca Raton radiologist who has an autistic teen son and is opening an ASD office beside his MRI center in Tamarac.

Clayman said he would not comment until he treats patients with Lupron therapy for a year. Geier could not be reached for comment despite several attempts by phone. He told one parent he did not plan to comment for this story.

The medical group began recruiting Florida patients in March when Geier spoke at a Fort Lauderdale conference for parents of children with autism.

Teresa Badillo was at the meeting. Her family has searched in vain for a way to help their autistic son, Marco, 18. Badillo said he has little speech or interaction with others, but is doing OK in high school. Lately, though, Marco has grown more aggressive, physical and rebellious.

"We were basically under seige in this house," Badillo said. "This kind of behavior is more scary at 18 [than] at 3. I had choices to make. If you see there is another option out there that can help your child, most parents are going to choose that option."

Also, Marco had discovered sex and sometimes touched himself inappropriately in public, a common problem among those with autism.

"The kids don't understand. They have impulses. It's what happens when you have high testosterone," Badillo said.

The family put Marco on Lupron about six weeks ago. He gets two injections a month at a dosage larger than used on adult cancer patients, plus a small daily shot.

"The therapy immediately stopped the aggression," Badillo said. "This is not castrating a kid. It's just lowering the [testosterone] levels enough to normal range so the kid is not aggressive."

She said Geier plans to continue the Lupron for several months to see if it helps Marco's other autistic behavior. She said she knows the drug has risks but believes Lupron critics do not fully grasp the hard realities of life with an autistic child.

Lupron critics said autism parents may not understand the dangers.

The drug is not approved for children – except a rare few with premature puberty – because it can impair bone development crucial to growth, said Dr. Gary Berkovitz, chief of pediatric endocrinology at the University of Miami medical school.

It's not recommended for people with heart disease, kidney disease, asthma, depression or seizures because it can worsen those conditions. Autistic children are prone to seizures.

"It has not been tested so there's no way to know if it has adverse effects in the long run," Berkovitz said.

Said neurologist McLaughlin: "We have very significant concerns about irreversible damage to sexual function and the brain and sex organs of these children."

In addition, the Food and Drug Administration is investigating complaints that Lupron causes diabetes in adults.

Geier published a 2006 study contending that 11 autistic children taking Lupron did better on tests of awareness, sociability and behavior. He has since issued other studies finding that mercury leads to excess testosterone and that autistic children have excessive levels of the hormone.

Other doctors said Geier's studies were small, were not scientifically sound and were published in journals that do not follow the standard practice of having experts review the methods.

The area's largest autism treatment center jointly run by the University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University, as well as another at Florida Atlantic University, frown on Lupron and other untested therapies, officials at the centers said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Good job on this as well.  The story states that "untested autism treatments have flourished."  And it ends with: 
       
 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A commonly used drug could dramatically increase survival rates for men who have to fight prostate cancer twice.

The drug, a type of androgen-depleting therapy, is a frontline treatment for men who opt not to have surgery for the cancer. But the new finding indicates it could also be a valuable add-on treatment to surgery if the cancer returns.

Androgens, including testosterone, are thought to contribute to the growth and development of prostate cancer. Among men whose cancer showed signs of coming back after their prostate was surgically removed, adding a drug that blocks androgen receptors to radiation treatments halved their death rate from prostate cancer over the subsequent 12 years.

The findings should trickle down to clinical settings “pretty quickly,” said Dr. William Shipley, chair of the genitourinary oncology unit at Massachusetts General Hospital and one of the researchers behind the study, which was published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Prostate cancer recurrence happens in about 30 percent of patients after surgery. In these cases, radiation therapy is usually used.

The specific ADT drug used in the study, bicalutamide, has since been largely replaced by another kind of drug that decreases the amount of testosterone the body produces. The effect of the newer-generation medications, gonadotropin-releasing hormones, is similar to bicalutamide, according to other trials.

AstraZeneca, which is one of the makers of bicalutamide, was a sponsor of the study, and one of Shipley’s coauthors has received honoraria and grants from the company.

Because prostate cancer can progress relatively slowly, the study — which ran from 1998 to 2003 — needed an extended follow-up period to be sure of the effects, Shipley said. The men in the trial received the ADT drugs for two years.

The study represents an important, if incremental, step for clinicians, noted Dr. William See, chair of the urology department at the Medical College of Wisconsin, who wasn’t involved in the study. “It really builds on some prior data and combines prior findings to ask and answer a new question that is quite relevant for men affected by prostate cancer.”

Some patients benefitted from adding the drugs more than others. The results were especially dramatic for men who had prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels above .07 ng/ml when they started the trial. (While that is a relatively low level for most men, PSA levels should be close to zero after a prostatectomy.) Men with medium-grade tumors and those who may not have had their entire cancer removed during surgery also survived significantly longer if they received the drug.

However, See and Shipley both noted that looking at those subsets of patients was not what the study was initially designed to do, which limits the statistical power of those conclusions. More research will be needed to confirm which men benefit most from taking the drug.

“You don’t want to treat a patient if he doesn’t need to be treated,” Shipley said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Readers get a solid description of the standard of care, including typical procedures in the first occurrence, and how radiation therapy is typically used after a recurrence. Hormone blockers are not oversold as some revolutionary new advancement, but an existing treatment that needed long-term study to determine if they were beneficial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New research shows that resistance training protects the brain in persons with multiple sclerosis, which may delay the development of the disease

In the past, multiple sclerosis patients were advised not to exercise for fear of exacerbating the illness. However, it is now known that physical training can relieve many of the symptoms, including the excessive fatigue and mobility impairments that are often seen. New research now shows that resistance training may protect the nervous system and thus slow the progression of the disease.

This is the main finding of a study conducted by a research partnership between Aarhus University, Aarhus University Hospital, the University of Southern Denmark and the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, that has just been published in Multiple Sclerosis Journal.

The study shows that resistance training has a number of positive effects on the brain, which go beyond what can be achieved through effective disease specific medication.

"Over the past six years, we have been pursuing the idea that physical training has effects on more than just the symptoms, and this study provides the first indications that physical exercise may protect the nervous system against the disease," says one of the researchers behind the study, Associate Professor Ulrik Dalgas from the Department of Public Health at Aarhus University.

"For the past 15 years, we have known that physical exercise does not harm people with multiple sclerosis, but instead often has a positive impact on, for example, their ability to walk, their levels of fatigue, their muscle strength and their aerobic capacity, which has otherwise often deteriorated. But the fact that physical training also seems to have a protective effect on the brain in people with multiple sclerosis is new and important knowledge," says Ulrik Dalgas.

In the study, the researchers followed 35 people with multiple sclerosis for six months. Half of the group engaged in resistance training twice a week, while the other half continued to live their lives normally without systematic training.

Prior to and following the six-month period, the test subjects had their brains MR-scanned, and the researchers could see that there was a tendency for the brain to shrink less in those patients who undertook resistance training.

"Among persons with multiple sclerosis, the brain shrinks markedly faster than normal. Drugs can counter this development, but we saw a tendency that training further minimises brain shrinkage in patients already receiving medication. In addition, we saw that several smaller brain areas actually started to grow in response to training," says Ulrik Dalgas.

The researchers behind the study are still unable to explain why training has a positive effect on the brain in people with multiple sclerosis. A bigger and more in-depth on-going study will help to clarify this, and may also lead to improved treatment options, says Ulrik Dalgas. However, he stresses that the aim is not to replace medication with physical training.

"Phasing out drugs in favour of training is not realistic. On the other hand, the study indicates that systematic physical training can be a far more important supplement during treatment than has so far been assumed. This aspect needs to be thoroughly explored," says Ulrik Dalgas.

It is not yet clear whether all people with multiple sclerosis can benefit from this type of exercise, as it has not been sufficiently tested in the more severely affected patients. Therefore, Ulrik Dalgas is not recommending that all multiple sclerosis patients throw themselves into intensive physical training regimes without first seeking professional advice.
• Multiple sclerosis is an incurable disease of the central nervous system.
• There are about twice as many women as men with multiple sclerosis.
• Eighty per cent of people with multiple sclerosis live with the disease for more than 35 years.
• The disease is found in both aggressive and more benign forms.
• The cause of the illness is unknown, but both genetic and environmental factors play a role.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions drugs as a treatment option for patients with MS. These include immunosuppressants, like corticosteroids to reduce nerve inflammation and beta interferons to reduce the frequency and severity of relapses. Plasma exchanges can also help patients who haven’t responded to steroids and whose symptoms are new and severe.
Other treatments options include physical therapy and muscle relaxants to help relieve MS signs and symptoms.
Although we would have liked more detail on established therapies, we feel the mention of medication was good enough for a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Fast food outlets should hand out free cholesterol-lowering statin drugs to their customers to “neutralize” the heart risks of eating fatty foods like burgers and fries, British scientists suggested on Thursday.

But a few experts say you might want to ask your server to hold the statin at this point.

In a study published in the American Journal of Cardiology, scientists from the National Heart and Lung Institute at Imperial College London calculated that the reduction in heart disease risk offered by a statin could offset the increase in risk from eating a cheeseburger and a milkshake.

“Statins don’t cut out all of the unhealthy effects of a burger and fries. It’s better to avoid fatty food altogether. But we’ve worked out that in terms of your likelihood of having a heart attack, taking a statin can reduce your risk to more or less the same degree as a fast food meal increases it,” said Dr. Darrel Francis, who led the research team.

“When people engage in risky behaviors like driving or smoking, they’re encouraged to take measures that minimize their risk, like wearing a seatbelt or choosing cigarettes with filters. Taking a statin is a rational way of lowering some of the risks of eating a fatty meal.”

Still, Peter Weissberg, medical director at the British Heart Foundation (BHF) health charity, said Francis’ idea should not be taken too literally. He urged people to focus on maintaining a good diet and taking exercise to keep their hearts healthy.

“Statins are a vital medicine for people with — or at high risk of developing — heart disease,” he said. “They are not a magic bullet.”

A study in June in the Archives of Internal Medicine suggested, in fact, that statins do not save lives in patients without heart disease, although they may prevent some non-fatal heart attacks.

Dr. Franz Messerli, the director of the hypertension program at two New York hospitals, St. Luke’s and Roosevelt, worried about the message handing out statins would send to burger-eaters.

“Complimentary statin packets are prone to ... give Quarter Pounder consumers a sense of false security,” he told Reuters Health by email.

While statins might combat some of the toll that fatty foods take on cholesterol, there’s a lot they can’t negate: “sodium content is high, fibres are absent, and caloric load gargantuan,” Messerli said of the fast food the authors looked at.

Statins are among the most widely used drugs for the treatment and prevention of heart disease and strokes — the world’s top killers.

One statin, a generic drug called simvastatin, is already available in low doses over the counter at pharmacies in Britain without a prescription. Other statins such as Pfizer’s Lipitor and AstraZeneca’s Crestor - which are among the biggest-selling drugs in the world — are for prescription only.

In the U.S., all statins are only available by prescription.

“Although no substitute for systematic lifestyle improvements, including healthy diet, regular exercise, weight loss, and smoking cessation, complimentary statin packets would add, at little cost, one positive choice to a panoply of negative ones,” the scientists write in their paper.

Francis’ team — who worked independently and had no funding from the drug or food industries for their research — used data from a previous large study to quantify how a person’s heart attack risk increases with their daily intake of total fat and harmful trans fats.

They compared this with the decrease in risk from taking statins, using data from seven previously published trials.

“It makes sense to make risk-reducing supplements available just as easily as the unhealthy condiments (such as salt or ketchup) that are provided free of charge,” Francis said in his report of the research. “It would cost less than 5 pence ($0.07) per customer — not much different to a sachet of ketchup.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The first quote in the story says "It’s better to avoid fatty foods altogether." And the story goes on to make that point in several ways. The story quotes directly from the editorial, too, saying that there is "no substitute for systematic lifestyle improvements, including healthy diet, regular exercise, weight loss, and smoking cessation".
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When actress and author Lena Dunham went public about having endometriosis, a disorder of the uterus, she wanted to make something clear: The pain it causes can be completely debilitating, and women desperately need better treatments.

Soon, it seems, women like Dunham with endometriosis pain will have a new option for relief. An endometriosis pain treatment was just approved by the Food and Drug Administration, and it’s expected to arrive at pharmacies as soon as August. The pill, called elagolix (brand name Orilissa), from the drugmaker AbbVie, is the first FDA-approved oral treatment in more than a decade for the moderate to severe pain that comes with endometriosis.

“This [medication] could really be transformative,” said Hugh Taylor, an OB-GYN at Yale Medical School who led the key trials testing the drug.

Endometriosis is one of the most common gynecological conditions, affecting as many as one in 10 women of reproductive age. And it can be incredibly painful. The reason is simple: Women with the condition are growing excess tissue in their abdomen that they can’t shed.

Every month, a woman’s uterine lining thickens and sheds during her period if she’s not pregnant. With endometriosis, that tissue thickens and bleeds, but it happens outside of the uterus — on the fallopian tubes, or even in the nose or lungs. Because the extra tissue has no way to exit the body (it can’t go through the vagina since it’s not growing in the uterus), it builds up and becomes trapped, leading to pain and, in some cases, infertility.

There’s no cure for endometriosis. To manage symptoms, women are usually prescribed birth control or over-the-counter painkillers as a first-line approach, but they don’t always work. In severe cases, a doctor may suggest “excision surgery” to remove the extra tissue. (Dunham had eight surgeries and ended up getting a hysterectomy, which was considered an extreme measure.)

Enter elagolix. Endometriosis is an estrogen-driven disease, and the drug works by lowering estrogen levels. Two large double-blind, placebo-control randomized trials, which 1,285 women completed, tested whether it can help women control endometriosis pain. The results, published last year in the New England Journal of Medicine, were impressive. The patients in those trials scored their pain from 0 (no pain) to 3 (severe pain). On average, they had pain levels of 2.2 out of 3 before starting on the drug — and they experienced a 2-point reduction in pain after taking the treatment for three months.

“It’s a major advance,” said Dr. Louis DePaolo, head of the fertility and infertility branch at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, “and another option women have that’s effective.”

Now the less good news: The drug won’t cure endometriosis; it’ll only tamp down the pain it causes. Many women in the trial experienced the symptoms of menopause — hot flashes, headache, insomnia — and researchers have also found the drug causes bone loss. We have no idea about the long-term effects of taking the drug because there are no trials lasting for longer than a year, or how it stacks up against other painkillers (since the trials only compared it to placebo). That’s not to mention cost: The drug’s price is listed at $850 per month. But for some, the risks and costs may be worth it. Here’s why.

Endometriosis is incredibly common — but it can go undiagnosed for years

Endometriosis is a chronic, sometimes highly disruptive condition. The three main ways it manifests are through pelvic pain, infertility, and pelvic masses such as cysts, scar tissue, and fibroids. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, some important signs of endometriosis include:
• Pain before and during periods

But many women don’t know they have endometriosis. It’s sometimes mistaken or dismissed for regular period pain. Definitively diagnosing the disorder requires invasive surgery; doctors need to peer inside the pelvis through a laparoscopy. (Imaging is rarely helpful in getting a clear diagnosis.) This involves making a small incision in the belly and inserting a tube with a tiny camera to see if the pelvic organs show signs of tissue scarring and buildup. So it’s no surprise it takes between three and 11 years after the onset of symptoms to diagnose endometriosis.

Doctors aren’t sure why some women get it

Adding to the mystery around endometriosis: No one knows exactly what causes it, but doctors have some theories.
• Retrograde menstrual flow: During a period, when a woman is shedding her uterine lining, some of that tissue can flow through her fallopian tubes and into her pelvis, which researchers think may cause endometriosis. But doctors have also found that the rate of retrograde menstruation is about the same in women with and without endometriosis, so they think additional factors spur the disorder in some.
• Genes: The disorder runs in families, so doctors believe there’s a genetic component. If a woman’s mom or sister had endometriosis, the woman is believed to be at a higher risk.
• Somatic mutations: Researchers are also finding that somatic mutations — acquired changes to DNA that happen after a person is born — may also be an endometriosis driver.
• Immune system dysfunction: Problems with the immune system can hamper a woman’s ability to clear her menstrual debris, leading to endometriosis.
• Environmental factors: There’s some evidence to suggest environmental exposures to certain chemicals may contribute to one’s risk of developing endometriosis.

The treatments available don’t always help, and some have severe side effects

When birth control pills or over-the-counter painkillers fail to help endometriosis pain, women are often left choosing between a monthly injection called Lupron Depot, which can put women into a profoundly menopausal state, or Danazol, a male hormone that often causes acne and facial hair growth.

In women for whom these drugs aren’t effective, or who don’t want to take medications, surgery to remove the displaced endometrial tissue can be a highly effective option. But the trouble with surgery is that endometriosis can recur, so women may need more surgeries. The success of surgery also depends on finding a skilled and experienced surgeon, and there’s always the risk of surgical complications.

The new drug elagolix is not risk-free, either. In the trials, women who took the drug had greater bone loss than did those who received placebo, and this wasn’t entirely surprising. Like other endometriosis treatments, the drug works by lowering estrogen levels (since endometriosis needs estrogen to grow). When that happens, women experience menopausal side effects. The most common in the trials were hot flashes, headaches, and insomnia. (Elagolix is available in two doses — 150 mg per day, or 200 mg twice daily — and the women on the higher dose experienced the side effects more frequently.) Mood swings and night sweats were less common, and one woman in the trial died by suicide (though there’s no indication that the medicine was a cause of her death).

DePaolo pointed out, “[Elagolix] doesn’t have the pronounced side effects some of the other compounds have.” That’s because, he said, it doesn’t drive down estrogen levels as severely.

But for patients who have tried other estrogen-lowering medicines, elagolix isn’t all that appealing. “This drug is palliative in nature. It does not cure or shrink the disease,” Casey Berna, director of programs and partnerships for the advocacy group EndoWhat. The drug’s side effects also concerned her, as did the lack of knowledge about its long-term impact.

For other women, though, the trade offs may be worth it. But in either case, women with severe endometriosis are still left choosing between terrible pain, surgery, or drugs with serious side effects.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: A number of existing pain-reduction alternatives are mentioned, from hormonal treatments to surgery, and their debits discussed. It would have been helpful to try and articulate how many women find the current alternatives insufficient.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 15, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Acupuncture may help ease pain and improve quality of life for people with fibromyalgia, a new study suggests.

Ten weeks after treatment, the pain scores of patients given acupuncture dropped an average of 41 percent, compared with an average drop of 27 percent for those given a simulated acupuncture treatment. The benefits were still seen after a year.

"Individualized acupuncture is a safe and good therapeutic option for the treatment of patients with fibromyalgia," said lead researcher Dr. Jorge Vas, of the pain treatment unit at Dona Mercedes Primary Health Center in Seville, Spain.

Fibromyalgia patients have chronic widespread pain, which is associated with fatigue, poor sleep patterns and depression. The condition affects up to 5 percent of the population, Vas said. Between 80 percent and 90 percent of fibromyalgia patients are women.

According to the study authors, nine out of 10 patients try some form of alternative therapy, such as massage or acupuncture, in addition to their regular pain medication.

"Both acupuncture and traditional medicine have a place in treating fibromyalgia," said Dr. Alexander Rances, an acupuncturist, pain management specialist and attending physician at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y.

"A combination of Western as well as traditional Chinese medicine probably offers these patients the best possible therapy," he said.

With acupuncture, extremely thin needles are inserted through the skin at strategic body points to treat pain.

Fibromyalgia treatment usually starts with medications such as the nerve pain medication Lyrica (pregabalin), and if that fails or is only partly effective, doctors might add acupuncture to the mix, Rances said.

For the study, Vas and colleagues randomly assigned 153 patients diagnosed with fibromyalgia to individually tailored acupuncture or simulated acupuncture. Patients had nine weekly treatments, each session lasting 20 minutes.

"Although it was allowed for the participants to continue with the pharmacological [drug] treatment they were taking beforehand, when the study was finished, the patients who received individualized acupuncture were taking less medication than the group on sham acupuncture," Vas said.

At 10 weeks, six months and 12 months after treatment, patients were asked about perceived levels of pain and depression and their physical and mental quality of life.

One year after treatment, acupuncture patients had an average 20 percent drop in their pain score, compared with a little more than 6 percent among those who had simulated therapy, the researchers found.

Scores on the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire, which measures how the condition affects patients' lives, also differed between groups. Reductions were seen of 35 percent at 10 weeks, and just over 22 percent at one year, for those given real acupuncture, compared with 24.5 percent and 5 percent, respectively, for those given sham acupuncture, the researchers said.

In addition, pressure pain and the number of tender points also improved more in patients given real acupuncture after 10 weeks, as did measures of fatigue, anxiety and depression, Vas said.

However, although taking less pain medication, acupuncture patients were using higher levels of antidepressants after one year, which may have artificially boosted the positive results, he said.

The report was published online Feb. 15 in the journal Acupuncture in Medicine.

Dr. Allyson Shrikhande is a physiatrist -- a doctor who specializes in physical medicine and rehabilitation -- at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. She agreed that antidepressant use could have been a "significant contributing factor to their continued improvement."

Still, Shrikhande said, "the findings in this study help demonstrate that acupuncture is a safe and effective treatment for chronic pain patients."

Many patients with fibromyalgia have a central nervous system that is unregulated, meaning an abundance of pain signals are sent to the brain, Shrikhande said.

"Acupuncture can calm or quiet the nervous system and help slow down the pain signals to the brain. Acupuncture can also improve blood flow, which can improve oxygenation of tissues," she said.

Some insurance companies cover acupuncture, which costs about $125 a session, according to the University of California, San Diego Center for Integrative Medicine.

For more on fibromyalgia, visit the U.S. National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Acupuncture is considered to be an alternative, or complement, to traditional western medicine. The story mentions that most fibromyalgia patients take medications for pain, depression, and other symptoms, and that they may also receive other alternative therapies, such as massage.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Wilmington, DE -- A Delaware team including Erin Crowgey, PhD, associate director of Bioinformatics with Nemours Biomedical Research, has published a study in the peer-reviewed journal BMC Bioinformatics, showing that DNA patterns in circulating blood cells can be used to help identify spastic cerebral palsy (CP) patients (Crowgey et al.).

The work represents a collaboration among researchers at Nemours, the University of Delaware (UD) and Genome Profiling LLC (GenPro for short). Co-authors of the paper include Robert Akins, PhD, the project principal investigator, who directs the Center for Pediatric Clinical Research and Development at Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children; UD molecular biologist Adam Marsh, PhD, who is chief science officer at GenPro; and Karyn Robinson, MS and Stephanie Yeager, MS, of Nemours Biomedical Research.

Cerebral palsy is a common yet understudied neurodevelopmental problem in the U.S. In fact, there is no national surveillance here, but the CDC estimates that 1 in 323 American children have the condition. CP is a group of disabilities with a wide spectrum of severity. Spastic CP, the most common type, is a lifelong condition characterized by joint stiffness, spasms, and muscle tightness that affects movement and posture and restricts the activity of affected children.

Although most children (85-90%) with cerebral palsy are born with it, diagnosis may be delayed until 2+ years of age. A diagnosis is made by monitoring motor milestones; infants thought to be at risk for CP are enrolled in early intervention programs where their progress is closely watched. New and better ways to identify infants with CP are needed so that interventions can start earlier for more children.

Nemours, internationally recognized for its CP center at Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, serves a diverse population of more than 3,000 children and young adults with CP, one of the largest programs in the U.S. Clinicians and researchers at Nemours continuously seek to improve the diagnosis and care of CP patients. Funding from the Swank Foundation enabled Nemours to develop a cerebral palsy tissue bank that stores blood and tissue samples from hundreds of surgical patients at Nemours.

In the study, the research team profiled blood samples collected in a blinded study from children and adolescents 9-19 years to explore whether patients with spastic CP showed differences at the cellular level that routine orthopedic patients (needing ACL repairs, spinal fusions or other surgeries) did not. The researchers identified a strong set of methylation markers, or patterns, that indicate differences in the genome between children with spastic CP and those without it. In a second study, using samples from children aged 2-5 years, the researchers were able to validate their results and predict with 73 percent accuracy whether the blood samples came from children who had CP.

"The evidence suggests that there is some epigenetic connection," said Crowgey. "If we can do a better job of screening for these at time of birth versus waiting for the disorder to be diagnosed at 2 years of age, then potentially we'll be able to deliver earlier therapeutics and have better outcomes and lower medical costs." Medicaid data show that annual medical costs for a child with CP are 10 to 26 times higher than for those without CP.

The power of data science, analytics and machine learning

The study leverages a unique statistical method and software platform originally developed by Dr. Marsh at UD and commercialized by GenPro to measure methylation patterns in DNA (a cell's genetic code) using next generation sequencing (NGS) data. NGS is a technique that enables scientists to decode DNA faster and more cheaply than traditional DNA sequencing methods. Each person's genome, or complete set of DNA, is like a word that's the length of 3 billion characters; but spelled with only the letters A, T, C or G. Traditional DNA sequencing techniques decode sections of DNA 700 characters at a time, while NGS takes advantage of parallel computing capabilities, enabling scientists to decode millions of DNA fragments. Subtle changes in a patient's physical health are paralleled by changes in DNA methylation, making it a useful tool to understand disease.

"Many of the signals that we pick up are based on immune system shifts--meaning the way a person's immune system responds to external stress events. When we find that epigenetic response, or signal, in the genetic sequencing, it provides another line of evidence for clinicians to use in making decisions," said Marsh.

The approach uses sophisticated machine learning techniques and algorithms to sort through hundreds of gigabytes of NGS data looking for these distinct DNA methylation patterns. "The data set is massive. It's not something a human can do. You need infrastructure, machine learning, data analysis, and data science," said Crowgey.

While the study findings indicate that there is a consistent signal present in circulating blood cells of children with spastic CP that remains from early childhood to the teenage years, the researchers say they need to further study samples from different age groups, including teenagers, toddlers, and infants from birth to 2 years. Learning more about methylation signals across ages will allow the approach to be further refined to identify cases and also could provide researchers new clues to understanding the cellular processes involved in advancing CP, and consequently, new therapeutics to manage the disease.

"We're still in the early phases, but the results are extremely promising and we're excited about the sensitivity of the test that we are seeing in our retrospective analysis," said Crowgey. If successful, the researchers say the type of blood test in development also may be useful for other disorders, such as infant leukemia.

Akins was optimistic. "This is an example of the kind of innovation that can happen when people with different skill sets collaborate. The experimental testing went from idea to validated execution in less than 12 months. We're now working toward a goal of eventually forming a clinical diagnostic test and applying it to a broad population." Akins added that Nemours is in a unique position for such an undertaking with its large CP population, its growing strength in data science and analytics, and its recent acquisition of newborn screening for the state of Delaware. "Many issues will need to be addressed, but we predict routine screening for CP in the near (<10 years) future," he said.

This research is funded by the Delaware Bioscience Center for Advanced Technology, the National Science Foundation, the American Academy for Cerebral Palsy and Developmental Medicine, and Nemours.

"This blood test could be a game changer. The earlier the diagnosis, the earlier we can direct therapies at the child. Specifically, high intensity physical therapy and possibly early surgery to prevent more significant problems in the future, and hopefully improve overall function and quality of life." M. Wade Shrader, MD, Chief, Cerebral Palsy Center, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children

Nemours is an internationally recognized children's health system that owns and operates the two free-standing children's hospitals: the Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children in Wilmington, Del., and Nemours Children's Hospital in Orlando, Fla., along with outpatient facilities in six states, delivering pediatric primary, specialty, and urgent care. Nemours also powers the world's most-visited website for information on the health of children and teens, KidsHealth.org, and offers on-demand, online video patient visits through Nemours CareConnect. Nemours ReadingBrightstart.org is a program dedicated to preventing reading failure in young children, grounded in Nemours' understanding that child health and learning are inextricably linked, and that reading level is a strong predictor of adult health.

Established as The Nemours Foundation through the legacy and philanthropy of Alfred I. duPont, Nemours provides pediatric clinical care, research, education, advocacy, and prevention programs to families in the communities it serves.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that currently, cerebral palsy patients are identified “by monitoring motor milestones.”  It says also that there is currently no blood test available to identify CP patients younger that about two years old.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lost Posture: Why Some Indigenous Cultures May Not Have Back Pain

Editor's note, June 10: We have added an acknowledgement of several sources that Esther Gokhale used while developing her theories on back pain. These include physiotherapy methods, such as the Alexander Technique and the Feldenkrais Method, and the work of anthropologist Noelle Perez-Christiaens.

Back pain is a tricky beast. Most Americans will at some point have a problem with their backs. And for an unlucky third, treatments won't work, and the problem will become chronic.

Believe it or not, there are a few cultures in the world where back pain hardly exists. One indigenous tribe in central India reported essentially none. And the discs in their backs showed little signs of degeneration as people aged.

An acupuncturist in Palo Alto, Calif., thinks she has figured out why. She has traveled around the world studying cultures with low rates of back pain — how they stand, sit and walk. Now she's sharing their secrets with back pain sufferers across the U.S.

About two decades ago, Esther Gokhale started to struggle with her own back after she had her first child. "I had excruciating pain. I couldn't sleep at night," she says. "I was walking around the block every two hours. I was just crippled."

Gokhale had a herniated disc. Eventually she had surgery to fix it. But a year later, it happened again. "They wanted to do another back surgery. You don't want to make a habit out of back surgery," she says.

This time around, Gokhale wanted to find a permanent fix for her back. And she wasn't convinced Western medicine could do that. So Gokhale started to think outside the box. She had an idea: "Go to populations where they don't have these huge problems and see what they're doing."

[Added June 10] So Gokhale studied findings from anthropologists, such as Noelle Perez-Christiaens, who analyzed postures of indigenous populations. And she studied physiotherapy methods, such as the Alexander Technique and the Feldenkrais Method.

Then over the next decade, Gokhale went to cultures around the world that live far away from modern life. She went to the mountains in Ecuador, tiny fishing towns in Portugal and remote villages of West Africa.

"I went to villages where every kid under age 4 was crying because they were frightened to see somebody with white skin — they'd never seen a white person before," she says.

Gokhale took photos and videos of people who walked with water buckets on their heads, collected firewood or sat on the ground weaving, for hours.

"I have a picture in my book of these two women who spend seven to nine hours everyday, bent over, gathering water chestnuts," Gokhale says. "They're quite old. But the truth is they don't have a back pain."

She tried to figure out what all these different people had in common. The first thing that popped out was the shape of their spines. "They have this regal posture, and it's very compelling."

And it's quite different than American spines.

If you look at an American's spine from the side, or profile, it's shaped like the letter S. It curves at the top and then back again at the bottom.

But Gokhale didn't see those two big curves in people who don't have back pain. "That S shape is actually not natural," she says. "It's a J-shaped spine that you want."

In fact, if you look at drawings from Leonardo da Vinci — or a Gray's Anatomy book from 1901 — the spine isn't shaped like a sharp, curvy S. It's much flatter, all the way down the back. Then at the bottom, it curves to stick the buttocks out. So the spine looks more like the letter J.

"The J-shaped spine is what you see in Greek statues. It's what you see in young children. It's good design," Gokhale says.

So Gokhale worked to get her spine into the J shape. And gradually her back pain went away.

Then Gokhale realized she could help others. She developed a set of exercises, wrote a book and set up a studio in downtown Palo Alto.

Now her list of clients is impressive. She's helped YouTube CEO Susan Wojcicki and Matt Drudge of the Drudge Report. She has given classes at Google, Facebook and companies across the country. In Silicon Valley, she's known as the "posture guru."

Each year, doctors in the Bay Area refer hundreds of patients to Gokhale. One of them is Dr. Neeta Jain, an internist at the Palo Alto Medical Foundation. She puts Gokhale's method in the same category as Pilates and yoga for back pain. And it doesn't bother her that the method hasn't been tested in a clinical trial.

"If people are finding things that are helpful, and it's not causing any harm, then why do we have to wait for a trial?" Jain asked.

But there's still a big question looming here: Is Gokhale right? Have people in Western cultures somehow forgotten the right way to stand?

Scientists don't know yet, says Dr. Praveen Mummaneni, a neurosurgeon at the University of California, San Francisco's Spine Center. Nobody has done a study on traditional cultures to see why some have lower rates of back pain, he says. Nobody has even documented the shape of their spines.

"I'd like to go and take X-rays of indigenous populations and compare it to people in the Western world," Mummaneni says. "I think that would be helpful."

But there's a whole bunch of reasons why Americans' postures — and the shape of their spines — may be different than those of indigenous populations, he says. For starters, Americans tend to be much heavier.

"If you have a lot of fat built up in the belly, that could pull your weight forward," Mummaneni says. "That could curve the spine. And people who are thinner probably have less curvature" — and thus a spine shaped more like J than than an S.

Americans are also much less active than people in traditional cultures, Mummaneni says. "I think the sedentary lifestyle promotes a lack of muscle tone and a lack of postural stability because the muscles get weak."

Everyone knows that weak abdominal muscles can cause back pain. In fact, Mummaneni says, stronger muscles might be the secret to Gokhale's success.

In other words, it's not that the J-shaped spine is the ideal one — or the healthiest. It's what goes into making the J-shaped spine that matters: "You have to use muscle strength to get your spine to look like a J shape," he says.

So Gokhale has somehow figured out a way to teach people to build up their core muscles without them even knowing it. "Yes, I think that's correct," Mummaneni says. "You're not going to be able to go from the S- to the J-shaped spine without having good core muscle strength. And I think that's key here."

So indigenous people around the world don't have a magic bullet for stopping back pain. They've just got beefy abdominal muscles, and their lifestyle helps to keep them that way, even as they age.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does stress that having good core muscle strength is important to reducing or preventing back pain, regardless of whether one uses the Gokhale Method. And it discusses approaches other than Gokhale to achieve that strength. However, it would have been good to note that there are multiple factors that can contribute significantly to back pain, including arthritis, osteoporosis, and injury. With any sort of nerve impingement (e.g. herniated disc pinching nerve), exercise alone will not work. And if there are degenerative changes, often more treatment is required, and that is very common. Finally, not all back pain is benign, and one would need to rule out things like metastatic cancer if pain is ongoing. The story would have been stronger if it had noted that sometimes exercise isn’t enough — and sometimes other treatment options are required so that a patient can manage the pain well enough to begin an exercise regime.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two existing drugs, in combination, have shown significant promise in promoting weight loss, according to a new report.

The drugs, phentermine and Topamax, in combination with lifestyle and weight-loss counseling were associated with a 18-22 pound weight loss in trial participants, compared with a three-pound weight loss in patients who received counseling alone.



 The drug also appears to have reduced other obesity-related indicators, such as blood pressure, cholesterol and inflammation levels.

By comparison, the only approved long-term prescription weight loss medication available on the market today, Xenical, is associated with a seven-pound weight loss when combined with diet and exercise.

The study was funded by the pharmaceutical company Vivus, which combined the two drugs into one pill called Qnexa, and petitioned the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for approval in October 2010. The Food and Drug Administration denied the request, asking for more safety data from the company before moving forward.

According to the report, there were specific concerns about each drug's safety individually; specifically Topamax, which is reported to cause some psychiatric and cognitive side effects and may cause clef palate birth defects if taken while pregnant.

According to the manufacturer's study, the two drugs, when taken together, and at controlled-release doses, were very safe. Participants in the trial reported minor side effects such as dry mouth and constipation, however at higher doses, some participants did complain about some psychiatric side effects.

Among the 2,487 study participants, nine became pregnant, and none of their children were born with cleft palates, the report said.

The drug could be a good option for some people, but it's most likely not a silver bullet, said Dr. Melina Jampolis, CNNHealth's physician nutrition expert, who is not connected with the study.

"This might be a good tool in the short term to get someone motivated, and that's great," she said. "But unless it's paired with aggressive lifestyle changes, it may not be great in the long term."

Phentermine is commonly used as a short-term weight loss treatment, and was previously paired with fenfluramine to make the successful but now-discontinued weight loss drug Fen-phen. Fen-phen was removed from the market in 1997 amid concerns about the drug's heart risk, but phentermine has been used successfully for short-term appetite suppression since then with no major safety concerns.

Topamax is commonly used to treat migraines and seizures.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Adequate.  The story stated:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Spinal manipulation and home exercise are more effective at relieving neck pain in the long term than medications, according to new research.

People undergoing spinal manipulation therapy for neck pain also reported greater satisfaction than people receiving medication or doing home exercises.

"We found that there are some viable treatment options for neck pain," said Gert Bronfort, vice president of research at the Wolfe-Harris Center for Clinical Studies at Northwestern Health Sciences University in Bloomington, Minn.

"What we don't really know yet is how to individualize these treatments for each particular patient. All are probably still viable treatment options, but what we don't know is what each particular patient will need," Bronfort said, adding that it's possible a combination of treatments might be helpful, too.

Results of the study are published in the Jan. 3 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine. Funding for the study was provided by the U.S. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.

Neck pain is an extremely common problem. About three-quarters of adults report having neck pain at some point in their lives, according to background information in the study. Neck pain is responsible for millions of health care visits each year, and it can have a negative impact on quality of life.

Spinal manipulation is one type of treatment that's offered for neck pain, and it can be administered by chiropractors, physical therapists, osteopaths and other health care providers, according to the study.

But, there isn't much evidence for treating neck pain with spinal manipulation. There also isn't a great deal of information on how effective medications or home exercise programs are for treating neck pain, the researchers noted.

Bronfort and colleagues thought that spinal manipulation might prove to be more effective than medications or home exercise therapy. To test their hypothesis, they recruited 272 people between the ages of 18 and 65 who had neck pain. Their neck pain had no known cause, such as a trauma or pinched nerve, and the patients been experiencing the pain for between two and 12 weeks when the study began.

The study volunteers were randomly selected for one of three treatment groups. One group received spinal manipulations over a 12-week period. Each individual was allowed to choose the number of spinal manipulations they felt they needed.

The second group received medications, both over the counter and prescription, depending on their needs. First-line medications included nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications or acetaminophen (Tylenol). If people didn't get relief from these drugs, narcotic pain medications and muscle relaxants were offered.

The third group was assigned two one-hour sessions of home exercise. The goal of the home-exercise program was to improve movement in the neck area. Participants were instructed to do the exercises six to eight times per day.

At the 12th week, 82 percent of people receiving spinal manipulation reported at least a 50 percent reduction in pain, compared with 69 percent of those on medication and 77 percent doing home exercises. Also at week 12, of people receiving spinal manipulation, 32 percent reported feeling a 100 percent reduction in pain, compared with 13 percent on medications and 30 percent doing home exercises.

At one year, 27 percent of those receiving spinal manipulation said they felt a 100 percent reduction in pain versus 17 percent of those on medications and 37 percent of those doing home exercises.

"For me, as an ER doctor, this study offers an interesting perspective," said Dr. Robert Glatter, an attending physician in emergency medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "It's a small study, but it found that home exercises and spinal manipulation were effective. So, should we be referring to physical therapists, osteopaths or chiropractors from the ER?"

"This study shows that basically neck pain will get better on its own," said Dr. Victor Khabie, chief of the departments of surgery and sports medicine at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y. "It would've been good if they had a no-treatment group, too," he added.

"Everyone heals differently. There are different pathways to healing, and whether you feel you're better off with chiropractic, home exercises or medications, this study shows that all three are basically just as effective. Whatever your pathway to healing, in about six to eight weeks, you should start to feel better," said Khabie.

He also noted that it's important for anyone receiving spinal manipulation to know that there are rare, but serious risks that can occur with neck manipulations.

All three experts said anyone experiencing neck pain needs to have it evaluated to make sure there isn't a serious or correctable cause of the pain. This is especially true if you've been in a car accident, or if you have any neurological symptoms, such as repeatedly dropping things, or if you have pain radiating down your arm.

Learn more about neck pain, its causes and treatment from the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The trial was set up as a direct comparison of popular treatments for neck pain, and that is just how the story presents it. It even includes a comment from an independent source that this sort of neck pain tends to improve on its own. As mentioned above, the story could have provided more details about the potential harms of the various treatment options.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 6, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- There's too little evidence to say definitively whether treating early, localized prostate cancer with radiation is a better option than "watchful waiting," new research finds.

In a study funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), researchers from Tufts University reviewed the available literature on radiation and prostate cancer, including 10 randomized controlled trials and 65 observational studies.

They concluded there was "insufficient evidence" to say with certainty whether radiation treatment compared to watchful waiting is more likely to save lives.

"We just don't have sufficient information to say much of anything," said Dr. Stanley Ip, an assistant professor of medicine at Tufts University Medical Center.

In part, that's because researchers found no randomized controlled trials -- considered the gold standard of research -- that compared radiation therapy with watching waiting, Ip said. Though there were observational studies, those may be biased because men who opt to hold off on treatment may be those whose tumors are lower risk to begin with, he said.

The study is published in the June 6 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Watchful waiting -- which does not involve cancer treatment -- means having regular exams while keeping an eye on the tumor to see if it grows or spreads. It is usually recommended when doctors feel someone's advanced age will allow them to outlive the generally slow-moving cancer or when someone has other conditions that are more likely to prove lethal.

Men who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer -- meaning it's confined to the prostate gland and has not spread -- are confronted with a bewildering array of options for treating it: surgery; radiation; drugs to deprive the tumor of the hormone androgen that may drive its growth; or watchful waiting.

In 2008, AHRQ also commissioned a review of studies on other prostate cancer treatment options, but that report could not draw conclusions on the best approach either.

"What all of these analyses have found is there is very limited data that allows us to determine which of these approaches in the best approach," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate cancer for the American Cancer Society.

Brooks said more comparative effectiveness research, which compares different kinds of treatments, is needed.

In the meantime, what are men diagnosed with early prostate cancer to do?

Men and their doctors need to consider what the tumor looks like under the microscope, which can help gauge how aggressive it may be. They should also consider age and overall health status, including whether or not the patient has other conditions more likely to cause death than the prostate cancer.

Finally, patients and their doctors should weight the potential debilitating side effects of the treatments, such as incontinence and erectile dysfunction, against how comfortable the man is with holding off on treatment, experts say.

"Men need to learn as much as they can about the possible outcomes and benefits of the various treatments and the potential side effects, and choose which direction they are most comfortable with," Brooks said.

In the current review, researchers found several trials that compared different doses of radiation and different types of radiation therapy, including external beam radiation therapy, in which a radiation is delivered through a beam through the skin, or brachytherapy, in which radioactive isotopes are delivered via injection into the prostate.

For those methods, too, there was too little research to say with confidence which method was superior in preventing deaths from prostate cancer, the researchers said. Retrospective studies, however, found that radiation treatments were associated with increased urinary or bowel problems, compared with no treatment or no initial treatment.

There was also "moderate strength evidence" that a higher external beam radiation was more effective than a lower dose.

Taken together, the review "does point out that based on current evidence, doctors should not be telling their patients that this form of radiation is better than that form," Brooks said. "Some of the distinctions being made are not really supported by the evidence."

Proton beam therapy in particular is expensive, but according to this report, there isn't enough evidence to show it's any better than other option.

Radiation, he noted, may be the best option for men whose tumors have spread outside the gland, since simply removing the prostate gland surgically is not likely to be as effective, he said.

The American Cancer Society estimates that in 2009, approximately 192,000 men were diagnosed with prostate cancer and approximately 27,000 men died of the disease.

The National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The entire story was about a systematic review of studies comparing different doses of radiation and different types of radiation therapy – and whether any has been shown to be a better option than “watchful waiting.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Cannabidiol, which is found in marijuana plants, reduced the number of convulsive seizures in children with a severe and often fatal epilepsy disorder, according to research published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine . Among children taking cannabidiol, the decrease in the frequency of convulsive seizures -- which involve a loss of consciousness, stiffened muscles and jerking movements -- was 23 percentage points greater than the decrease in seizures among children taking a placebo.

The study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled human trial, which is considered the gold standard test for any new medicine.

GW Pharmaceuticals, a company that is developing cannabidiol medicines, helped subsidize the study.

"After 3,800 years of cannabis use for epilepsy ... we finally have solid evidence," said Dr. Orrin Devinsky, lead author of the study and director of NYU Langone's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center. His own previous research indicates that cannabis was used as early as 1800 B.C. in Sumeria to treat epilepsy; neurologists of the Victorian period used Indian hemp, which is rich in cannabidiol, for the same purpose.

Despite the generally positive results, most study participants reported side effects that included vomiting, fatigue, diarrhea and some liver issues.

A total of 120 patients with Dravet syndrome, ranging in age from nearly 2 to 18 years old, were randomly assigned to receive either an oral solution of cannabidiol or a placebo for a 14-week period.

"Dravet syndrome is a severe childhood-onset epilepsy that causes multiple kinds of seizures, developmental delays, speech and language problems, behavioral issues and movement and balance problems," said Brandy Fureman, vice president of research and new therapies at the Epilepsy Foundation. She was not involved in the new study.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that disrupts electrical communication between neurons in the brain. Considered a spectrum disorder, different epilepsy syndromes are defined by clusters of symptoms or features and treated accordingly.

Existing epilepsy medications usually don't work for patients with Dravet, so "up to 20% of these children die from seizures before age 20 years," Devinsky explained.

Within the study, individual participants experienced convulsive seizures at a rate ranging from four per month, on average, to 1,717 per month.

During the 14-week study, frequency of convulsive seizures decreased from an average of 12.4 to 5.9 per month in the cannabidiol group, compared with 14.9 to 14.1 in the placebo group. On average, the change in seizure frequency amounted to a 39% decrease for the cannabidiol group patients, compared with a roughly 13% decrease among the placebo group.

Five percent of the children became entirely seizure-free during the 14-week study. Overall, parents in the cannabidiol group felt that they witnessed "significantly greater" positive changes in their children than parents in the placebo group.

However, there was a downside. Most (93%) of the cannabidiol patients reported side effects, though three-quarters of the placebo group patients did as well. Nine out of 61 cannabidiol group patients dropped out of the study, eight of them because of side effects, compared with just three of the 59 placebo group patients.

"Tiredness (somnolence or fatigue) was most common; others were decreased appetite, diarrhea and vomiting," Devinsky explained.

Based on the overall results, Devinsky believes CBD should be evaluated for epilepsy types beyond Dravet syndrome, which is caused by a genetic mutation and affects about one in 20,000 to 40,000 children in the United States.

"No one study decides an issue; the sample size is still relatively small (because this is a rare syndrome and so hard to study large numbers of cases) and the duration of treatment so far has been relatively short," Hall, who was not involved in the research, wrote in an email.

Still, Hall said the research, which carefully measured safety and efficacy for a "substantial" number of children, showed "clear evidence of benefits in reducing seizure frequency and severity over the duration of the trial."

"Interestingly, it looks similar to our other seizure medications in terms of efficacy and tolerability," Porter said. "So, sadly, not a home run for most patients but another tool in our treatment regimen."

The marijuana plant is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance. Scientific researchers studying cannabidiol must meet federal security requirements and follow federal practices. Some scientists have said these federal requirements have slowed research supporting medicinal benefits of the plant.

Porter believes the study may open the door to having "more thoughtful discussions with our patients about the efficacy and the side effects" of cannabidiol. "Hopefully, the FDA will see this as a sign it should be moved off of Schedule I. If it stays on Schedule I, we will have trouble getting it to our patients when it does become available."

Changing the schedule of a drug falls to the Drug Enforcement Administration or the Department of Health and Human Services. An interested party, such as a drug company, may also petition for the process to begin. The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institute of Drug Abuse provide guidance to the DEA when reviewing scientific evidence on which to base a schedule change.

He noted that generating more evidence of effective use is "a good thing."

The University of Queensland's Hall believes that boundaries between medical use of cannabinoids and the recreational use of cannabis by adults should not be blurred. "If future clinical trials confirm these promising results, then appropriate regulation will enable the drug to be safely used for medical purposes," he said.

The Epilepsy Foundation's Fureman said, "before publication of this trial, much of the clinical evidence about CBD's effects on people's seizures was uncontrolled and anecdotal." She added that the new study is "critically important" for the epilepsy community, which believes a CBD-based medical product would be a first-in-class therapeutic option.

On the need for more scientific research, all these experts agree.

As Devinsky said, "natural substances are not necessarily safe and effective. They need to be evaluated rigorously."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There is not a deep comparison of alternatives in this piece, but we give it credit for quoting an independent expert saying, “Interestingly, it looks similar to our other seizure medications in terms of efficacy and tolerability. … So, sadly, not a home run for most patients but another tool in our treatment regimen.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Anew gastric balloon that can be swallowed like a pill and then filledwhile in the stomach, helped patients lose more than 37 percent oftheir excess weight over four months, according to new researchpresented here at ObesityWeek 2015, the largest international eventfocused on the basic science, clinical application and prevention andtreatment of obesity. The weeklong conference is hosted by the

AmericanSociety for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS) and The ObesitySociety (TOS).

AllurionTechnologies, the manufacturer of the device called Elipse, whichis not yet commercially available, is studyingwhat it says is the “first procedureless gastric balloon” inpatients with a body mass index (BMI) of 27 or more.

Thetreatment involves patients swallowing a capsule that quicklydissolves in the stomach to reveal a deflated gastric balloon inside.With a thin catheter attached to the device, but long enough toremain outside the patient’s mouth, a physician fills the balloonwith fluid (550 mL) to about the size of a grapefruit. The catheteris then removed, while the balloon remains in the stomach for fourmonths. At that point, a valve designed to open on its own, allowsthe balloon to empty and be excreted naturally from the body,eliminating the need for endoscopy or another procedure.

“ Likeother gastric balloons, the mechanism of action of Elipse is likelymultifactorial and includes increased satiety from the reduction ofavailable space in the stomach, delayed gastric emptying, and changesin hormones that control hunger and appetite,” saidRam Chuttani, MD*, study co-author and director of Endoscopy andchief, Interventional Gastroenterology at Beth Israel DeaconessMedical Center in Boston. “Our findings demonstrate that Elipseprovides individuals and their caregivers with a safe, effective, andnon-invasive weight loss intervention that does not require surgery,endoscopy, or anesthesia.”

Researcherspresented interim results for the first 34 patients of a multi-centerstudy that showed individuals lost an average of 22 pounds after fourmonths or 37 percent of their excess weight. Patients also sawimprovements in triglycerides and hemoglobin A1c (HgbA1c) levels,risk factors for heart disease and diabetes. Similar to othergastric balloons, the most common adverse events reported were nauseaand vomiting.

immediate pastpresident of the ASMBS and vice-chair, UC Irvine Department ofSurgery and chief of gastrointestinal surgery, who was not involvedin the study said the device is not a permanent solution to weightloss, but has the potential to help those individuals who areoverweight or have obesity and are not candidates for bariatricsurgery.

“ Newtreatment options are being studied and approved for the treatment ofobesity, which is good news for our patients and the healthcareprofessionals involved in their treatment,” said Dr. Nguyen, whowas not involved in the study. “For many struggling with theirweight, procedureless gastric balloon devices may serve as atreatment option that bridges the gap between weight-loss drugs andsurgery.”

TheU.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) this year alone approved theOrberaIntragastric Balloon from Apollo Endosurgery and theReShapeIntegrated Dual Balloon System from ReShape Medical. Bothdevices are indicated for adults with BMIs between 30 and 40 whocould not lose weight through diet and exercise alone. The FDA also approved threeweight-loss drugs since 2012.

Inaddition to Dr. Chuttani, study authors of the abstract entitled,“The First Procedureless Gastric Balloon: A Prospective StudyEvaluating Safety, Weight Loss, Metabolic Parameters and Quality ofLife,” include, Evzen Machytka MD, PhD, Martina Bojkova MD, TomasKupka MD, and Marek Buzga MSc, PhD from the University of Ostrava,Ioannis Raftopoulos MD, Andreas Giannakou MD, and Kandiliotis IoannisMD from the Iatriko Medical Center, and Kathy Stecco MD, Samuel LevyMD, and Shantanu Gaur MD, from Allurion Technologies.

Accordingto the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), more than 78million adults were obese in 2011–2012. i The ASMBS estimates about 24 million people have severe or morbidobesity. Individuals with a BMI greater than 30 have a 50 to 100percent increased risk of premature death compared to healthy weightindividuals as well as an increased risk of developing more than 40obesity-related diseases and conditions including type 2 diabetes,heart disease and cancer. ii iii

Metabolic/bariatricsurgery has been shown to be the most effective and long lastingtreatment for morbid obesity and many related conditions and resultsin significant weight loss. The Agency for Healthcare Research andQuality (AHRQ) reported significant improvements in the safety ofmetabolic/bariatric surgery due in large part to improvedlaparoscopic techniques. iv The risk of death is about 0.1 percent v and the overall likelihood of major complications is about 4percent. vi

TheASMBS is the largest organization for bariatric surgeons in thenation. It is a non-profit organization that works to advance the artand science of bariatric surgery and is committed to educatingmedical professionals and the lay public about bariatric surgery asan option for the treatment of morbid obesity, as well as theassociated risks and benefits. It encourages its members toinvestigate and discover new advances in obesity, while maintaining asteady exchange of experiences and ideas that may lead to improvedoutcomes for morbidly obese patients. For more information, visitwww.asmbs.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release makes several mentions of alternative therapies including traditional gastric balloon surgery, other newly approved gastric balloon devices, bariatric surgery, weight-loss drugs and diet and exercise.
The release also suggests the gastric balloon pill would be an option filling a treatment gap between weight-loss drugs and surgery.
While the release doesn’t offer data on how the gastric balloon pill compared with all these alternative methods, we’ll give it a pass for the frequent mentions of alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Acupuncture may help relieve chronic back, joint and shoulder pain, according to a new review of the evidence - but some of its benefit is likely due to the “placebo effect,” researchers concluded.

In an analysis of 29 studies, they found people who got acupuncture typically reported more pain relief than those who didn’t.

But patients treated with fake or “sham” acupuncture - using retracting needles that don’t stick in the skin, for example - estimated their pain at somewhere in between the other two groups, suggesting that they also got some benefit from the procedure.

“A doctor who has a patient in pain has a lot of options,” such as medications and physical or talk therapy, said lead author Andrew Vickers, from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.

“This provides evidence that they would be justified in considering… acupuncture,” he told Reuters Health.

Acupuncture has been controversial among doctors as a possible treatment for a range of conditions including chronic pain and fibromyalgia.

Some think it has potential as an add-on or alternative to standard treatment, while others argue any acupuncture-related benefits are likely the result of hopeful patients getting treatment they strongly believe will help them.

That either means many of the three million Americans that get acupuncture every year are “wasting their time” - or others who forgo it are missing out on potential benefits, Vickers said.

To try to help sort out which is the case, he and his colleagues analyzed 29 studies they deemed to be high-quality comparisons of acupuncture, fake acupuncture and no treatment. Those trials included close to 18,000 patients in the United States and Europe with back and neck pain, shoulder pain, chronic headaches or joint pain due to osteoarthritis.

The researchers found that on average, people treated with acupuncture reported a “modest” improvement in symptoms compared to those who had sham treatment, and a larger effect compared to untreated patients.

They estimated in their Archives of Internal Medicine report that about 50 percent of patients had their symptoms cut in half with acupuncture, compared to almost 43 percent of those treated with sham acupuncture and 30 percent with no acupuncture-like therapy.

A typical acupuncture session runs for about $100 and is often not covered by health insurance.

USUALLY NOT THE FIRST STEP

“I have a long list of chronic pain patients coming to seek acupuncture,” said Jongbae Park, head of Asian Medicine & Acupuncture Research at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine.

It’s usually “not their first approach to address the condition,” he said - rather people seek acupuncture when traditional care fails to stop their pain.

Park, who was not involved in the new study, said acupuncture focuses on healing the underlying tissue injury that is causing pain, rather than treating the pain itself as medications would.

“I am a biased clinician,” Park told Reuters Health. But, he added, “I would sincerely say more than 75 percent of my patients will see improvement.”

Vickers said people who are considering acupuncture should first make sure their acupuncturist is appropriately qualified and licensed. In those cases, he said, acupuncture is very safe - and the main downsides are costs and the inconvenience of getting to a clinic.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions medications, physical, and talk therapy as potential options for chronic pain.  A complete story however might also have included some information about the standard treatments and how they compare to placebo.  When you look at physical therapy for chronic low back and NSAIDs the results are not all that impressive
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If authenticated in further, larger trials, the results could also become a landmark in the field of autism research, since scientists speculated that the drug may help some patients with autism not caused by fragile X, perhaps becoming the first medicine to address autism’s core symptoms.

One child in five thousand is born with fragile X syndrome, with mental effects ranging from mild learning disabilities to retardation so profound that sufferers do not speak, and physical effects that include elongated faces, prominent jaws, big ears, and enlarged testes. It mostly affects boys and earned its name because, under a microscope, one arm of the X chromosome seems nearly broken, with part hanging by a thread.

The gene for fragile X was discovered in 1991. Work since then has found that fragile X patients seem to experience an overload of unchecked synaptic noise — synapses being the junctions between brain neurons. The Novartis drug and others like it are intended to lower the volume of this noise so memory formation and high-level thinking can take place, allowing children to develop normally.

The Novartis trial, which began in 2008 in Europe with data analysis completed this year, was too brief to observe effects on basic intelligence. Instead, researchers measured a range of aberrant behaviors like hyperactivity, repetitive motions, social withdrawal and inappropriate speech. They gave one set of patients the drug and another a placebo, and after a few weeks switched treatments, with both doctors and patients unaware of which pill was which.

The results of the trial were something of a jumble until Novartis scientists noticed that patients who had a particular, undisclosed biological trait improved far more than others. “The bottom line is that we showed clear improvements in behavior,” Dr. Fishman said.

Told of the results, two parents of a fragile X patient were euphoric.

“This is what we have been working for and hoping for since our son was diagnosed with fragile X 17 years ago,” said Katie Clapp, president and co-founder of the Fraxa Research Foundation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to financing fragile X research. “This may be the key to solving the mystery of autism and other developmental disorders.”

Geraldine Dawson, chief science officer at Autism Speaks, the world’s largest autism advocacy organization, said that a growing body of research suggests that the many genetic causes of autism all seem to affect synapses, suggesting that a treatment for one form of the disease might help others.

“The exciting thing about these results is that it is our hope that these same medications may have similar positive benefits for people with autism who don’t have fragile X syndrome,” Dr. Dawson said.

Between 10 percent and 15 percent of autism cases result from fragile X syndrome or some other known genetic defect. While fragile X is the most common inherited cause of mental retardation, Down syndrome — which also causes retardation — is more common but is not inherited.

The Novartis trial results were not published or peer reviewed, and for commercial reasons Dr. Fishman refused to divulge many details. Dr. Luca Santarelli, head of neuroscience at Roche, confirmed that Roche is in the midst of testing a similar medicine in fragile X patients at four sites in the United States.

“So far we like what we see,” Dr. Santarelli said in his only characterization of their study.

One reason for the euphoria surrounding the Novartis trial is that it was seen as an especially difficult test of the drug’s effects. For ethical reasons, Novartis tested the drug only in adults. But the company and outside researchers believe that such compounds may prove most effective in young children, whose brains are far more likely to respond rapidly when barriers to learning are removed.

“This is perhaps the most promising therapeutic discovery ever for a gene-based behavioral disease,” said Dr. Edward M. Scolnick, former research chief at Merck and now director of the Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research at the Broad Institute at Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Dr. Scolnick has not seen the results of the Novartis trial, but was told of them and concluded that if the drugs work in fragile X, “there’s nothing to say that they won’t work in some cases of broader autism-spectrum disorders.”

The roots for the Novartis results began in 1982 when Stephen T. Warren, then a graduate student in genetics at Michigan State University, was looking for a job and something to research. A friend told him about fragile X and, with the same reflection he might use to pick a novel for a long flight, he decided that he wanted to find the gene that caused it.

“I had no idea how hard this would be,” Dr. Warren said. Nine years later, Dr. Warren, then at Emory University, was part of an international team that won a fierce competition by isolating the gene. The discovery was front-page news around the world, and experts predicted that widespread fetal testing and therapies were in the offing.

The predictions were premature because, like most of genetic research, discovering how the flawed gene caused disease was far harder than anticipated and required multiple leaps in neurology and biology. And even with those, much remains mysterious.

Fragile X is caused by a genetic stutter in which a portion of the gene gets repeated like a scratched album. With each subsequent generation, the number of repeats tends to rise. So if a mother has 10 repeats, her child might have 11 or 12. For reasons that are not well understood, however, this process of repeat amplification can suddenly go haywire. So mothers who have 55 or more repeats tend to have children with hundreds.

In anyone with 200 or more repeats, the body shuts off the gene. Since genes are used to make proteins, this genetic silencing means the encoded protein is never made. The absence of this protein in cells causes the wide-ranging effects of fragile X syndrome. Those with 55 to 200 repeats are considered carriers, and recent research shows they can have severe neurological declines late in life that mimic Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s.

Many geneticists would have moved on to other research topics after finding a disorder’s underlying gene. But Dr. Warren met affected children and their parents. Instead of family pictures, Dr. Warren’s desk displays a framed photo of a fragile X chromosome.

“I could not imagine telling someone like Katie Clapp that we were not going to pursue this research anymore,” he said.

So he kept on. Years of work by him and others found that the protein missing in those with fragile X normally seems to act as a sort of traffic cop at brain synapses, helping to stop or slow brain signaling at crucial intervals. It does this by sopping up the genetic instructions needed to produce proteins that encourage brain signaling. Regulating this flow of electronic pulses across the brain is crucial for the brain’s ability to learn and mature.

Dr. Warren was puzzling over how to recreate that synaptic traffic cop when, because of a scheduling conflict, he showed up in 2001 at the wrong scientific conference and happened to sit next to Mark F. Bear, a neuroscience professor at M.I.T. who had just given a presentation about compounds that seemed to work in synapses to speed the creation of proteins — including the one missing in fragile X patients.

The two got to talking and decided to collaborate. They found that if Dr. Bear reverse-engineered his compounds, they seemed to slow brain transmissions. Instead of a traffic cop, the brain would get speed bumps. Not ideal, but perhaps adequate in lowering the synaptic noise enough to encourage learning and the moderation of the kind of synaptic traffic jams that in fragile X children can lead to seizures.

Sure enough, mice, fish and fruit flies that through genetic engineering were made to have fragile X seemed to become normal when given Dr. Bear’s compound. The Novartis compound is a member of the same drug family.

“We have been promising for a long time that unlocking the molecular basis for hereditary diseases would lead to dramatic therapeutic advances, and that promise is finally coming true,” said Dr. Francis S. Collins, director of the National Institutes of Health, in discussing the science leading up to the trial. “But it has not been easy.”

A hundred years ago, Katie Clapp would have died giving birth to Andy, her child with fragile X.

“Andy’s head was too big to get out without a C-section, he would have killed me, and that would have taken care of the fragile X gene,” she said.

But Ms. Clapp and Andy did survive. And despite going to some of the best hospitals in the country, four years would pass before Andy’s condition was properly diagnosed.

When a doctor finally thought to do a fragile X test, Ms. Clapp and her husband, Dr. Michael Tranfaglia — both Harvard graduates with post-graduate degrees — researched the disease and came to two conclusions: fragile X was potentially treatable; and only about five researchers in the world were working toward a cure.

“And I thought, what if all five walk across the street at the same time and get hit by a Mack truck?” Ms. Clapp said. “That is not going to get us there.”

So the two started the Fraxa Research Foundation. Remarkably, their efforts seem to be paying off and may finally offer hope not only to those who with fragile X but to carriers like Andy’s sister, Laura.

“I’ve always known my kids have a chance of having it,” Laura, 18, said in a recent visit to the family’s house. “But I’m not going to have kids for at least 10 years anyway, and they’ll have a cure for by then.”

She paused, looked at her mother and said: “You’ve got 10 years.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The treatment approach appears to be genuinely novel. An expert source comments that fragile X syndrome, up until recently, was viewed as "disability needing rehab, not a disorder needing medication."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Late Houston surgeon's work may fight cancer that killed him Surgeon's trial study on cancer is hailed

Brain tumor took his life, but his pioneering therapy now may give others hope

The death of Houston neurosurgeon Samuel Hassenbusch from the brain cancer he treated has been one of 2008's sadder stories. But there's good news about the experimental treatment that he pioneered.

In study results to be presented next week at an annual meeting of cancer doctors, Hassenbusch's treatment — chemotherapy and a new vaccine — significantly prolonged survival of patients with glioblastoma, the most common and aggressive brain cancer.

Sen. Edward Kennedy was diagnosed with the disease last week.

"I'm biased, but this is some of the best data we've ever seen," said Dr. John Sampson, a Duke University neurosurgeon and the principal investigator of the study, conducted at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and Duke. "It appears very promising for a cancer where there's been little hope."

The trial's big surprise was that the chemotherapy didn't stop the vaccine from prompting a strong immune response and instead enhanced it. Because chemotherapy kills patients' white blood cells, it is usually considered incompatible with vaccines or, as they're also known, immunotherapy.

Glioblastoma kills nearly 10,000 Americans annually, a majority within the first 15 months after diagnosis, largely because of tentacle-like cells that creep into the brain from the main mass.

Hassenbusch, an M.D. Anderson professor of neurosurgery and a pain control expert who treated more than 500 brain cancer patients, was diagnosed with the disease in 2005. After surgery and follow-up radiation, he and his doctors decided to combine Temodar, the now-standard chemotherapy, and the vaccine, until then only used alone.

Hassenbusch became the first patient in the M.D. Anderson-Duke trial.

In all, the study enrolled 23 patients between 2005 and 2007. It was only open to those with a particular protein — present in one-third to two-thirds of glioblastomas — and those who were tumor free after surgery and radiation.

Kennedy's tumor is thought to be inoperable.

The study found the average time for recurrence of the tumor was 16.6 months, up from the previous six months. The time of survival was also up significantly from the previous average of 14 months, said Sampson, who declined to reveal the exact number until he presents the data June 2 at the American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting in Chicago.

Under the trial protocol, some patients received Temodar for the first five days of the month, and some received it for the first 21 days. On the 21st, all received the vaccine, which signals the immune system to destroy the cancer. Without the vaccine, the immune system doesn't recognize glioblastoma.

Almost all the patients mounted an immune response. The response was better with the highest dose of Temodar.

"I think Sam would be pretty excited about these results," said Dr. Mark Gilbert, an M.D. Anderson professor of neuro-oncology whose study of Temodar enrolled some 1,150 patients, the most ever in a brain cancer trial.

Gilbert cautioned that the study results are preliminary. He noted the impressive results could be the result of cherry-picking patients, accepting only those whose tumors had been excised by surgery and radiation.

To resolve that possibility, a new trial is under way at 20 cancer centers, including M.D. Anderson, dividing such patients into a group that gets just Temodor and a group that gets the combination therapy.

Also on tap is a trial adding a third drug — Avastin, a targeted therapy that starves tumors by stopping them from building blood vessels that supply them with nutrients — to the regimen.

For one patient in the study, the Temodar-vaccine combination by itself has worked fine.

"Doctors originally gave me six to eight months to live when I was diagnosed with glioblastoma," said Barbara Derenowski, 69, of Surprise, Ariz., a retirement community northwest of Phoenix. "But two years later, I'm in good shape, living a normal life and still returning cancer-free scans every month, thanks to this trial. I hope it becomes available to more people."

Hassenbusch lived almost three years after his diagnosis. He appeared to be beating the cancer with the combination therapy. But in May 2007, the cancer returned and this February claimed his life.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This was a story about additional treatments that might be used in conjunction with currently utilized therapy.  It was clear that surgery, radiation and standard chemotherapy are used.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - People who eat lots of magnesium-rich foods such as leafy green vegetables, nuts and beans have fewer strokes, according to an international analysis covering some 250,000 people.

But the authors of the study, published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, stopped short of recommending people take a daily magnesium supplement because their analysis focused on magnesium in food — and it may be another aspect of the food that is responsible for their finding.

“Dietary magnesium intake is inversely associated with risk of stroke, specifically ischemic stroke,” wrote lead author Susanna Larsson, a professor at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden.

The results suggest that people eat a healthy diet with “magnesium-rich foods such as green leafy vegetables, nuts, beans and whole grains,” she added.

Larsson and her colleagues combed through research databases spanning the last 45 years to find studies that tracked how much magnesium people took and how many of them had a stroke over time.

In seven studies published in the past 14 years, about 250,000 people in the United States, Europe and Asia were followed for an average of 11.5 years. About 6,500 of them, or three percent, had a stroke in the time they were followed.

For every extra 100 milligrams of magnesium a person ate per day, their risk of an ischemic stroke — the most common kind, typically caused by a blood clot — fell by nine percent.

The median magnesium intake for U.S. citizens included in the analysis was 242 milligrams a day. The United States recommends that men and women over age 31 eat 420 and 320 milligrams of magnesium daily, respectively.

Most of the studies allowed the researchers to rule out other factors, such as family history.

But Larsson told Reuters Health in an email that she could not say whether other aspects of what the people ate partially or entirely explained the finding.

More in-depth studies are needed before researchers can say that the magnesium was what actually reduced the stroke risk, she added.

Other experts said the results were consistent with dietary recommendations.

“It’s a diet that’s rich in fruits, vegetables and grains. Those are things that have low sodium, high potassium and high magnesium,” said Larry Goldstein, director of the stroke center at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, North Carolina.

"It's again the diet per se, not any one individual component of the diet." SOURCE: bit.ly/AhalBY
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story a satisfactory grade for emphasizing that this study could not address whether other aspects of peoples’ diets affected the findings – and that the results were consistent with dietary recommendations.
The story would have been stronger if it had mentioned the importance of hypertension control in stroke reduction – and that it may be the favorable dietary pattern that is working with these people through improved blood pressure control.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Brachytherapy, a technique pioneered to treat prostate cancer, is increasingly being used on breast cancer patients.

Oklahomans had about 2,200 new cases of breast cancer this year.

The advantages of brachytherapy, also called "accelerated partial breast irradiation,” are shorter treatment time and a smaller area that is exposed to radiation. Brachytherapy also has fewer side effects such as radiation burns.

"That reduces the potential harm to surrounding organs behind the breast tissue. That was a huge factor in me choosing to do the brachytherapy,” said Cheryl McCartney, 51, a Chouteau Elementary School principal who had brachytherapy done in 2006 at Cancer Treatment Centers of America in Tulsa.

McCartney had no side effects and remains cancer-free.

The typical radiation treatment for breast cancer involves about six weeks of daily "external beam radiation” that treats the entire breast. Not all communities offer radiation treatment, so women often must travel to receive it. Because of the burden, doctors say, many choose to have mastectomies instead.

"It's a lot shorter, and it's obviously convenient,” said Dr. Doug Kelly, a radiation oncologist with Cancer Treatment Centers. For many women, family and work obligations make a commute to receive treatment a challenge. "They really have a hard time coming in for six weeks,” he said.

The shorter treatment duration encouraged McCartney to have brachytherapy. Her first oncologist suggested the traditional approach. After seeking a second opinion, she had the needle method done without having to miss work. She returned twice a day for treatment.

"It did not disrupt my schedule that week,” she said.

Cancer Treatment Centers was among the first to adopt brachytherapy for breast cancer patients a decade ago, Kelly said.

"Now it's becoming more common and almost standard,” Kelly said.

Although there are no large-scale national results, doctors say studies have shown brachytherapy to be as effective as traditional radiation therapy.

OU Physicians Radiologist Dr. Ozer Algan said a national study of brachytherapy's effectiveness compared to treating the entire breast is underway, but it will be several years before results are published.

However, he said, "I think it is becoming more popular, both from a physician perspective but also from a patient perspective. I think most patients want to get their treatment done as quickly as possible.”

Algan said he doesn't extol one technique over the others; all are acceptable depending on the patient.

In the multiple-catheter method, a doctor places 10 to 20 "needles” about one centimeter apart around the tumor cavity, and a machine inserts the radioactive pellet. The procedure requires a hospital stay, at the end of which the needles and pellets are removed. Women can then return to work.

In the balloon-catheter method, also known as Mammosite, a doctor inflates a balloon in the tumor cavity, and a catheter delivers the radioactive pellet.

Although standards depend somewhat on doctors' preferences, candidates for breast brachytherapy typically have early-stage tumors with a margin of healthy tissue around the tumor site after removal and minimal or no migration of cancer cells to nearby lymph nodes.

"You're hopefully killing any stray cancer cells,” Kelly said.

Brachytherapy remains a mainstay of prostate cancer treatment. Oklahomans had some 2,510 new cases of prostate cancer this year.

OU Physicians Urologist Dr. Puneet Sindhwani said doctors are diagnosing prostate cancer earlier; they aren't seeing the advanced-stage or "hybrid” cancers they saw 15 or 20 years ago.

"More and more patients are opting for brachytherapy. More and more physicians are offering brachytherapy,” he said.

Because the prostate is small and tiny shifts in position can make accurately targeting tumors difficult, OU Physicians has software and a real-time machine that allow doctors to place the seeds exactly where they are needed.

Without the software, doctors must plan where to place the tiny pellets and then recreate the position of the prostate. The computer calculates radiation exposure to nearby nerves and tissue, which is important because overexposure can cause erectile dysfunction and other problems.

"A five-millimeter distance will make you either overexposed or underexposed,” he explained.

Sindhwani has been performing the procedure with the new equipment for about three months.

Although long-term data are unavailable, results have been positive.

"At present time, it seems like they are doing very well,” he said.

The 50 to 150 pellets become inert metal after losing their radioactivity.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article describes the most common alternative, external beam radiation. 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EWING, N.J., March 14, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Nasdaq: CPXX) today announced positive results from the Phase 3 trial of VYXEOS™ (cytarabine: daunorubicin) Liposome for Injection (also known as CPX-351) in patients with high-risk (secondary) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) compared to the standard of care regimen of cytarabine and daunorubicin known as 7+3. The trial met its primary endpoint demonstrating a statistically significant improvement in overall survival. Data will be submitted for presentation at the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2016 Annual Meeting.

The median overall survival for patients treated with VYXEOS in the study was 9.56 months compared to 5.95 months for patients receiving 7+3, representing a 3.61 month improvement in favor of VYXEOS. The hazard ratio (HR) was 0.69 (p=0.005) which represents a 31 percent reduction in the risk of death versus 7+3. The percentage of patients alive 12 months after randomization was 41.5% on the VYXEOS arm compared to 27.6% on the 7+3 arm. The percentage of patients alive 24 months after randomization was 31.1% on the VYXEOS arm compared to 12.3% on the 7+3 arm.

"The overall survival advantage seen with CPX-351 compared to 7+3, along with a superior response rate and no increase in serious toxicity indicates that we'll likely have a new standard of care for treating older patients with secondary AML," said Jeffrey E. Lancet, M.D., senior member and chief of the Leukemia/Myelodysplasia Program at Moffitt Cancer Center and the principal investigator for the study. "This represents a major step forward for a very difficult-to-treat patient population."

VYXEOS also demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in induction response rate (CR+CRi of 47.7% versus 33.3%; p=0.016) and this significance was maintained for the analysis of CR alone (CR of 37.3% versus 25.6%, p=0.040).

Sixty-day all-cause mortality was 13.7% versus 21.2%, in favor of patients treated with VYXEOS.

No substantial difference in Grade 3 or higher adverse events was observed between VYXEOS and 7+3. In the intent-to-treat population, Grade 3 or higher, hematologic adverse events were similar for overall infections, febrile neutropenia, and bleeding events. In the intent-to-treat population, Grade 3 or higher, non-hematologic adverse events were similar across all organ systems, including cardiac, gastrointestinal, general systems, metabolic disorders, musculoskeletal, nervous system, respiratory, skin and renal.

"These findings confirm that VYXEOS provides the first opportunity we've had in decades to extend survival for patients with high-risk AML," added Gail Roboz, M.D., Professor of Medicine and Director of the Leukemia Program at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University and the New York-Presbyterian Hospital in New York. "Also, more patients in remission means more who are eligible for potentially curative therapy."

Based on these results the company expects to submit a New Drug Application (NDA) for VYXEOS with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) later this year and submit a Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) with the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in the first quarter of 2017.

"The successful outcome of this Phase 3 trial represents an important advance for AML patients, their families and clinicians," said Scott Jackson, Chief Executive Officer of Celator Pharmaceuticals. "It also marks a major milestone for Celator, for VYXEOS, and for our CombiPlex® platform. We offer our sincere thanks to the patients and investigators who participated in this study and we will work closely with regulatory authorities to make this new treatment available to the AML community as soon as possible."

The clinical trial was conducted in partnership with The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society® (LLS) through its Therapy Acceleration Program (TAP), which has supported the clinical development of VYXEOS beginning in Phase 2.

Celator will host a conference call and live audio webcast on Tuesday, March 15, 2016 at 8:00am EDT to discuss the results of the Phase 3 trial. To participate in the conference call, please dial 877-303-6316 (domestic) or 650-521-5176 (international) and refer to conference ID 71930208. The live webcast of the call can be accessed in the Investors section of Celator's website at www.celatorpharma.com. An archived webcast will be available on Celator's website beginning approximately two hours after the event.

VYXEOS (cytarabine:daunorubicin) Liposome for Injection, also known as CPX-351, is a nano-scale co-formulation of cytarabine and daunorubicin at a synergistic 5:1 molar ration. VYXEOS represents a novel approach to developing combinations of drugs in which molar ratios of two drugs with synergistic anti-tumor activity are encapsulated in a nano-scale liposome in order to maintain the desired ratio following administration. VYXEOS was granted orphan drug status by the FDA and the European Commission for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). VYXEOS was also granted Fast Track designation for the treatment of elderly patients with secondary AML. In addition to the Phase 3 trial, Celator published results from two randomized, controlled, Phase 2 trials with VYXEOS. The first trial was conducted in newly diagnosed elderly AML patients and the second trial was conducted in patients with AML in first relapse.

The randomized, controlled, Phase 3 trial (Protocol NCT01696084), enrolled 309 patients at 39 sites in the United States and Canada, and compared VYXEOS to the conventional cytarabine and daunorubicin treatment regimen (commonly referred to as 7+3) as first-line therapy in older (60-75 years of age) patients with high-risk (secondary) AML. Patients were stratified for age (60 to 69 and 70 to 75 years of age) and AML type; treatment-related AML, AML with documented history of MDS with prior treatment with hypomethylating agent therapy, AML with documented history of MDS without prior hypomethlyating agent therapy, AML with a documented history of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMMoL), and de novo AML with a karyotype characteristic of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).

Patients were randomized 1:1 to receive either VYXEOS or 7+3. Patients could receive one or two inductions, and responding patients could receive one or two consolidations. First induction for VYXEOS was 100u/m2; days 1, 3, and 5 by 90-minute infusion and for the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 7 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1, 2, and 3 (7+3). Second induction for VYXEOS-treated patients was 100u/m2 on days 1 and 3 and the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 5 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1 and 2 (5+2).

Only patients with documented CR or CRi were eligible to receive chemotherapy consolidation. Consolidation for VYXEOS-treated patients was 65u/m2 on days 1 and 3 and the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 5 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1 and 2 (5+2).

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a rapidly progressing cancer of the blood characterized by the uncontrolled proliferation of immature blast cells in the bone marrow. AML is generally a disease of older adults, and the median age of a patient diagnosed with AML is about 67 years. The American Cancer Society estimates that there will be 19,950 new cases of AML and 10,430 deaths from AML in the U.S. in 2016. In Europe the number of new cases is estimated to be 18,000 and in Japan the number is 5,500. The Company estimates that nearly 70 percent of AML patients are over the age of 60, and approximately 75 percent are intermediate or high risk. Furthermore, approximately half of those patients are considered suitable for intensive treatment.

Even with current treatment, overall survival for AML is poor. In patients over 60 years of age, the 5 year survival rate is less than 10%. In high-risk (secondary) AML, overall survival is lower, resulting in an acute need for new treatment options for these patients.

Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc., with locations in Ewing, N.J., and Vancouver, B.C., is an oncology-focused biopharmaceutical company that is transforming the science of combination therapy, and developing products to improve patient outcomes in cancer. Celator's proprietary technology platform, CombiPlex®, enables the rational design and rapid evaluation of optimized combinations of anti-cancer drugs, incorporating traditional chemotherapies as well as molecularly targeted agents to deliver enhanced anti-cancer activity. CombiPlex addresses several fundamental shortcomings of conventional combination regimens, as well as the challenges inherent in combination drug development, by identifying the most effective synergistic molar ratio of the drugs being combined in vitro, and fixing this ratio in a nano-scale drug delivery complex to maintain the optimized combination after administration and ensuring exposure of this ratio to the tumor. Celator's pipeline includes the lead product, VYXEOS™ (also known as CPX-351), a nano-scale liposomal formulation of cytarabine:daunorubicin being studied for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia; CPX-1, a nano-scale liposomal formulation of irinotecan:floxuridine studied in colorectal cancer; and a preclinical stage product candidate, CPX-8, a hydrophobic docetaxel prodrug nanoparticle formulation. The Company is advancing its CombiPlex platform and broadening its application to include molecularly targeted therapies. The Company is seeking research and development collaborations with other biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies where its proprietary technology may provide benefit.

For more information, please visit Celator's website at www.celatorpharma.com. Information on ongoing trials is available at www.clinicaltrials.gov.

To the extent that statements contained in this press release are not descriptions of historical facts regarding Celator, they are forward-looking statements reflecting the current beliefs and expectations of management made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as "may," "will," "expect," "anticipate," "estimate," "intend," and similar expressions (as well as other words or expressions referencing future events, conditions or circumstances) are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements contained in this press release include, among others, statements regarding the safety, potential efficacy, therapeutic potential, and commercial potential of VYXEOS™ (also known as CPX-351), our expectations regarding the timing of our regulatory filings, our expectations regarding our research and development programs and advancing our CombiPlex platform and the potential to establish research and development collaborations applying our proprietary technologies with other biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies. Forward-looking statements in this release involve substantial risks and uncertainties that could cause our development programs, future results, or achievements to differ significantly from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, the uncertainties inherent in the conduct of clinical studies, whether clinical study results obtained to date will be predictive of future results, whether the final results of our clinical studies will be supportive of regulatory approval to market VYXEOS and other matters that could affect the commercial potential of our drug candidates. Celator undertakes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements. For a further description of the risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ from those expressed in these forward-looking statements, as well as risks relating to the business of the company in general, see Celator's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, subsequent reports on Form 10-Q and 8-K, and other filings by the company with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release gets a satisfactory rating for devoting plenty of space to describing the new drug’s advantages in terms of survival advantage over the comparator, or current standard of care. Are there other treatments that are useful in treating high risk AML?  We never get that information. This would have been much stronger if a statement about the studies of the non-liposomal formulation of the drug was given.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Finding a ‘silent killer'

A new strategy involving a simple blood test is a ‘step forward’ in detecting ovarian cancer early

Houston researchers have demonstrated a promising new way to detect ovarian cancer early, a long-sought tool in the battle against the disease known as “the silent killer” because it's usually not diagnosed until it's difficult to treat.

University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center researchers Thursday reported the results of a study that showed a simple blood test, tracked over time and followed by an ultrasound if needed, accurately picks up the disease in early, more curable stages. There is no such screening tool currently in use.

“This is an important step forward in the effort to develop an early detection system for this very lethal disease,” said Dr. Karen Lu, a professor in M.D. Anderson's department of gynecologic oncology and the study's principal investigator. “If the study's findings are confirmed in larger studies, I think this new strategy will be practice-changing.”

The method used in the nine-year study of 3,252 initially healthy postmenopausal women caught five ovarian cancers, three of them invasive. There were only a few false positives.

Lu said the study isn't large enough to justify recommending yet. But she added that an ongoing study in the United Kingdom involving 200,000 women should more definitively determine the test's value. That study is due to show results in 2015.

Ovarian cancer, though rare, is the fourth-leading cancer killer among U.S. women. In 2009, according to the American Cancer Society, it was diagnosed in 21,550 women and killed 14,600. More than 75 percent of women are diagnosed when the disease has already become advanced.

The new strategy involves an existing blood test for a protein discovered in the 1980s by an M.D. Anderson researcher and long used for predicting ovarian cancer recurrence. The protein, known as CA-125, has not been good at identifying new early-stage ovarian cancer because it can become elevated for other reasons, leading to false positives.

In the last decade, hopeful of finding a better test, ovarian cancer researchers have invested much time in the investigation of other biomarkers and technologies. But none proved as accurate as CA-125 after a Harvard scientist developed a mathematical model combining trends in test results and a patient's age.

One expert said the study is an important step but definitely needs follow-up work.

“It's a well-done study about which its authors are appropriately careful in their conclusions,” said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy medical director at the American Cancer Society. “But more research and refining needs to be done before it should be implemented. I can remember when doctors all rushed to adopt the Prostate Specific Antigen test, and we still don't know how to use it.”

Lu acknowledged there are comparisons to the PSA test, which has come under fire in recent years for being better at detecting prostate cancer than improving survival. But Lu said that if the UK study replicates her results, the ovarian cancer test would have the advantage of producing much fewer false positives and being able to spot aggressive cancers.

Study participants were grouped as low, medium or high risk based on how much their CA-125 levels changed over time. Low-risk women repeated the blood test in a year, medium-risk women were referred for an ultrasound, and high-risk women had exploratory surgery.

Over the study's nine years, 85 women had ultrasounds and eight had surgery. Three of the eight turned out to have benign tumors.

Among the study participants was Liz Stegall, who enrolled at the request of the family of Linda Nelson Taylor, a friend who died of ovarian cancer that wasn't diagnosed until it was advanced. Stegall had no family cancer history, but six years into the study last year, she was diagnosed with early stage disease after a blood test showed a spike in her CA-125 levels.

“I would say I'm ecstatic,” said Stegall, 59, of Sugar Land, who finished treatment at the end of December and is cancer free. “This new test came too late to save Linda, but thanks to her and it, I should be alive for some time still. And if I can be saved, so can other people.”

The study results were unveiled Thursday in advance of a major cancer conference next month.

More than half of the women in the study came from Houston. Besides M.D. Anderson, the participating institutions were The Woman's Hospital of Texas, Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, Women and Infants Hospital in Providence, R.I., and John Stoddard Cancer Center in Des Moines, Iowa.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story is clear to say that there is no good existing screening method and that using CA-125 alone has been proven inneffective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Sept. 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- For asthma patients whose condition is not controlled with standard inhaled steroids, the addition of Spiriva -- a medication already approved for lung disease -- appears to improve breathing, a new study finds.

However, the study authors and an outside expert stressed that these are early findings and much longer, larger clinical trials are needed.

Tiotropium bromide (Spiriva)) belongs to a class of drugs called anticholinergics, which work by enlarging the airways to allow for easier breathing. Currently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has only approved the medication for use by patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a chronic ailment that is a combination of bronchitis and emphysema.

Treating asthma has never been a one-size-fits-all proposition, so "having a new class of asthma medications could be potentially important," said lead researcher Dr. Stephen P. Peters, a professor of pulmonary, critical care, allergy, and immunologic medicine at Wake Forest University, in Winston-Salem, NC.

"People are different. Some people will respond to some medications, some respond to others," he said.

The report, funded by the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, is published in the Sept. 19 online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine. The journal is releasing the data early to coincide with its presentation Sunday at the European Respiratory Society meeting in Barcelona.

For the study, Peters' team tried three drug regimens on 210 asthmatics. These included: Spiriva plus an inhaled steroid; a double dose of the inhaled steroid; and an inhaled steroid plus Serevent, a long-acting beta agonist that relaxes the muscles in the airway.

Patients stayed on each regiment for 14 weeks.

The researchers found that Spiriva plus an inhaled steroid was more effective than giving a double dose of steroids in improving breathing and controlling asthma for these tough-to-treat patients.

In addition, the combination of an inhaled steroid and Spiriva was not less effective than using an inhaled steroid plus Serevent, they said.

That's important, Peters said, because there have been some safety concerns raised about long-acting beta agonists. These drugs carry a note on their labels warning of the possibility of severe adverse events, including death, he noted.

The results need to be confirmed in a much larger pool of patients, Peters said, and he noted that the patients were not followed long enough to see if Spiriva was able to reduce the severity of asthma attacks and hospitalizations.

In addition, Spiriva's safety profile among asthmatics still needs to be studied, he said.

Because the drug is not yet FDA-approved for use in asthma, Peters was reluctant to recommend it for that use. "My hope is that in three to five years we will have the drug approved for asthma," he said.

Dr. Shirin Shafazand, an assistant professor of pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, said that "perhaps there is a role for Spiriva in these poorly controlled asthmatics."

However, at this stage there is no definitive answer whether Spiriva should or shouldn't be used in asthma, she said.

"This is a good foundation to design a trial where you would look at Spiriva plus steroids versus doubling the dose of steroids in a large number of asthmatics who are poorly controlled and then you follow them long-term," Shafazand said, but right now there is no data on long-term efficacy and safety.

For more information on asthma, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: By the nature of the study, an unapproved therapy was compared to existing alternatives. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 13, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Acupuncture may be an effective way to treat older children struggling with a certain form of lazy eye, new research from China suggests, although experts say more studies are needed.

Lazy eye (amblyopia) is essentially a state of miscommunication between the brain and the eyes, resulting in the favoring of one eye over the other, according to the National Eye Institute.

The study authors noted that anywhere from less than 1 percent to 5 percent of people worldwide are affected with the condition. Of those, between one third and one half have a type of lazy eye known as anisometropia, which is caused by a difference in the degree of nearsightedness or farsightedness between the two eyes.

Standard treatment for children involves eyeglasses or contact lens designed to correct focus issues. However, while this approach is often successful in younger children (between the ages of 3 and 7), it is successful among only about a third of older children (between the ages of 7 and 12).

For the latter group, doctors will often place a patch over the "good" eye temporarily in addition to eyeglasses, and treatment success is typically achieved in two-thirds of cases.

Children, however, often have trouble adhering to patch therapy, the treatment can bring emotional issues for some and a reverse form of lazy eye can also take root, the researchers said.

Study author Dr. Dennis S.C. Lam, from the department of ophthalmology and visual sciences and Institute of Chinese Medicine at the Joint Shantou International Eye Center of Shantou University and Chinese University of Hong Kong, and his colleagues report their observations in the December issue of the Archives of Ophthalmology.

In the search for a better option than patch therapy, Lam and his associates set out to explore the potential benefits of acupuncture, noting that it has been used to treat dry eye and myopia.

Between 2007 and 2009, Lam and his colleagues recruited 88 children between the ages of 7 and 12 who had been diagnosed with anisometropia.

About half the children were treated five times a week with acupuncture, targeting five specific acupuncture needle insertion points (located at the top of the head and the eyebrow region, as well as the legs and hands). The other half were given two hours a day of patch therapy, combined with a minimum of one hour per day of near-vision exercises such as reading.

After about four months of treatment, the research team found that overall visual acuity improved markedly more among the acupuncture group relative to the patch group. In fact, they noted that while lazy eye was successfully treated in nearly 42 percent of the acupuncture patients, that figure dropped to less than 17 percent among the patch patients.

Neither treatment prompted significant side effects, the authors said.

The team nonetheless pointed out that their study's tracking period was relatively short, and that acupuncture is a complicated system that may lend itself to different success rates, depending on the skills of the particular acupuncturist.

And while theorizing that the apparent success of this alternative approach may have something to do with stimulating blood flow, retinal nerve growth and visual cortex activity, the authors acknowledged that the exact mechanism by which it works remains poorly understood.

Dr. Richard Bensinger, a Seattle-based ophthalmologist and spokesman for the American Academy of Ophthalmology, said that the finding is "certainly suggestive and worth following up."

"This is kind of cool," he said. "But I will say that I don't know of any study looking at acupuncture and vision. There are studies based on symptomatic things such as pain, and I think there's pretty good evidence that it does have benefit in that respect. But for vision therapy this is the first I've heard of it, and I don't know that anyone has ever tried this before. So this is like a teaser."

"Of course people in those parts of the country, like where I live, where there's fairly wide acceptance of alternative medicine might receive this type of treatment better than others," Bensinger cautioned. "And no question patients will gravitate towards treatments that are covered by their insurance even if it's not the best treatment. And as an alternative approach, this may not be covered."

"But if it works," he added, "people will certainly be excited -- although it certainly needs further testing and further studies to decide if it's really beneficial or not."

For his part, Dr. Stanley Chang, chairman of the ophthalmology department at Columbia University in New York City, did not seem to hold out much promise for acupuncture's potential as an alternative lazy eye therapy.

"Acupuncture I think definitely works for pain amelioration, but I'm not sure it works for some of these other things," he cautioned. "They've tried it for the treatment of myopia and glaucoma, without much success. And so although there haven't been any really good trials comparing acupuncture with conventional therapies, my guess is that it's probably not going to do much for the treatment of lazy eye."

"However, I think it's worth considering or trying," Chang added, "because nothing else seems to work very well for patients of that age, including patch therapy. But what will need is a very carefully controlled study that accounts for all the variables that might have an impact on the outcome of this approach."

For more on amblyopia, visit the National Eye Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that standard treatment for younger children with amblyopia involves eyeglasses or contact lens designed to correct problems with focus. Patch therapy is useful for older children, according to the story, but may be tougher for children to adhere to and has potential adverse effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Much of the buzz over mobile health interventions seems to be about how we can use an ever-growing variety of shiny new smartphone apps and sensors to better manage our health.

But texting, that old-school technology, may deserve some of that spotlight, too.

Getting texts with motivating and informative messages led patients with coronary heart disease to make behavior changes like exercising more and smoking less, according to a study published Tuesday in JAMA, the journal of the American Medical Association. By the end of the six-month study, patients who had received the text messages had reduced their cholesterol, blood pressure and body mass index.

"I have to say, we were pretty surprised that it worked," says Clara Chow, lead author of the study and program director of community-based cardiac services at Westmead Hospital in Sydney, Australia.

And it worked to improve not just one risk factor for heart disease, but many. "These are the things that medications usually do, not text messages," says Chow, who is also an associate professor at Sydney Medical School at the University of Sydney.

In a randomized clinical trial, more than 700 patients with coronary heart disease were split into two groups: half received four text messages per week for six months plus usual care, while the other half received just usual care.

The texts that patients received were semi-personalized, based on background information about each person, such as smoking status and preferred name. For example, vegetarian participants wouldn't receive the text message about how grilling steak is healthier than deep-frying it.

Other texts might include something like, "Hi, Elizabeth. Have you gone for your walk today?" or "Have you taken your medications yet today? It's important to take them at the same time each day."

There's a lot of hype over mobile health interventions these days, Chow says. "Everyone thinks it has a lot of potential, but there's actually very little evidence."

While there are more than 100,000 health-related apps on the market, the evidence to date is lacking as to whether many of those apps are safe or effective, according to Zubin Eapen, a cardiologist and assistant professor of medicine at Duke University School of Medicine.

"We [as physicians] are always looking for evidence to make sure that we are recommending the right things for our patients, whether it's a drug, a device or a digital product, like an app," says Eapen, who is also medical director of the Duke Heart Failure Same-Day Access Clinic.

Eapen coauthored an editorial, which was published alongside Chow's study, with Eric Peterson, the Fred Cobb Distinguished Professor of Medicine in the division of cardiology at Duke and an associate editor of JAMA.

Not only does this research provide evidence that a text-based program can improve heart disease risk factors, but it also shows that a bunch of bells and whistles aren't required for successful health outcomes. A simple, low-cost program of text messaging can do the trick.

"I like to look for things that are able to be used in multiple corners of our world, from low-income settings to high-income settings," Chow says. "Everybody owns a mobile phone these days. You don't have to have a smartphone to text."

That means more access across more sectors of a population. While almost two-thirds of American adults own a smartphone, that number rises even higher when you're talking about plain old cell phones – a full nine out of 10 American adults own some kind of cell phone.

Globally, cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death. "If we are going to reach a global population, we need solutions that are both scalable and affordable," Eapen says. "And mobile health – and text messaging, maybe, in particular – represents both a scalable and affordable approach."

Making healthy changes in behavior can be tough, but for patients with heart disease, it can be vital.

Yet those daily decisions – whether to smoke that cigarette, eat that piece of cake or skip the gym – are often "far removed from the rewards or consequences," Eapen says. It can be hard to view those everyday decisions in light of more distant consequences, like having another heart attack or not living as long a life as desired. Encouraging text messages may help to inform those everyday decisions and keep a bigger goal in mind.

Chow and Eapen say the study has its limitations. It can't tell us whether text messaging could eventually lead to fewer subsequent heart attacks among the patients receiving those messages or whether the positive health outcomes would continue past the six-month study window. Yet patients in Chow's study resoundingly said that the text messaging helped them make the necessary changes – more than 90 percent of the participants found the program useful.

"People said things like, 'It wasn't actually what the messages said, it was that someone was there supporting me, thinking about me,' " Chow says.

And although Chow and her colleagues told study participants that they did not need to reply to the text messages, many of them still did. "Heaps of them replied to us," she says. "They would say, 'Thanks for the message. I've been on my walk, my blood pressure is better.' "
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The focus of the story is not so much on how the text message intervention directly reduced heart disease risk, but on the extent to which it resulted in patients taking steps to reduce their own risk — such as by exercising more, smoking less, making dietary changes, or taking prescription drugs on a regular basis. The story does discuss other “mobile health interventions,” such as smartphone apps — but notes that there don’t appear to be many mobile health projects that rely simply on text messages. The story also looks at how the text messages helped patients pursue lifestyle changes — like exercising more and smoking less — that reduced their risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers report some of the most encouraging results yet for treating lung cancer with the latest immune-based treatments, most of which have been approved to treat other types of tumors.

In three papers presented at the American Association for Cancer Research annual meeting, and published simultaneously in the , lung cancer experts found innovative ways to weaken lung tumors to improve people’s chances of surviving the disease.

“There is definitely a high unmet need,” says Patrick Forde, assistant professor of oncology and associate member of the Bloomberg-Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at Johns Hopkins, of the lack of effective treatments for lung cancer. Currently more than half of people who are treated even at early stages of the disease can expect the cancer to return, and chemotherapy typically leads to only a 5% improvement in people’s chances of living five years — but an up to 70% chance of being exposed to serious toxicities.

The studies involve a group of immune-based cancer drugs called checkpoint inhibitors, which are designed to rip away the molecular cloak behind which cancer cells hide from the immune system. The medications target a protein called PD-1, its related PD-L1, or CTLA-4, which protect the body’s cells from being killed by immune cells; because tumors are normal cells growing out of control, they take advantage of this molecular security blanket to avoid getting detected by immune cells. A series of checkpoint inhibitor drugs, first approved in 2011 initially for treating melanoma, expose the tumor cells to the immune system. Based on their success in treating skin cancers, scientists are now studying this group of drugs in a number of other cancers, including tumors in the lung.

In one study, called CheckMate-227, researchers tested whether a combination of two of these checkpoint inhibitor drugs could keep tumors from growing better than the standard treatment of chemotherapy in people with advanced non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Nearly 300 people were randomly assigned to receive either the combination of the immune-based drugs or the traditional chemotherapy treatment. After nearly a year, the lung cancer in people taking the immunotherapy was 42% less likely to have progressed than among people getting chemotherapy.

What’s more, say the study’s authors, doctors may also figure out which people are most likely to respond to the two-drug combination of nivolumab (Opdivo) and ipilimumab (Yervoy) and which are not. In the study, he and his colleagues found that people whose tumors had more mutations enjoyed the longest time period during which their cancers did not progress.

Currently, lung cancer treatments rely heavily on chemotherapy, but doctors are shifting toward a more customized and precise way of treating each person’s disease in order to improve their chances of survival. For example, newer targeted therapy drugs home in on specific genetic mutations that are responsible for driving a person’s cancer. Doctors can also determine if a person’s lung cancer is genetically vulnerable to the checkpoint inhibitor drugs tested in the current study. Putting together everything that doctors currently know about lung tumors, “more than half of people with lung cancer can avoid chemotherapy and get more precision-based treatments,” says Dr. Matthew Hellmann of the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC), lead author of the study. In addition, “a year after treatment, three times more people on immunotherapy were doing well compared to those who just got chemotherapy.”

The results could play a role in changing standard treatments for people diagnosed with advanced NSCLC, by making a strong case for starting people immediately on the immunotherapy combination rather than giving them chemotherapy first, as many doctors currently do. While nivolumab is approved for treating metastatic NSCLC, for example, that indication calls for using it if the disease continues to progress either during or after chemotherapy. This combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab showed that the paired drugs could be more effective when begun as the first treatment, instead of chemotherapy.

There may also be other ways to improve outcomes for people with advanced NSCLC. In another study, researchers found that combining standard chemotherapy with another immune-based checkpoint inhibitor, pembrolizumab (Keytruda), helped them live nearly four months longer on average than people treated with just chemotherapy. People getting the combination of immunotherapy and chemotherapy were 51% less likely to die after 10.5 months than people receiving chemotherapy alone. “The magnitude of benefit was unexpected and great to see,” says Dr. Leena Gandhi, associate professor of medicine at NYU Langone Medical Center and co-author of the study. Pembrolizumab is already approved for treating about 25% to 30% of people with advanced NSCLC who have a certain genetic profile that makes their cancer vulnerable to the drug, but this latest study expands that population to many more people who may benefit from the immunotherapy if the medication is combined with chemotherapy.

The results are even more encouraging for people with early stage lung cancer. In a third, small study of 21 people diagnosed with early stage disease, researchers led by a team at Johns Hopkins and MSKCC found that giving people two doses of nivolumab before surgery to remove lung tumors shrunk those tumors drastically and lowered chances of relapse, thanks to its ability to jump start the immune system to fight the cancer. When the scientists analyzed the tumors they had cut out, they found that in about half of the people treated with nivolumab, the growths showed significant destruction by immune cells, meaning that nivolumab had unmasked the tumors as foreign and allowed the immune system’s killer cells to attack them. And when the scientists studied the blood of the people receiving the immunotherapy, they discovered a close match between the types of immune cells in the blood and certain targets on the tumor cells, suggesting that nivolumab had released the immune system to pump out the appropriate cells it needed to tackle the cancer.

“We expected to see some response, but I don’t think we expected to see a 45% significant response,” says Forde. “To give you some idea of how significant that is, with chemotherapy we normally see the same degree of response around 20% of the time.”

Forde says that the strong response seen in people at the beginning of the disease could suggest that immunotherapies might be useful in re-training the immune system to fight cancer for long periods of time — possibly even a lifetime. “The Holy Grail is to have a relatively non-toxic therapy that could potentially use the body’s own immune system to prevent recurrence,” he says. “And while our study is only with 21 patients, the early indications from this study are very positive.”

Taken together, the results could fundamentally change the way lung cancer is treated, significantly improving people’s ability to both hold off lung cancer for longer periods of time, as well as live longer with the disease.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions chemotherapy, which it says “therapy typically leads to only a 5% improvement in people’s chances of living five years — but an up to 70% chance of being exposed to serious toxicities.” (But, note that the story never provided information on immunotherapy’s serious toxicities.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, April 15, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Adding computer-aided detection to mammograms finds more early, noninvasive cancers and helps detect invasive cancers at earlier stages, according to a large new study. But the jury's still out as to how worthwhile the extra technology is overall.

For one thing, computer-aided detection (CAD) increases the amount of diagnostic testing among women who turn out not to have breast cancer. And the technology makes mammograms more expensive.

CAD is becoming more widespread, said Dr. Joshua Fenton, an associate professor of family and community medicine at the University of California, Davis, and lead study author. "It's an add-on and now is used in probably three-quarters of U.S. mammograms," he said.

Computer-aided detection systems use a digitized mammogram image from either a traditional film mammogram or a digitally acquired mammogram, according to the American College of Radiology. The CAD software looks for areas that may indicate cancer so the radiologist can then look more closely at the mammogram.

Although it has rapidly become part of mammogram screening, Fenton said there is limited and conflicting research on its effect.

Under Medicare payment rates, doctors get an additional $11 for adding computer-aided detection to a mammogram, said Fenton, citing Medicare data. The Medicare rate for a film mammogram is $81 while a digital mammogram is $139.

His team evaluated more than 409,000 mammograms -- with and without computer-aided detection -- from more than 163,000 women aged 67 to 89. The study is published in the April 16 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Fenton took data from a large U.S. epidemiology database from 2001 to 2006. During that time, computer-aided detection use increased from 3.6 percent to 60.5 percent. Now, with about 75 percent of mammograms adding it, it is even more common, Fenton said.

"In our study, we assessed its impact in the Medicare program," he said. The researchers compared the results when mammograms included CAD to when they did not.

When computer-aided detection was used, doctors found a greater number of early cancers known as ductal carcinoma in situ, or DCIS. "But the [overall] rate of invasive breast cancer diagnosis was no different with or without CAD," Fenton said.

However, among the women who did have invasive cancer, computer-aided detection was linked with a greater likelihood of finding the cancer while it was stage 1 or 2 compared to stage 3 or 4, they found.

"CAD was also associated with increased diagnostic testing among women who turned out not to have breast cancer," he said. These women, because breast cancer was suspected, had to be called back for additional tests, such as repeat mammograms or biopsies.

So is the new computer technology worth it? "Our study doesn't answer that question; it raises that question," Fenton said. The findings, he said, are a mix of potential good news and not so good. The additional tests that turn out to be unnecessary, because no cancer is found, are not desirable, he said.

Some of the very early cancers diagnosed in older women, he noted, may not have caused them a problem during their lifetime. But doctors can't say with certainty which ones will progress and which ones will not.

"Women should recognize that CAD comes with some potential risks," Fenton said. "It has the potential risk of a false-positive mammogram. If you are an older woman, [there is] the risk of overtreatment of noninvasive lesions."

Dr. Daniel Kopans, a professor of radiology at Harvard Medical School and senior radiologist in the breast imaging division at Massachusetts General Hospital, said the study provides additional information to doctors and women, but has some limitations. He was not involved with the study.

"The good news is the use of CAD was related to finding invasive cancers at smaller sizes and earlier stages than before the CAD era," said Kopans, also a member of the American College of Radiology's Breast Imaging Commission. "There should be no argument that finding invasive cancers at a smaller size and earlier stage is beneficial," he said, as they are more likely to be cured.

While he calls finding more DCIS with computer-aided detection also ''likely a good thing," he acknowledged the debate about the possibility that a very early cancer in an elderly woman may not cause a problem in her lifetime. Although the treatment of DCIS is debated among experts, Kopans said, "In my mind, it is always worth it to find additional cancers."

One limitation of the study, he said, is that the researchers cannot say for sure it was the computer-aided detection that made the difference. Other factors could have played a role, such as the radiologists becoming more experienced, he said.

To learn more about mammography, visit the American College of Radiology/Radiological Society of North America.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: By explaining the limitations & benefits of adding CAD to standard mammography readings, the article informs readers about both methods.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Of the many embarrassing health statistics in this country, the huge number of unwanted pregnancies is perhaps the easiest to rectify. Nearly half the pregnancies among American women are unintended — unwanted now or within the next two years. And among sexually active teenagers and young adults, the rate of unplanned pregnancy is even higher.

Fully 43 percent of these pregnancies follow incorrect or inconsistent uses of contraception. Of course, some couples fail to use any contraception, but others rely on contraceptive methods that have significant failure rates even when properly used.

These facts prompted a committee of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists this month to urge its members to introduce women of all ages to the most effective and underused methods of reversible contraception: IUDs and hormonal implants. Once inserted, these long-acting methods remove the risk of patient error when a sexually active woman wishes to avoid pregnancy. Their effectiveness rivals that of sterilization.

In a 2012 study of 7,486 women aged 14 to 45, long-acting reversible contraceptives, or LARCs, were shown to be 20 times as effective in preventing pregnancy than the pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring. The risk of an unwanted pregnancy with these other methods was especially high among women under 21, whose rate of unintended pregnancy was nearly double that among older women.

Yet fewer than 10 percent of sexually active women currently rely on long-acting reversible contraception, and a major reason is doctors’ reluctance to recommend them. Only about half of obstetrician-gynecologists offer the implant, the committee said, and many physicians use “overly restrictive criteria” when deciding whether to recommend an IUD, especially for adolescents and women who have not yet been pregnant.

Greater LARC use can reduce birthrates among adolescents and, for women of all ages, a reliance upon abortion to prevent unwanted births, the experts wrote in the October issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

Furthermore, the higher upfront costs of LARC methods are no longer an impediment for women with insurance obtained through the Affordable Care Act. Megan L. Kavanaugh, a senior research scientist at the Guttmacher Institute, which studies reproductive health, said in an interview that “all new insurance plans obtained through the act’s exchanges fully cover all contraceptive methods without any co-payments or other out-of-pocket costs.” Title X family planning clinics and Planned Parenthood clinics are more likely than other sources to offer LARC methods, she said.

In a paper published two years ago, European experts predicted that “after decades of dominance by ‘the Pill,’ it is likely that in the future, long-acting reversible contraceptives will become the first-line contraceptive option, owing to their superior contraceptive effectiveness in real-life use, cost effectiveness as well as their established safety profile.”

Here is a summary of the advantages of LARCs, listed by the committee:

■ They are independent of the sex act and do not depend on the user’s motivation and reliability.

■ Compared with other reversible methods, they are more effective and have higher rates of continued use and user satisfaction.

■ There is no need to get frequent supplies and no additional costs once they are inserted, making them highly cost effective.

■ There are few contraindications for their use, and fertility returns quickly after removal.

Furthermore, the committee stated, “almost all women are appropriate candidates” for the LARC methods currently available. They are an implant that slowly releases the hormone etonogestrel over a period of three years, and four IUDs: the copper T that can be used for up to 10 years, and three IUDs containing the hormone levonorgestrel (two approved for use up to three years, and one approved for up to five years).

In real-world use, these methods are associated with a one-year pregnancy rate of less than one per 100 women. In contrast, women using the pill, patch or vaginal ring face an annual pregnancy risk of 9 percent; the diaphragm is associated with a 12 percent pregnancy rate, and with condoms, cervical caps and sponges, the rate is 18 percent.

“While there is no one best contraceptive method for every woman or every couple, women should have access to all methods and should know how effective the LARCs are,” Dr. Kavanaugh said.

The etonogestrel implant is a small plastic rod resembling a matchstick that is inserted under the skin in the upper arm. The hormone, a form of progesterone, prevents ovulation and thickens the cervical mucus, making it harder for sperm to reach and fertilize an egg. Though the implant can remain in place and effective for three years, it can also be removed sooner if, for example, a woman decides she wants to become pregnant. Typically with the implant, menstrual bleeding diminishes, and after a year, one woman in three stops having periods. However, some women develop longer, heavier periods, and some have increased spotting between periods.

Likewise with the hormonal IUDs. Levonorgestrel, also a progesterone, changes the cervical mucus, blocking the transport of sperm and fertilization of an egg. It also suppresses growth of the uterine lining and thus reduces cramping and heavy menstrual bleeding. Women using it report a significant reduction in menstrual blood loss.

The copper IUD does not contain hormones. Rather, the copper is toxic to sperm, preventing them from fertilizing an egg. Because it also prevents a fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus, the copper IUD can serve as emergency contraception for up to five days following unprotected intercourse.

Both the implant and IUD can be used by women who are breast-feeding, as well as those who cannot take estrogen. There are few contraindications; nearly all women are eligible for an implant or IUD, according to guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Unlike early IUDs no longer in use, “modern IUDs do not carry an increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease after the first 20 days following insertion,” Dr. Brooke Winner and her colleagues wrote in The New England Journal of Medicine. With both implants and IUDs, fertility returns quickly as soon as the devices are removed.

Common side effects include irregular bleeding during the first few months following the insertion of an implant or IUD. The latter is also associated with some cramping at the time of insertion.
• The More We Learn on Nutrition, the More We Ignore
• Ask Well: Catching Up on Lost Sleep

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This story did a great job of outlining many different alternative methods of contraception and their effectiveness.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (Embargoed Until Oct. 18, 2018 @ 10:05AM ET) -- A surgical technique called EDAS (encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis) significantly decreases the rate of stroke recurrence and death for patients with severe atherosclerosis of the brain arteries, according to findings of a Phase IIa clinical trial presented today at the World Stroke Congress in Montreal. Atherosclerotic disease, in which plaque buildup narrows the brain arteries, is one of the most common causes of strokes.

Neurosurgeons performing EDAS reroute arteries from the scalp and the membranes that cover the brain and place these arteries under the skull near areas of the brain at risk of stroke. Over time, new blood vessels form, creating fresh pathways for blood and oxygen to reach the brain.

The trial, led by Nestor R. Gonzalez, MD, professor of Neurosurgery and director of the Neurovascular Laboratory at Cedars-Sinai, enrolled 52 patients with severe brain atherosclerosis, also known as intracranial atherosclerotic disease, or ICAD, who showed symptoms of either a recent stroke or a mini-stroke, called a transient ischemic attack. These patients received EDAS surgery, along with intensive medical management, which included diet and lifestyle changes, blood thinners and other medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar levels.

After one year, 9.6 percent of the patients treated with the surgery experienced another ischemic stroke or died, compared with 21.2 percent of patients in a matched control group who received only intensive medical management. Two of the EDAS patients had small wound openings that required additional surgical interventions, but there were no intracranial hemorrhages or other serious adverse events, the researchers reported.

"Our findings in this intermediate-stage trial are promising for applying EDAS surgery to intracranial atherosclerotic disease," said Gonzalez said. Previously, EDAS has been used for moyamoya disease, a rare cerebrovascular disorder that affects younger patients.

Gonzalez said the new trial addressed a serious medical need. "Even under the best current treatments, ICAD carries high rates of recurrent stroke and death, compared with other causes of stroke," he said. "Developing new therapeutic strategies is crucial for ICAD patients."

Current ICAD therapies--in addition to intensive medical management--include bypass surgery to connect a blood vessel from outside the brain to a vessel inside the brain, as well as angioplasty with stenting, which involves inflating a tiny balloon inside a cerebral artery to open it up and placing a stent device inside the artery. Despite advances in medical care, annual rates of recurrent stroke and death are remain high, at 15 percent or more for ICAD patients, according to published research.

Gonzalez said his team is working with the stroke prevention working group of the National Institutes of Health to develop a proposal for a Phase III randomized clinical trial across multiple institutions to further test the effectiveness of EDAS as compared with intensive medical management. While this Phase IIa trial selected patients from previous studies as the control group, the Phase III study would enroll new ICAD patients for both the control and experimental groups, he explained.

"This clinical trial moves us significantly closer to preventing strokes and death in high-risk populations," said Keith Black, MD, professor and chair of the Department of Neurosurgery. "As a nationally renowned physician-investigator, Dr. Gonzalez personifies the dedication of Cedars-Sinai to translating the most advanced research into new cures."

Besides Gonzalez, the trial involved other investigators from the stroke centers of Cedars-Sinai and UCLA.

Funding: Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Strokes of the National Institutes of Health under award number K23NS079477-01A1.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release covers alternatives to the EDAS surgery with the following:  “Current ICAD therapies — in addition to intensive medical management — include bypass surgery to connect a blood vessel from outside the brain to a vessel inside the brain, as well as angioplasty with stenting, which involves inflating a tiny balloon inside a cerebral artery to open it up and placing a stent device inside the artery. Despite advances in medical care, annual rates of recurrent stroke and death remain high, at 15 percent or more for ICAD patients, according to published research.”
Since the therapy was compared to intensive medical therapy only, it is not clear how this procedure compares to other vascular surgical therapies (such as bypass surgery or angioplasty with stenting, both named in the release).  If 52 patients with 9.6% recurrent stroke (5 patients) were compared to 52 hypothetical patients with a 15% recurrent stroke rate (8 patients), the results would not be statistically significant and would have a significantly high likelihood that they occurred by chance alone. This kind of statistics manipulation can mislead readers into believing there is a big difference between this new therapy and older vascular surgical therapies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- The use of mammograms has dipped since a medical task force made controversial recommendations that women in their 40s may not need to get breast cancer screenings every year, according to one of three small studies to be presented Monday.

The studies related to this topic will be presented at the American Roentgen Ray Society annual meeting. They do not appear in peer-reviewed journals.

The studies suggest that fewer physicians are recommending annual mammograms for women in their 40s, fewer patients in that age group are getting screened and that tumors found through routine mammography are more likely to be detected in early stages of cancer.

The studies examined the impact of the controversial guidelines issued by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal advisory board.

Who decides about mammograms? Inside the task force

In November 2009, the group stated that yearly mammograms should not be automatic at age 40 and that physicians should discuss their risks and benefits with their patients. It recommended routine mammography screenings every two years for women ages 50 to 74.

"The benefit in 40- to 49-year-old women is pretty small," said Dr. Virginia Moyer, chair of the task force, about annual mammograms. "There is a real, but rather modest benefit. There are also risks, and they are greater in younger women than older women."

Mammograms are less effective in detecting growths in younger women, whose breasts may be denser. The screening gets better with older women because breast tissues change over time.

As a result, some women experience false positives, anxiety and unnecessary biopsies because of mammograms, according to data. Roughly 15% of women in their 40s detect breast cancer through mammography.

"The benefit is modest enough it needs to be an individual decision," Moyer said about mammograms for women in their 40s.

This contradicted advice from cancer groups such as the American Cancer Society and Susan G. Komen for the Cure, which told women 40 and older to get screened every year. It sparked immediate outcry from such groups and cancer survivors, who say routine mammograms for women younger than 50 can save lives.

Suspicious growths caught in regular-screening mammograms are more likely to be in early stages and therefore more treatable, said Dr. Donna Plecha, division chief of mammography at University Hospitals at Case Medical Center in Ohio.

She reviewed records of 524 biopsies (samples of suspicious growths in breasts) from women in their 40s during 2008 to 2009 at her hospital.

Of the 359 biopsies from screening mammography patients, 15% had cancer. These cancers were more treatable because they were caught in earlier stages, Plecha said.

Although 85% of those biopsies turned out to be noncancerous, some "may show us the patient is at higher risk of breast cancer," she said.

"I haven't met many patients who don't appreciate us being thorough, to trying to find the cancers at an early stage," Plecha said. "I would still recommend screening mammograms starting at age of 40," because cancers caught earlier would be more curable.

Breast cancer ID'd more accurately by docs who see more scans

Plecha's findings were not surprising to Moyer. It's obvious that annual screenings would catch cancers before they progress, she said.

The study presumes that catching earlier stages for women between the ages of 40-49 would translate into fewer breast cancer deaths.

"The data that we have suggests that 1 in a thousand will benefit from mammograms in the 40-49 age," she said. "There are whole lots of assumptions that are not supported by the data they presented."

The task force did not say don't get mammograms, Moyer said.

"It might make women not want to get the test," she said. "This is a decision that should belong to the woman with appropriate info on hand."

In another study, Dr. Lara Hardesty, section chief of breast imaging at the University of Colorado Hospital, examined survey results from fewer than 50 internists, gynecologists, family practitioners and nurse midwives.

She found that fewer clinicians were recommending annual mammograms after the task force's guidelines were issued.

Before the guidelines, 56% recommended yearly mammograms for women in the 40- to 49-year-old range. After the guidelines, that rate decreased to 20%, and 56% of the clinicians reported they were discussing the risks and benefits of screening with patients. That decrease, Hardesty said, "is a statistically significant difference," but it also showed more doctors were discussing mammograms with patients.

Hardesty also found that there were 205 fewer mammograms among women in their 40s after the guidelines were issued. Among patients 50 and older, mammograms increased slightly from 4,479 patients to 4,498.

It was unclear why mammograms in the 40s decreased while older women's mammograms increased slightly.

Hardesty offered this hypothesis: Older women are used to having annual mammograms because they've done it for years. Meanwhile, younger women may feel as though they don't have to get this screening.

Although the task force concluded that the net benefit of mammography in the 40s is small, Hardesty said: "If you're the one person we find your cancer, it's the world to you."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There was a far more balanced discussion of harms and benefits in this story, although the use of personal opinion and recommendations, and the ending resulted in an imbalance in the piece.  Excerpts that demonstrate this imbalance:
Wouldn’t a more balanced way to end the piece – focusing on the shared decision-making element so important in this issue – have been to end with this:
Nonethless, all of this was in the piece, so we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Welcome to Dear Julia, a weekly column where readers can submit everyday health questions on anything from the science of hangovers to the mysteries of back pain. Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.

What's the difference between Tylenol, Advil, and aspirin? Which is the best to take for pain?

I used to take acetaminophen (usually referred to by its brand name, Tylenol) for the occasional headache or sore muscle, mostly because that's what we used in my house growing up. I didn't think much about whether it was more or less effective than any other type of over-the-counter pain reliever, and I suspect the same is true for many folks. Acetaminophen, after all, is the most popular over-the-counter painkiller worldwide.

So I was surprised when I found out there's a huge gap between how pain researchers think about this drug and how the public does. More specifically, every researcher I contacted for this piece said some variation of what Andrew Moore, a pain researcher at Oxford University, told me: Tylenol doesn't actually work that well for pain. To be more exact, he said, "I can't imagine why anybody would take acetaminophen."

Moore has done a number of systematic reviews on over-the-counter pain medications, looking at all the available evidence to figure out which ones work best for various problems. I asked him to describe the overall success rates for the most common three: acetaminophen (like Tylenol), ibuprofen (like Advil), and aspirin.

Like all good evidence-based medicine thinkers, he was able to provide a very practical answer: "If you’re talking about aspirin in doses of 500 to 1,000 mg or two tablets, 30 percent of people get relief from acute pain. For acetaminophen at doses of 500 to 1,000 mg, about 40 percent have a success. For ibuprofen, in its normal formulation at something around 400 mg or two tablets, about 50 percent have success."

Now, Moore was referring here to acute pain that strikes after a specific event, like a surgery, a cut, or a burn, but his message was simple: Ibuprofen seems to work best, followed by acetaminophen, and then aspirin.

For ongoing (or chronic) pain — a sore lower back, say, or the kind of degenerative arthritis that typically develops with age — ibuprofen still outperforms acetaminophen.

"WE FOUND THAT [TYLENOL] IS INEFFECTIVE ON BOTH PAIN AND DISABILITY OUTCOMES FOR LOW BACK PAIN" A 2015 systematic review of high-quality evidence, published in the BMJ, found that acetaminophen didn't seem to help most sufferers of chronic low back pain, and that it barely alleviates pain in people with osteoarthritis. As the researchers wrote, "We found that [acetaminophen] is ineffective on both pain and disability outcomes for low back pain in the immediate and short term and is not clinically superior to placebo on both pain and disability outcomes for osteoarthritis."

A limitation of the study is that the evidence on acetaminophen was mainly for acute low back pain, but as the University of Leeds's Philip Conaghan explained, "There is very little long-term data [on chronic back pain], and if a drug doesn't work in the acute problem, it seems unlikely to work in the chronic phase — though back pain may be even more complex than osteoarthritis pain."

The study also noted that patients on acetaminophen "are nearly four times more likely to have abnormal results on liver function tests compared with those taking oral placebo."

Other studies, like this well-designed randomized control trial of people with knee pain, have similar conclusions: Acetaminophen doesn't perform as well as ibuprofen, and it's linked to higher rates of liver problems. (Ibuprofen also has potential side effects; more on that below.)

So what about the occasional headache? What works best for that?

It turns out this is another fascinating problem area for pain researchers. Moore has looked at all the evidence for what he calls "infrequent tension headaches" and found "it is surprising how poor [the research] is and how little it tells us." Either the outcomes in studies are badly defined, the studies have too few participants to say anything concrete, or many people in the studies actually seem to have chronic headaches as opposed to the ordinary ones the researchers are allegedly studying.

"Most people would say, if you look at the data, take an ibuprofen tablet," Moore said. "Acetaminophen is just not a very good analgesic [pain reliever], yet it’s the go-to drug because it’s thought to be safe."

And that's where things get even more interesting: Acetaminophen isn't actually that safe.

"We always thought [acetaminophen] was safe, but there are increasing signals of accidental overdose in people who are regularly using it for chronic pain, and some liver toxicity," explained Conaghan, who has studied adverse events data related to this popular drug.

Between 1998 and 2003, acetaminophen was the leading cause of acute liver failure in the US. There are also hundreds of related deaths every year — though keep in mind that millions of people take drugs with acetaminophen, so these more extreme side effects are rare (especially if you're only taking them in small doses occasionally). Still, for the drug's minimal pain-killing benefits, the risks may not be worth it. 



"Don't believe that just because something is over-the-counter, it’s safe," Conaghan added. (He advised people to see their doctor if they're taking any of these painkillers for more than a few days — particularly if they're on other drugs already.)

"[Tylenol] is an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether"

Kay Brune, a professor of pharmacology and toxicology at Germany's Friedrich-Alexander University who has also studied the toxicity of painkillers, was even more direct in his thoughts on acetaminophen: "It's an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether."

Aspirin is safer than acetaminophen, he said, though to be used as a pain reliever it requires much higher doses — which can have side effects like stomach upset. Aspirin also interferes with blood coagulation for days after taking it. "If you take one gram of aspirin," Brune explained, "you're at risk of bleeding for another four days." This is why aspirin has its place as a protective agent against strokes and heart attacks for people at a higher risk.

Ibuprofen doesn't have these two problems — it's less toxic than the others in the doses that give people pain relief. But it has other side effects. "Ibuprofen puts people at risk of bleeds in the gastrointestinal tract and kidney damage — so it's not free of risk," said Brune. Using it in high doses also seems to raise blood pressure and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke — one reason the Food and Drug Administration recently warned people should only use ibuprofen (and other "nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs," or NSAIDS, like naproxen) for short periods of time and in small amounts.



I asked Brune about what he'd suggest for the occasional headache or sore muscle. "Taking 400 mg of ibuprofen won't cause measurable harm," he answered. "Of all drugs we have available, for most indications, it's also the most effective one."

Is acetaminophen good for anything?

If the research community seems to have sided with ibuprofen for pain, is acetaminophen good for anything?



Yes. There are some groups of people with health complications who shouldn't take ibuprofen. For example, patients with kidney, gastric, cardiovascular, or bleeding problems may need to avoid NSAIDS like ibuprofen, so doctors might suggest Tylenol in these cases. 



There's also some evidence that NSAIDS may increase the risk of psychosis and cognitive impairment in the elderly, so doctors may avoid prescribing these drugs for older patients. And Tylenol is generally considered safer than Advil or aspirin for pregnant women.



Fever is another area where acetaminophen can help, said Moore. According to one systematic review, acetaminophen seems to be safe for treating very young kids with fever, and you can give children as young as 3 months old acetaminophen, whereas you need to wait until kids are at least 6 months old to safely treat them with ibuprofen. This may help to explain the popularity of drugs like Tylenol for kids.

But a final caveat here: If your child is older than 6 months, it's not all that clear that acetaminophen outperforms ibuprofen for reducing fevers, and the same is true for adults. So keep that in mind the next time you confront your medicine cabinet.

Send your questions to Julia via the submission form or @juliaoftoronto on Twitter. Read more about Dear Julia here.

Watch: How Americans got stuck with endless drug ads
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The main premise of the story was comparing which pain medication was the best for different types of pain. The comparisons are covered in depth with perspectives from three sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A fresh look at the medical evidence shows women who eat more fiber are less likely to get breast cancer.

Chinese researchers found those who ate the most of the healthy plant components were 11 percent less likely to develop breast cancer than women who ate the least.

Their findings don’t prove fiber itself lowers cancer risk, however, because women who consume a lot of it might be healthier overall than those who don’t.

The results “can identify associations but cannot tell us what will happen if people change their behavior,” said John Pierce, a cancer research at the University of California, San Diego, who was not involved in the work.

While earlier research has yielded mixed conclusions on the link between cancer and fiber, it would make scientific sense: According to the Chinese researchers, people who eat high-fiber diets have lower levels of estrogen, which is a risk factor for breast tumors.

So to get more clarity, the researchers combined 10 earlier studies that looked at women’s diets and followed them over seven to 18 years to see who developed cancer.

Of more than 710,000 women, 2.4 percent ended up with breast cancer. And those in the top fifth of fiber intake were 11 percent less likely to do so than women in the bottom fifth.

That was after accounting for differences in risk factors like alcohol drinking, weight, hormone replacement therapy and family members with the disease.

Still, it’s impossible to rule out that big fiber eaters had healthier habits overall that would cut their risk, Jia-Yi Dong of Soochow University in Suzhou and his colleagues write in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

And the potential effect was “very small,” Dr. Eleni Linos of Stanford University, who wasn’t involved in the research, told Reuters Health in an email.

About one in eight American women get breast cancer at some point, with less than a quarter of them dying from it.

Although the connection between breast cancer risk and fiber is a small one, fiber is “something that we know is healthy for you anyway,” said Christina Clarke, a research scientist at the Cancer Prevention Institute of California in Fremont.

Known benefits of a high-fiber diet include lower cholesterol and weight loss. If it turns out to cut cancer risk as well, that would be an extra bonus, Clarke said.

Fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole grains are all high in fiber.

According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 2010 Dietary Guidelines, most Americans don’t get enough fiber. The guidelines recommend that women eat 25 grams of fiber per day and men eat 38 grams, while the average Americans gets just 15 grams a day.

“Increasing dietary fiber intake in the general public is of great public health significance,” the Chinese team concludes.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story did touch on other risk factors:  “alcohol drinking, weight, hormone replacement therapy and family history”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS, Feb. 26, 2018 -- A lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet, which includes eggs and dairy but excludes meat and fish, and a Mediterranean diet are likely equally effective in reducing the risk of heart disease and stroke, according to new research in the American Heart Association's journal Circulation.

Previous separate studies have shown that a Mediterranean diet reduces certain risk factors for cardiovascular disease, as does a vegetarian diet; however, this was the first study to compare effects of the two distinct eating patterns

Current study authors said they wanted to evaluate whether switching to a lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet would also be heart-healthy in people who were used to eating both meat and fish. "To best evaluate this issue, we decided to compare a lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet with a Mediterranean diet in the same group of people," said Francesco Sofi, M.D., Ph.D, lead study author and professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Florence and Careggi University Hospital in Italy.

The study included 107 healthy but overweight participants, ages 18-75, who were randomly assigned to follow for three months either a low-calorie vegetarian diet, which included dairy and eggs, or a low-calorie Mediterranean diet for three months. The Mediterranean diet included poultry, fish and some red meat as well as fruits, vegetables, beans and whole grains. After three months, the participants switched diets. Most participants were able to stay on both diets.
• lost about 4 pounds of weight overall; and
• experienced about the same change in body mass index, a measure of weight in relationship to height.

Authors said they did find two differences between the diets that may be noteworthy. The vegetarian diet was more effective at reducing LDL (the "bad") cholesterol, while the Mediterranean diet resulted greater reductions in triglycerides, high levels of which increase the risk for heart attack and stroke.

Still, "the take-home message of our study is that a low-calorie lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet can help patients reduce cardiovascular risk about the same as a low-calorie Mediterranean diet," Sofi said. "People have more than one choice for a heart-healthy diet."

In an editorial accompanying the study, Cheryl A. M. Anderson, Ph.D., M.P.H., M.S., an associate professor of preventive medicine at the University of California, San Diego, in California, wrote that there were similarities between the two diets that may explain the results. Both follow "a healthy dietary pattern rich in fruits and vegetables, legumes [beans], whole grains and nuts; focusing on diet variety, nutrient density and appropriate amount of food; and limiting energy intake from saturated fats."

Anderson, who was not involved in the study, added that promoting both diets by healthcare professionals "offer a possible solution to the ongoing challenges to prevent and manage obesity and cardiovascular diseases."

Study limitations include the fact that participants were at "relatively low" risk of cardiovascular disease. Anderson said future research should compare the diets in patients at higher risk for heart disease and should also explore "whether or not healthful versions of traditional diets around the world that emphasize fresh foods and limit sugars, saturated fats, and sodium can prevent and manage obesity and cardiovascular diseases."

Co-authors are Monica Dinu, MSc.; Giuditta Pagliai, MSc.; Francesca Cesari, MSc., Ph.D.; Anna Maria Gori, MSc.; Alice Sereni, MSc.; Matteo Becatti, MSc., Ph.D.; Claudia Fiorillo, MSc., Ph.D.; Rossella Marcucci, M.D., Ph.D.; and Alessandro Casini, M.D. Author disclosures are on the manuscript.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
• Available multimedia located on the right column of the release link: https:/
• After February 26, view the manuscript and editorial online
• For updates and new science from the Circulation journal follow @CircAHA

Statements and conclusions of study authors published in American Heart Association scientific journals are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the association's policy or position. The association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations and health insurance providers are available at http://www. .

The American Heart Association is devoted to saving people from heart disease and stroke - the two leading causes of death in the world. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat these diseases. The Dallas-based association is the nation's oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke. To learn more or to get involved, call 1.800.AHA.USA1, visit heart.org or call any of our offices around the country. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This study was designed to strictly compare just two types of diets. So not bringing up other dietary options seems appropriate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors are experimenting with new technology that could give them a more complete view of the large intestine than ever before, improving the odds of finding potentially cancerous growths earlier.

Dr. Arie Kaufman of SUNY Stony Brook demonstrated the virtual colonoscopy for CBS New York's Dr. Max Gomez.

"We'll have both the computer and the doctors working in tandem to find polyps and find cancers," Kaufman said. He added it could lead to better and earlier detection of colon polyps.

Virtual colonoscopy screening uses CT scans to create color, 3D images of the colon, the final portion of the large intestine. Special computer animation enables a doctor to view the organ in remarkable detail. Regular colonoscopy physically examines the colon by inserting a lighted probe into the intestine and requires a sedative. Both have made early detection and treatment more precise.

This next step in virtual colonoscopy, called "immersive colonoscopy," projects 3D images of the colon large enough to fill the walls of a room. Doctors can then "walk through" the colon and explore many different angles.

"We have the side view and the back view," said Kaufman. "This will allow the physician to view 100 percent of the surface including lesions, which are hidden behind folds maybe seen on the side and back walls."

Such highly specific screening may allow doctors to detect more abnormal growths, called polyps, when they are as small as .10 mm, so they can be removed before they become full-blown cancer tumors.

For the patient, a virtual colonoscopy is low risk but does involve additional exposure to radiation. It may need to be followed with the physical colonoscopy later, as well.

Colonoscopies are recommended for adults age 50 and over to help detect early signs of colorectal cancer. Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of death among the combined group of men and women who have cancer, according to the National Institutes of Health.

The CDC says colonoscopy may also be recommended for people experiencing stomach pain, aches or cramps that don't go away, unexplained weight loss and blood in the stool. More routine DNA tests and stool sampling, which show signs of bleeding caused by irregular growths, can also help detect colon polyps and indicate that the need for a full colonoscopy.

The CDC says colonoscopy could reduce the number of colorectal cancer cases by as much as 60 percent. This new wave of radiology-based colonoscopy could improve those odds further.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The American Cancer Society provides a comprehensive listing of screening methods for colon cancer based on the level of risk of an individual. The story mentions a standard colonoscopy as an alternative as well as DNA tests and stool sampling.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heterosexuals who are HIV negative can significantly reduce their risk of infection by taking a daily dose of an antiviral drug, according to a new study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The study, called TDF2, followed 1,200 uninfected heterosexual men and women between the ages of 18 and 39 years in Botswana, Africa.

Study participants took a tablet containing tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and emitricitabine (TDF/FTC), whose brand name is Truvada, or a placebo. On average, patients were followed for a year although some were followed for about three and a half years. The risk of infection was reduced 63% overall, but for participants who actually got the drugs, that risk decreased by 78%.

Giving daily antiretroviral drugs to uninfected individuals to prevent the disease is called pre-exposure prophylaxis or PrEP. Previous studies have shown PrEP to be effective in reducing infection rates among the uninfected.

Dr. Kevin Fenton, director of the CDC's national Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, called the news a milestone. "It is clear we are not going to find one magic pill to solve the issue of HIV but by combining this approach with others we are beginning to get a better handle on combination packages. There is reason to be excited."

The news comes at the same time a second study looking at PrEP in heterosexual couples in Kenya and Uganda also found significant reductions in infection rates. The Partners PrEP study participants took either TDF/FTC, the drug tenofovir–brand name Viread, or a placebo. Preliminary results showed both treatments significantly reduced transmission in couples where one partner was already infected with the virus. Patients who took tenofovir had 62% fewer infections while those taking the combination drug had 73% fewer infections than those who got the placebo.

"Just a few years ago the tool kit for HIV prevention was not very large," says Dr. Jared Baeten, the principal investigator of the Partners PrEP study at the University of Washington. "Now we have a nice collection of really powerful strategies that work for the population at greatest risk in the world. This is really a game changer."

"We now have findings from two studies showing that PrEP can work for heterosexuals, the population hardest hit by HIV worldwide," Fenton said. "Taken together, these studies provide strong evidence the power of this prevention strategy."

In fact, an interim review of the Partners data on effectiveness was so compelling that the trial was stopped early and the placebo arm was discontinued. Clear evidence Baeten said, that PrEP substantially reduces infection risk. At the same time he says, there was no evidence of safety concerns. Patients taking the placebo will be put on one of the drugs.

In the TDF2 study those taking the drug reported nausea, vomiting and dizziness.

An earlier PrEP trial, the iPrEx study, looked at treatment in men who have sex with men. Infection rates dropped by 90% in patients who consistently used PrEP.

“We are in a critical moment in HIV prevention research,” said Robert Grant, M.D., M.P.H, of the Gladstone Institutes and the University of California at San Francisco. He is the iPrEx protocol chair. “iPrEx provided the first proof of an important new method of HIV prevention that can help slow the global toll of 2.6 million new HIV infections each year. Partners PrEP and the TDF2 study have now expanded that finding by demonstrating the effectiveness of PrEP in heterosexual women and men.

"Developing and deploying proven HIV prevention methods – including PrEP, microbicides, vaginal gels, clean needles, medical male circumcision, early treatment, counseling, testing, condoms and suppressive therapy for pregnant women will all be key to slowing the global epidemic," he said.

The CDC says the next step is to fully review all the data and begin to develop guidelines for the use of these drugs in heterosexual men and women here in the U.S.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions several other approaches that are effective for preventing HIV transmission, including microbicides, vaginal gels, clean needles, medical male circumcision, early treatment, counseling, testing, condoms and suppressive therapy for pregnant women.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Faced with the negative quality-of-life effects from surgery and radiation treatments for prostate cancer, low risk patients may instead want to consider active surveillance with their physician, according to a study released Tuesday by the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

The Vanderbilt University Medical Center study led by Daniel Barocas, M.D., MPH, associate professor of Urologic Surgery, compared the side effects and outcomes of contemporary treatments for localized prostate cancer with active surveillance in order to guide men with prostate cancer in choosing the best treatment for them.

Surgery is considered by some to be the most definitive treatment, and there is evidence from other studies that it has better long-term cancer outcomes than radiation for higher-risk cancers, but it has more sexual and urinary side effects than radiation.

“Patients who were treated with surgery or radiation had side effects, while those who were managed with active surveillance, for the most part, did quite well,” Barocas said.

“It is best to avoid treatment if you have a prostate cancer that is safe to observe. This is why most doctors recommend ‘active surveillance’ for low-risk cancers,” he said.

Three-year survival from prostate cancer was excellent in the study at over 99 percent for patients regardless of whether they chose surgery, radiation or active surveillance. Barocas did caution that prostate cancer tends to be slow growing and patients would need to be followed for 10 years or more to find differences in mortality.

“This study shows that, despite technological advances in the treatment of prostate cancer, both surgery and radiation still have a negative effect on quality of life,” said co-author David Penson, M.D., MPH, Paul V. Hamilton, M.D., and Virginia E. Howd Professor of Urologic Oncology and professor and chair of the Department of Urologic Surgery.

“Certainly, if a man has low-risk prostate cancer, he should seriously be considering active surveillance as a reasonable way to go,” he said.

Erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence were more common in men treated with surgery than radiation when studied three years after treatment, although the difference in sexual dysfunction was only apparent in patients with excellent baseline function.

“Urinary incontinence was reported as a moderate or big problem in 14 percent of men three years after surgery compared to 5 percent of men who had radiation,” Barocas said.

“Men who had radiation reported more problems with bowel function and hormone side effects compared to men who had surgery, but these differences were only seen within the first year following treatment,” he said.

The authors also reported that:

- Surgery was associated with fewer urinary irritative symptoms, like weak urine stream or urinary frequency, compared to active surveillance.

- Radiation patients had similar urinary irritative symptoms to men on active surveillance, which is an improvement from previous studies with older radiation techniques.

- None of the treatments had an impact on general quality of life, such as the ability to do activities of daily living, emotional health and energy or vitality.

Funding for the study was provided by grants 1R01HS019356 and 1R01HS022640 from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; UL1TR000011 to the Vanderbilt Institute of Clinical and Translational Research from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences; and 5T32CA106183 from the National Institute of Health and the National Cancer Institute (Dr Tyson). Research reported in this article was partially funded through a Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) award CE12-11-4667.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The study was about comparison of alternatives and the release did a good job explaining what the alternatives were — surgery, radiation and active surveillance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — CHAPEL HILL, NC – UNC researchers say the results from the multi-site phase 2 and 3 trials of brexanolone injection are not only promising, but could change the way postpartum depression (PPD) is treated.

Brexanolone injection works differently than existing anti-depressant medications, and if approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) later this year, will be the first new class of anti-depressants in decades, and the first drug specifically indicated for PPD.

“With current anti-depressant SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) it could take four to six weeks to get a treatment response. In the brexanolone trials, we saw patients starting to feel better within days,” said the trial’s academic principal investigator, Samantha Meltzer-Brody, MD, MPH, director of Perinatal Psychiatry Program at the UNC School of Medicine.

David Rubinow, MD, chair of the Department of Psychiatry at the UNC School of Medicine and a coauthor of the paper, says time is especially crucial for new mothers experiencing postpartum depression because the weeks and months following birth are a critical period for mother-infant bonding. Common symptoms of PPD – a mood disorder in women that can be triggered by fluctuations in reproductive hormones – include low mood, feeling overwhelmed, anxious and ruminating thoughts, potential withdrawal from the baby and her family, and suicidal thoughts in the most severe cases. PPD is one of the most common complications of pregnancy, with between 10 and 20 percent of mothers worldwide experiencing it.

“Having a drug developed specifically for postpartum depression is a game-changer for women’s health,” said Meltzer-Brody. “With our latest results, we believe that brexanolone, if approved, could provide relief for women with a range of postpartum severity.”

The paper, published in The Lancet, includes a new integrated analysis of results from three double-blind, placebo-controlled trials that took place at 30 sites in the U.S., including UNC’s Perinatal Psychiatry Unit. Eligible women were aged 18-45 years old and were six months postpartum or less at screening. They also had to be experiencing moderate to severe postpartum depression, which was assessed by the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D).

The integrated analysis looked at results of the trials which randomized 209 women to receive a double-blinded 60-hour infusion of either brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr or placebo. A unique dose group of brexanolone 60 µg/kg/hr in one of the studies was not included in the integrated efficacy analysis, but was included in integrated analyses of safety. Brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr was administered to 102 women with moderate or severe PPD who also were evaluated throughout the infusion, after the infusion stopped and then periodically for up to 30 days. Another 107 women were administered a placebo and evaluated during the same timeframe. The first statistically significant reduction in depression severity with brexanolone injection relative to placebo was observed as early as 24 hours after dosing. At the end of the 60-hour infusion, the average reduction in patients’ Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D or depression severity score) was 17.0 points for women in the brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr group, versus 12.8 in the placebo group (p<0.0001). The reduction of symptoms in the patients receiving brexanolone injection was maintained throughout the last study visit at Day 30. The most common (≥10% of subjects) adverse events following during brexanolone injection administration were headache, dizziness and somnolence.

“This is a very different model for how we treat depression. Having a drug approved to treat PPD that works quickly and effectively, yet is also durable, would be a huge step forward for psychiatry in general,” Meltzer-Brody said.

Brexanolone injection is an allosteric modulator of both synaptic and extra-synaptic GABAᴀ receptors. In postpartum depression, the GABA pathway may play a key role in regulating hormones that researchers believe can lead to PPD.

Sage Therapeutics is the developer of brexanolone injection and sponsor of the trials. A New Drug Application is currently under review by the FDA and brexanolone injection has been granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation. The FDA has assigned a Prescription Drug User Fee Act target date of December 19, 2018.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that women currently can receive antidepressants for postpartum depression, but that the new drug being studied goes to work relieving symptoms faster than traditional antidepressants — days rather than weeks.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Colonoscopy may miss as many as one in every 13 colon cancers, suggests a new study.

Canadian researchers note that their finding should be a heads-up to clinicians performing the exam, as well as to patients preparing for it. Both groups could do things to improve the detection rate, they said.

“Several recent studies have raised questions on the effectiveness of colonoscopy as currently performed in everyday clinical practice on reducing risk of subsequent colon cancer,” lead researcher Dr. Harminder Singh, of the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, in Canada, told Reuters Health by e-mail. “Therefore, it is important to study the factors associated with the diagnosis of colon cancer occurring after colonoscopy.”

During a colonoscopy, a flexible camera is passed through the colon in search of abnormal growths known as polyps and other warning signs of early tumors. It is one of a few screening tests for colon cancer, the second-leading cancer killer in the U.S., according the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Another less expensive test is fecal occult blood testing, which involves taking stool specimens at home and mailing them to the doctor’s office or medical lab. The US Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of medical experts appointed by the federal government, recommends screening people aged 50 to 75 for the disease, but does not specify which test is best.

In their study, Singh and his colleagues identified nearly 5,000 individuals aged 50 to 80 who had been diagnosed with the cancer between 1992 and 2008, across the entire Canadian province of Manitoba.

The team found that about eight percent, or one in every 13 cancers, had been missed during colonoscopies conducted six months to three years prior to diagnosis.

Women were a third more likely to have had their cancer missed, report the researchers in The American Journal of Gastroenterology. And general practice physicians missed cancers 60 percent more often than gastroenterologists.

There are three likely reasons for these “misses,” noted Dr. David Lieberman of the Oregon Health and Science University, in Portland. Tumors may simply have gone unidentified on the exam, or were seen but not completely removed. While rare, he also noted that it is possible that an undetected cancer was actually not present at the exam, but rather grew very quickly afterwards.

No improvement in colonoscopy can do anything to avoid the latter. But the first two reasons are potentially avoidable, Lieberman told Reuters Health in an e-mail.

Given the wide variation in colonoscopy training, the researchers call for standardizing it, including credentialing and re-credentialing.

“There is an urgent need to focus on and improve the outcomes of colonoscopy,” Singh said.

However, Lieberman cautioned against the over-interpretation of the results. “These patients were referred for colonoscopy, most commonly due to symptoms,” Lieberman said. “This is very different from a population undergoing screening.”

Colonoscopy would probably miss a smaller percentage of cancers in such a large population, Lieberman said, because the rate would be lower.

Dr. Charles Kahi of the Indiana University School of Medicine, in Indianapolis, noted that the rate found in the new study was a bit higher than previously reported. But he added that the risk factors identified match those in the earlier studies.

“The key to maximizing protection against colorectal cancer after colonoscopy is performance by an operator with excellent examination” and growth-removal technique, “in a well-prepped colon,” Kahi told Reuters Health by e-mail.

And for this, patients should do their part. “To increase their chances of an early diagnosis, it is important that all individuals undergoing colonoscopy strictly follow the instructions for bowel preparation for colonoscopy,” added Singh, speaking of the large amounts of special drinks consumed before the test to clean out the bowel. “It may be a nuisance but it will help maximize the view during (colonoscopy).”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says, "Another less expensive test is fecal occult blood testing, which involves taking stool specimens at home and mailing them to the doctor’s office or medical lab. The US Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of medical experts appointed by the federal government, recommends screening people aged 50 to 75 for the disease, but does not specify which test is best." There could have been some mention of how effective fecal occult blood testing is and whether similar studies have been done on that type of screening.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
First marketed in the 1960s as a fertility drug, tamoxifen has been hailed as a miracle drug for its ability to prevent and treat breast cancer, and despite decades of research scientists have not been able to find anything comparable -- until now.

In a study published in The Lancet on Thursday, researchers found that a class of inexpensive, existing generic called aromatase inhibitors, which suppress hormones, reduce recurrence rates by 30 percent as compared with tamoxifen. That confirmed what researchers had believed for several years. But a separate finding about the effect of the drug on death risk was a surprise.

The study reported that "taking aromatase inhibitors for 5 years reduced the risk of postmenopausal women with breast cancer dying of their disease by 40 percent within 10 years of starting treatment, compared with no hormonal treatment."

The results were part of the Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group, a collaboration based at the University of Oxford, that collects and analyzes information about randomized clinical trials every few years.

Paul Workman, professor and chief executive of the Institute of Cancer Research in London, said in a statement accompanying the publication of the journal article that "the evidence on aromatase inhibitors has been accumulating for well over a decade, but it has taken this huge and complex study to make sense of all the data, and provide a firm basis for clinical guidelines.”

"It tends to be the discovery of new treatments that grabs the headlines, but it is just as important to maximize the benefit patients get from existing treatments through major, practice-changing studies like this," Workman said.

The researchers wrote in the study that a substantial number of the trial participants switched from tamoxifen to aromatase inhibitors after they heard that it could reduce recurrence, which affected their results. If this had not happened, "the benefit of aromatase inhibitors over tamoxifen would probably have been somewhat greater," they surmised.

A separate analysis by the same group, also published in The Lancet, looked at bisphosphonates, which are typically used for osteoporosis. Researchers at Sheffield University found that in postmenopausal women during the first 10 years after diagnosis of breast cancer, the drug could reduce the risk of death by 18 per cent.

Using the two drugs together as a one-two punch may be even more powerful.

Richard Gray, a professor at the University of Oxford and who served as the lead statistician for both studies, said that half of all women with breast cancer are postmenopausal with hormone-sensitive tumors and could potentially benefit from both drugs.

“The drugs are complementary, because the main side effect of aromatase inhibitors is an increase in bone loss and fractures, while bisphosphonates reduce bone loss and fractures as well as improving survival," he said.

FDA approves breakthrough cholesterol drug, but only for certain high-risk patients

Overeating may be caused by a hormone deficiency, scientists say

CDC report: Lyme disease is spreading to new territories

Researchers retract study claiming marriages fail more often when wife falls ill
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article compares aromatase inhibitors to tamoxifen, which in the past has been the go-to drug for treating breast cancer. More recently, many women have been on tamoxifen for a few years and then on an aromatase inhibitor in addition to other treatments.The piece could have mentioned other treatments like chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgery, such as ovary removal in women with very high risks for breast cancer.  Often all of these approaches are used together in the course of treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Noah Hano has no trouble pulling his daughter in a sled now, but it would have been impossible a year ago. His back pain was excrutiating,reports.

"It got to the point where I was absolutely desperate. I would go in the yard, spend five minutes in the yard raking leaves and have to sit down or lay down," Noah says.

Susan Filskov can still remember the pain she felt after hurting her back shoveling snow five years ago.

"It is just miserable. It is just like a numbing pain that doesn't go away," Susan says.

Both Susan and Noah went to see a leading back surgeon, Dr. James Weinstein, of Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center. Both got the same diagnosis: herniated discs.

What causes the disc to herniate in the first place?

"The disc is made up of mostly water, and it get tears in it. If you get a tear in your tire, or your car, you would get a bulge," Dr. Weinstein explains.

The herniated disc, or bulge, can press on the nerves in the spine, causing pain. Some people can tolerate the pain with physical therapy, medications and steroid injections. But others choose surgery to remove that bulge that causes the pain.

In an effort to determine which approach is best, Dr. Weinstein's launched a major study of over 1,200 patients with back pain. He says he thinks that sometimes people are too quick with surgery. "I think that it be important for people to have good information," he adds.

Whether you have surgery often depends on where you live and what doctor you see. Earlier studies show that a patient is 20 times more likely to have surgery in Idaho Falls, Missoula and Mason City, as compared to Newark, Bangor and Terre Haute.

"It is so interesting that geography is destiny," Dr. Weinstein says. "It's not rational."

But no matter where you live, surgery is not necessarily the best or only option. In fact, Dr. Weinstein's findings, released today in the Journal of the American Medical Association, conclude that surgery is only slightly more effective in some cases than a non-surgical approach.

"We basically found that people who had very significant symptoms, that surgery, in fact, was better," Dr. Weinstein says. "However what was really interesting is that patients who decided not to have surgery who could wait also did very well."

Critics claim Weinstein's studies are flawed because some patients, like Susan, decided to have surgery, even though she had been in the group that wasn't going to be operated on. The operation was a success and she's been pain-free for four years. As for Noah, he did just as well by exercising and taking a wait and see approach.

The study was so controversial, Dr. Weinstein says, because "I guess some of my colleagues were worried that I might find the wrong thing. I am not sure."

He says his intent was not to put some orthopedic surgeons out of business.

"That was never the intent," Dr. Weinstein explains. "It was just to find the truth for patients."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions various kinds of non-operative care, including physical therapy, medications and steroid injections, as the alternative to surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Women who take hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to ease menopause symptoms like hot flashes and night sweats may be no more likely to die prematurely than women who don’t take hormones, a new study suggests.

Many women have been reluctant to use hormones for menopause symptoms since 2002, when the federally funded Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study linked the treatments containing man-made versions of the female hormones estrogen and progestin to an increased risk of breast cancer, heart attacks and strokes.

The current study, however, looked at longer-term data from the WHI study and found no increased risk of death from all causes, or from cancer or cardiovascular issues in particular, associated with hormone use.

“Women seeking treatment for distressing hot flashes, night sweats or other menopausal symptoms may find the mortality results reassuring,” said lead study author Dr. JoAnn Manson of Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Women go through menopause when they stop menstruating, typically between ages 45 and 55. As the ovaries curb production of the hormones estrogen and progesterone in the years leading up to menopause and afterward, women can experience symptoms ranging from irregular periods and vaginal dryness to mood swings and insomnia.

For the study, researchers looked at data on 27,347 women ages 50 to 79 who joined two WHI trials between 1993 and 1998 and were followed through 2014. One trial tested estrogen alone against a placebo, or dummy pill, while the other trial tested estrogen taken in combination with progestin.

Women were 63 years old on average when they joined the trials and had already gone through menopause. They took hormones or a placebo for five to seven years and were followed for a total of 18 years altogether.

Death rates were similar - at about 27 percent - among women who took hormones and women who didn’t, researchers report in JAMA.

Younger women in the study appeared to have better survival odds with HRT. Over the initial five to seven years when women were randomly assigned to take hormones or a placebo, death rates were about 30 percent lower among women aged 50 to 59 when they took HRT than when they didn’t.

For women who started hormones in their 60s or 70s, however, there wasn’t a meaningful difference in death rates according to whether they got the treatment or a placebo during the initial years of the study.

After 18 years, including both the treatment period and a decade or more of follow-up, women’s age when they joined the study no longer appeared to significantly influence death rates.

One limitation of the study is that the WHI didn’t look at different dosages of hormone pills, and the findings may be different for other dosages or different types of therapy such as gels or creams or skin patches.

Still, the current study should ease concerns raised by earlier results from the WHI trials that an increased risk of breast cancer or heart attacks might translate into higher long-term mortality rates, said Dr. Melissa McNeil, author of an accompanying editorial and a women’s health researcher at the University of Pittsburgh.

Taking a combination of estrogen and progestin is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, but advances in screening and treatment since the WHI started now mean these tumors are unlikely to be fatal, McNeil said by email.

With additional years of follow-up, it also appears that the increased heart attack risk associated with HRT in the initial results from the WHI trials is limited to older women, McNeil added.

“Hormone therapy has been in and out of favor - first it was good for all menopausal women, then it was dangerous for all women,” McNeil said. “The take-home message now is that for the right patient, hormone therapy is safe and effective.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story is about alternatives, on its face, about the alternative of taking or not taking hormone replacement therapy. We wish there had been a sentence or two more on how other methods are available to women to ease symptoms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 17, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Because of stringent tonsillectomy guidelines, some kids who could benefit from tonsil removal surgery aren't getting it, two new reviews suggest.

To qualify for the surgery, a child must have many recurring throat infections within a short span of time or severe sleep disturbances, said Dr. Sivakumar Chinnadurai, a co-author of the reviews.

An evaluation of current medical evidence suggests more kids would receive significant short-term improvement in their daily life if the guidelines were relaxed, said Chinnadurai, a pediatric otolaryngologist with Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville.

Children experienced nearly half as many sore throats when they underwent a tonsillectomy, even if they didn't meet the guidelines, Chinnadurai and his colleagues found. The kids also missed fewer days of school and were less likely to need medical care.

However, this strong benefit only applies to the first couple of years following surgery, Chinnadurai said. By the third year, there was no clear benefit in terms of the number of throat infections. Also, there was limited research on long-term results.

"The decision about whether those children should have tonsillectomy for that temporary benefit is really tied to what those children need or what they're suffering with," Chinnadurai said. Kids who miss a lot of school or need frequent trips to the doctor due to sore throats could benefit from the surgery, he said.

There's an even clearer benefit for kids whose sleep is disturbed due to inflamed tonsils, Chinnadurai said.

"In a child with a diagnosis of sleep apnea, we can see a benefit in sleep-related quality of life," he said. The kids get better sleep, and thus exhibit better everyday behavior and pay more attention in school.

The medical approach to treating tonsil infections has evolved over recent decades.

Tonsillectomy is the third most common surgery performed on U.S. children, with 530,000 such procedures completed each year, according to the American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery.

Thirty years ago, nine out of 10 tonsillectomies in children were performed to treat recurring throat infections. These days, the procedure is done 20 percent of the time for infections and 80 percent of the time for sleep problems, according to the academy.

Swollen tonsils can block the airway during sleep, causing breathing problems that range from simple snoring to obstructive sleep apnea, the researchers said in background notes.

Guidelines say a tonsillectomy to treat throat infections is justified if a child had seven or more sore throats during the previous year; five or more sore throats two years running, or three or more sore throats for three years in a row, according to the background notes.

The researchers decided to review whether the throat infection guidelines are too stringent, ruling out patients who potentially could benefit but don't meet the high threshold of recurring infections, Chinnadurai said.

There aren't strong guidelines regarding the use of tonsillectomy to treat sleep disorders, so the doctors reviewed the evidence to see whether the surgery outperformed so-called watchful waiting -- monitoring the situation.

The study results showed "there may be new evidence that supports expanding the criteria and opening up the procedure to more individuals," said Dr. Alyssa Hackett, an otolaryngologist with the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai in New York City.

"In the right child with the right indications, these are really wonderful procedures that can be life-changing for both the child and the family," said Hackett, who wasn't involved with the new research.

"If you need your appendix out, you need your appendix out," Hackett said. "But for the tonsils and adenoids, there are great quality-of-life benefits that are evident for the surgery, but no child has ever died because they haven't gone through the surgery." (Adenoids, glands at the roof of the mouth, are often removed along with tonsils.)

Still, Chinnadurai and Hackett warned against automatically choosing the surgery for every sore throat.

About 3 percent of kids who undergo the procedure experience bleeding during the two-week recovery period, Hackett said.

"Though a tonsillectomy is low-risk, it is not risk-free, and those risks need to be weighed against the benefits for each individual child," Chinnadurai said.

"We're talking about a child who has significant sleep-related issues," Hackett said. "We don't want people to say my child snores, they need to have their tonsils out. That's not what this study says at all."

The two reports were published online Jan. 17 in the journal Pediatrics.

For more on tonsillectomy, visit the American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story is about a comparison between tonsillectomies and watchful waiting, the primary two alternatives in dealing with either recurrent sore throats and obstructive breathing.
The published studies note that watchful waiting includes antibiotic therapy.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Older people who use olive oil in their cooking and on their salads may have a lower risk of suffering a stroke, researchers reported Wednesday.

In a study that followed older French adults for five years, researchers found that those who regularly used olive oil were 41 percent less likely to have a stroke than those who never used the oil.

The findings, reported in the journal Neurology, hint that the well-known connection between olive oil and heart disease might extend to stroke as well. Olive oil is a key ingredient in the so-called Mediterranean diet. And some clinical trials have suggested that the diet helps control risk factors for heart disease, like high blood pressure, abdominal obesity and elevated levels of “bad” LDL cholesterol.

High olive oil intake is also linked to a lower risk of heart attack, and a longer lifespan among heart attack survivors. These latest findings support the general advice that people replace dubious dietary fats — namely, saturated fats and “trans” fats — with olive oil and other unsaturated fats, according to an expert not involved in the study. But he also stressed that the study does not prove that olive oil, per se, helps prevent strokes.

“We need to remember that this is an observational study,” said Dr. Nikolaos Scarmeas, a neurologist at Columbia University Medical Center in New York who wrote an editorial published with the study.

The study found a correlation between people’s olive oil use and their stroke risk, he told Reuters Health — but that doesn’t necessarily translate into cause-and-effect.

“People who use a lot of olive oil may be very different from people who don’t,” Scarmeas said.

Olive oil users may, for example, have higher incomes, eat better overall or exercise more often than people who never use the oil. The researchers on the new study, led by Cécilia Samieri of the French national research institute INSERM, tried to account for those differences. And after they did, olive oil was still linked to a lower stroke risk.

But it’s impossible to fully account for all those variables, Scarmeas noted. What’s needed, he said, are clinical trials where people are randomly assigned to use olive oil or not, then followed over time to see who suffers a stroke. Such clinical trials are considered the “gold standard” of medical evidence.

The current study included 7,625 French adults age 65 and older who reported on their diets and other lifestyle factors. People who said they used olive oil for both cooking and as a dressing were considered “intensive users.”

Over the next five to six years, those intensive users suffered strokes at a rate of 0.3 percent per year. That compared with just over 0.5 percent among non-users, and 0.4 percent among moderate users.

When the researchers factored in other diet habits, exercise levels and major risk factors for stroke — like high blood pressure and diabetes — heavy olive oil use was tied to 41 percent reduction in the odds of stroke.

Samieri’s team also took blood samples from another 1,245 older adults, measuring their levels of oleic acid — a monounsaturated fat that accounts for most of the fatty acids in olive oil. The one-third of participants with the highest oleic acid levels were 73 percent less likely to suffer a stroke than the one-third with the lowest levels.

The findings, according to Scarmeas, argue for more research into olive oil’s potential benefits against not only heart disease, but stroke and other neurological diseases as well.

For now, he suggested that people choose olive oil and other unsaturated fats over saturated fats (found largely in meat and dairy) and trans fats (found in some processed foods, like crackers, cookies and chips).

“It’s better to rely on this type of fat for your overall health,” Scarmeas said.

That said, no single food is consumed in isolation, he points out in his editorial. Olive oil is one part of the Mediterranean diet that has been tied to heart benefits. The diet also boasts plenty of fruits and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, fish and moderate amounts of red wine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story at least mentioned other factors that could be at play – “no single food is consumed in isolation, he points out in his editorial. Olive oil is one part of the Mediterranean diet that has been tied to heart benefits. The diet also boasts plenty of fruits and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, fish and moderate amounts of red wine.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A five-minute neck scan could predict a person's risk of developing dementia a full decade before symptoms emerge, researchers have said.

The test, which analyzes the pulse of blood vessels in the neck, could become part of routine testing for cognitive decline, according to the study by scientists at University College London (UCL), who presented their work Sunday at the American Heart Association's annual scientific conference.

A group of almost 3,200 patients, aged 58-74, had ultrasounds on their necks in 2002, before having their cognitive functions monitored for up to 14 years, from 2002 to 2016.

People with the most intense pulses, which pointed to a greater and more irregular blood flow, were up to 50% more likely to suffer reduced cognitive functions, the research found, because the strength with which blood traveled into their brains caused damage to the brain's network of blood vessels.

Pulses become more intense when arteries near the heart are worn down -- usually by lifestyle factors such as poor diet and drug use -- and can no longer "cushion" the blood flow coming from the heart.

"If you can detect [the risk] in people in mid-life, it really gives an impetus to those people to change their lifestyle," said Dr. Scott Chiesa, post-doctoral researcher at UCL.

"What's good for the arteries is good for the brain," he added in summary of his findings. "Dementia is not an inevitable cause of aging. How you live your life... has a real impact on how quickly your condition can decline."

If the findings are confirmed by larger studies, they could vastly improve the ability to detect dementia in middle age.

And the scans would be "well set up for routine testing," according to Chiesa. "It's very easy to do, and it's very quick to do."

When healthy, arteries around the heart can regulate the blood being pumped from the organ, ensuring that it flows smoothly and at a constant rate to the brain.

But damage to the arteries means blood flows more aggressively and irregularly through vessels and into the brain, which can damage its network of blood vessels and cells. Over time, the researchers believe this led more frequently to cognitive decline in participants in the study.

"What we do know is that the blood supply in the brain is incredibly important, and that maintaining a healthy heart and blood pressure is associated with a lower risk of developing dementia," said Carol Routledge, Director of Research at Alzheimer's Research UK, who was not involved in the research.

Vascular dementia is directly caused by reduced blood flow to the brain, and this can also play a role in the development of Alzheimer's disease, studies have found. Those two conditions make up the vast majority of cases of dementia.

Dementia is an umbrella term used to describe symptoms related to the loss of brain function. Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia make up the vast majority of cases.

In the United States, the condition is the sixth biggest cause of death among all adults, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, while in the UK it has overtaken heart disease as the leading cause of death, according to the Office for National Statistics.

The study's findings have been met with cautious optimism by dementia organizations.

"Getting a diagnosis of dementia can be time consuming and quite frustrating for many people, so it's promising that earlier indicators of cognitive decline are in development," said Paul Edwards, Director of Clinical Services at Dementia UK.

But he added that focus should also be paid to dementia sufferers after their diagnosis, saying: "The elephant in the room is the lack of support for people and their families once they get a diagnosis of dementia."

There is currently no cure for dementia, though medication can be used to temporarily treat its symptoms.

"Often, a diagnosis is made and then people are sent home with no information, no follow-up appointments and no clue about what is going to happen next."

More research is needed to determine whether neck scans should become a part of routine testing for dementia.

"While these findings are interesting, as the full data from this research is yet to be published it is difficult to assess how useful this kind of scan could be," said Routledge.

Routledge added that current evidence shows that not smoking, only consuming alcohol within recommended limits, staying active, monitoring cholesterol levels and eating a balanced diet can all help with the health of the heart and brain.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that researchers are attempting to see if the test should be added as part of “routine screening” for risk factors. It would have been helpful to briefly explain what is currently included in routing screening.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Jan. 5, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have taken another step in the hunt to find a treatment for an aggressive, likely-to-recur form of breast cancer.

In a study published in the Jan. 5 online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine, the experimental drug iniparib not only shrank tumors and increased the time they took to progress, but also surprised researchers by prolonging survival in women with what's known as triple-negative breast cancer.

This type of breast cancer lacks receptors for estrogen and progesterone and doesn't have large quantities of HER-2/neu protein, which the most successful cancer therapies target. This means that many currently available drugs simply won't affect it.

"We were surprised [at the results] because triple-negative breast cancer is very difficult to treat," said study lead author Dr. Joyce O'Shaughnessy.

"The big, big surprise was survival," added O'Shaughnessy, who nevertheless stressed that the trial was small and preliminary.

The findings were enough to generate the interest of Dr. Lisa A. Carey, the co-author of an accompanying editorial.

"It is early, but it's really exciting because it's a new class of drugs. It isn't that often that we have a completely new approach to treating cancer," said Carey, medical director of the University of North Carolina Breast Center in Chapel Hill. "This is a new book. We've just opened it up."

Iniparib inhibits a pathway that helps repair DNA; researchers call it the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) pathway. If this chain is interrupted, cancer cells don't have the necessary tools to repair themselves.

"[PARP inhibitors] work by preventing the cells from repairing damage to their DNA," Carey explained.

A similar drug, in fact, has shown benefit in patients with BRCA 1 or BRCA 2 mutations predisposing them to breast and ovarian cancer.

In this study, 123 patients with triple-negative breast cancer were randomized to receive a commonly used, well-tolerated chemotherapy regimen (gemcitabine and carboplatin) or to receive chemo plus iniparib.

More than one-half of the women responded to the combination treatment (meaning the tumor volume decreased) versus only about one-third of those receiving chemo alone.

Women receiving iniparib plus chemo lived an average of 12.3 months compared to just 7.7 months in the chemo-alone group. This may not seen like very long in either group, but for this serious a cancer, it is impressive, the researchers noted.

This was a phase 2 trial. O'Shaughnessy, who is co-director of breast cancer research at Baylor-Sammons Cancer Center, US Oncology, and Texas Oncology in Dallas, said the results of a larger (about 500 patients) phase 3 trial should be available within one to three months.

"The whole field is still preliminary and we have to be careful not to overhype the results [as] we're waiting on the results of the phase 3 trial," she said. "Phase 2 was quite positive, but we really don't know if this is going to end up benefiting patients until we get to phase 3."

In her editorial accompanying the study, Carey agreed. "Both excitement and caution are appropriate in interpreting the trial," she wrote. "Some clear drawbacks should be noted." Among them, she said, were the small size of the study group, "imbalances at baseline" favoring the iniparib group, and the "unconventional" chemotherapy regimen. But caveats notwithstanding, she concluded, the results may herald improved therapy "for an underserved subgroup of patients with breast cancer."

O'Shaughnessy added that the drug was "extremely well tolerated [by patients]. It didn't seem to add any appreciable toxicity to chemotherapy."

In the meantime, she pointed out, a woman walking through a clinic door who is diagnosed with triple-negative breast cancer shouldn't panic. "If it's only in the breast or lymph nodes, we cure most triple-negative cancers. But when it recurs and becomes metastatic, it's very difficult to treat," she explained.

The study was funded by BiPar Sciences, a subsidiary of Sanofi-Aventis which makes the drug.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Alternative treatments are not mentioned but the piece explains that metastatic triple-negative breast cancer is very difficult to treat & that many currently available treatments are not effective.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A combination of two drugs delays progression of advanced, aggressive breast cancer by an average of nine months - working in all subsets of the most common type of breast cancer.

The combination - of a first-in-class targeted drug called palbociclib, and the hormone drug fulvestrant - slowed cancer growth in around two thirds of women with advanced forms of the most common type of breast cancer.

The combination allowed many women with metastatic hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative cancer to delay the start of chemotherapy, which is the traditional treatment option in these patients once hormone drugs have stopped working.

The international study, led in the UK by Dr Nicholas Turner, from The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, updates the results of a major phase III trial published last year.

The results confirm the prior benefit observed with palbociclib, and show that palbociclib works regardless of how sensitive patients' cancer was to earlier hormone therapy.

The new research, published today (Thursday) in The Lancet Oncology, shows that even women with specific genetic changes conveying resistance to hormone therapy can benefit from the new drug combination.

Hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative cancer accounts for around 75 per cent of cases of breast cancer.

In the trial, researchers from 144 research centres in 17 countries followed 521 women allocated to receive either palbociclib and fulvestrant, or a dummy pill and fulvestrant. The trial was funded by Pfizer.

Women in the palbociclib plus fulvestrant group took a median of 9.5 months to progress, as measured by CT and MRI scans, compared with 4.6 months in the placebo group.

Some 67 per cent of the 347 women in the palbociclib plus fulvestrant group showed clinical benefit - either a reduction in tumour size or control of disease for at least six months - compared with 40 per cent of the 174 women in the placebo plus fulvestrant group.

Some 19 per cent in the palbociclib plus fulvestrant group had a decrease in tumour size compared with 9 per cent in the placebo plus fulvestrant group.

The study also aimed to assess whether cancers with particular genetic traits responded less well or better to the combination than others.

Mutations to the gene PIK3CA represent the most common genetic event in breast cancer, and mutations in the gene are associated with a shorter response to hormone therapy.

The research showed that using 'liquid biopsies' that measure cancer DNA circulating in the blood to detect PIK3CA, and tests for blood hormone levels, the palbociclib combination worked in all types of hormone-receptor positive, HER2 negative breast cancer.

Palbociclib is a first-in-class drug - with a different mechanism of action to other approved drugs - which simultaneously blocks two proteins called CDK4 and CDK6 in cancer cells. It causes less severe side-effects than traditional chemotherapy.

In the trial, severe side-effects caused by the combination were rare. Many women (81 per cent on the palbociclib arm) had a drop in their white blood cell count, but this rarely led to serious symptoms.

Study co-lead author Dr Nicolas Turner, Team Leader in Molecular Oncology at The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and Consultant Medical Oncologist at The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, said:

"Our research underlines the effectiveness of palbociclib with fulvestrant in metastatic breast cancer and, importantly, demonstrates its benefit in all types of hormone-receptor positive breast cancer. We hope our results lead to the adoption of this drug combination in breast cancer, where it delays the need to start chemotherapy by an average of nine months.

"Our study also sends a powerful message that in combining new drugs in innovative trials we can find better options for women with advanced breast cancer. Chemotherapy can add several months to life but it comes at a cost of often life-limiting side effects, and we need alternative treatments that are better tolerated to treat patients with advanced breast cancer."

Professor Paul Workman, Chief Executive of The Institute of Cancer Research, London, said:

"If we're going to drive further improvements in survival from cancer, it's essential that we find ways of prolonging life in people whose cancers have evolved and become resistant to treatment. This trial is an exciting example of one of the most promising approaches to overcoming drug resistance, by combining drugs with different mechanisms of action to block off cancer's escape routes. It's very encouraging to see such substantial delays to cancer progression."

For more information please contact Henry French on 020 7153 5582 or henry.french@icr.ac.uk. For enquiries out of hours, please call 07595 963 613.

The Institute of Cancer Research, London, is one of the world's most influential cancer research institutes.

Scientists and clinicians at The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) are working every day to make a real impact on cancer patients' lives. Through its unique partnership with The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and 'bench-to-bedside' approach, the ICR is able to create and deliver results in a way that other institutions cannot. Together the two organisations are rated in the top four cancer centres globally.

The ICR has an outstanding record of achievement dating back more than 100 years. It provided the first convincing evidence that DNA damage is the basic cause of cancer, laying the foundation for the now universally accepted idea that cancer is a genetic disease. Today it leads the world at isolating cancer-related genes and discovering new targeted drugs for personalised cancer treatment.

As a college of the University of London, the ICR provides postgraduate higher education of international distinction. It has charitable status and relies on support from partner organisations, charities and the general public.

The ICR's mission is to make the discoveries that defeat cancer. For more information visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Throughout the news release, comparison between the drug combination is made with the alternative of taking only one of the drugs, fulvestrant, plus placebo. Several clinical endpoints are reported, all showing the clear advantage of the drug combination.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Testing women for human papillomavirus (HPV) may catch more pre-cancerous growths than standard cervical cancer screening does — but more evidence is needed before the newer tests become routine, a study published Monday concludes.

The report, in the Annals of Internal Medicine, sums up a research review done for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), an expert medical panel supported by the federal government.

The USPSTF is set to update its recommendations on cervical cancer screening, which were last laid out in 2003.

At that time, the task force recommended that sexually active women get regular Pap tests to screen for cervical cancer. But it said there was not enough evidence to recommend for or against newer types of testing — including HPV tests and the “liquid-based” Pap tests that are now more often used than the old-fashioned version.

During Pap tests, cells are swabbed or scraped from the cervix for examination under a microscope to find cancer or possible pre-cancerous changes. In the so-called liquid-based version, the cells are placed in special preservative liquid designed to make the specimen easier to “read”; those same cells can also be used for HPV testing (unlike the cells collected with conventional Pap tests).

Exactly what impact the new research review will have on the USPSTF recommendations is anyone's guess. A draft of the guidelines will not be published until Wednesday, when it will be available for public comment on the task force website (here: 1.usa.gov/4xXexl).

A lot of research has been done since the 2003 recommendations, said Dr. Evelyn P. Whitlock, a senior investigator with Kaiser Permanente Northwest in Portland, Oregon, who led the review.

But there are still questions about the effects of HPV screening, and “more complete evidence” is needed before it becomes widely used, Whitlock and her colleagues write.

HPV is a common virus that causes warts, including genital warts. Usually, the immune system clears the infection, but persistent infection with certain strains of HPV leads to cervical cancer in some women.

So in recent years, tests for those “high-risk” HPV strains have been developed to help in screening for the disease. A few HPV tests are approved for use, along with Pap tests, for screening women age 30 or older. (The tests are not approved for younger women because they give doctors little information; younger women commonly have HPV infections that go away on their own.)

It has not been clear exactly how HPV testing, or liquid-based Pap tests, measure up against standard Pap tests.

In their review, Whitlock’s team examined four clinical trials including more than 140,000 women that compared older Pap tests with the liquid-based version.

They found that both tests had nearly the same “sensitivity” — which refers to their ability to detect cancer or pre-cancer. The tests also had the same “specificity,” which can be used to measure how often a screening test produces false-positive results.

Across studies, the false-positive rate ranged between about six percent and 16 percent for both conventional and liquid-based Pap tests.

“It’s reassuring to know that they perform equivalently,” Whitlock told Reuters Health.

In an interview, she noted that the decision of whether to do a conventional or liquid-based Pap test is not the patient’s. It may not even be the doctor’s — but may instead depend on whatever health system he or she is part of.

Several other clinical trials in the review looked at HPV testing. In general, Whitlock’s team found, HPV tests were more sensitive than conventional Pap tests, but they were less specific, meaning they had a higher false-positive rate.

In a 2003 trial of more than 3,000 women, for example, HPV testing caught 96 percent of potentially pre-cancerous growths, versus 65 percent with Pap tests. But the false-positive rate was 15 percent, compared with two percent with Pap testing.

The problem with that higher false-positive rate is that it could lead to needless biopsies and other tests, or treatment to remove abnormal-looking tissue.

“It’s a tricky thing to get your mind around,” Whitlock said. “It may seem that if a test is more sensitive, it must be better. But it’s more subtle than that. You’re trying to make a tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity.”

Since cervical cancer screening is repeated over time, what’s needed is evidence of the longer-term effects of different tests, according to Whitlock. How often, for example, does HPV testing lead to biopsies, versus Pap testing?

And no one knows yet whether HPV testing actually catches cervical cancer at an earlier stage, or reduces deaths from the disease, compared with Pap tests.

Clinical trials are ongoing, Whitlock said. “The state of the science will be changing relatively quickly, so we’ll have to keep looking at this.”

Right now, the American Cancer Society (ACS) and other medical groups recommend that women start Pap tests at age 21 or three years after they become sexually active, whichever comes first. Those should be done every one to two years until age 30; after age 30, women who’ve had three normal Pap tests in a row can be screened less often — every two to three years.

Pap plus HPV testing, done every three years, is considered a “reasonable option” for women age 30 and up, according to the ACS.

Nationally, the cervical cancer death rate dropped by 70 percent between 1955 and 1992, and routine Pap testing is credited for most of that decline.

But many women still do not get regular Pap screening, Whitlock pointed out. It’s thought that more than half of cervical cancer cases in the U.S. occur in women who’ve never been screened, or haven’t been in the past five years.

If more women received the screening that already exists, “that would be a huge step forward,” Whitlock said.

An estimated 12,700 U.S. women will be diagnosed with cervical cancer this year, and nearly 4,300 will die from the disease, according to the ACS.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There was great detail in comparing the liquid test and HPV testing with traditional cervical cancer screening.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For years pregnant women have been warned about eating tuna because of concerns about mercury exposure. But a federal panel has reignited the debate about the benefits and risks of eating tuna and other seafood during pregnancy.

Experts agree that seafood is a rich source of important nutrients, and that most of us don’t eat enough of it. Fish is rich in omega-3 fatty acids, B vitamins, iodine, selenium and vitamin D. And numerous studies show that the nutrients in fish are particularly important for brain development in fetuses and nursing infants.

As part of a sweeping review of nutrition recommendations, the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee recently reiterated the current seafood guidelines: Americans should eat a wide variety of seafood. The report also acknowledges the risk of mercury exposure from certain kinds of seafoods, and notes that women who are pregnant, nursing or may become pregnant should avoid certain kinds — tilefish, shark, swordfish and king mackerel — because of their high mercury content.

The panel withheld a recommendation about tuna, second only to shrimp in popularity in the United States. Current guidelines from the Food and Drug Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency warn pregnant and nursing women to limit tuna consumption to six ounces per week.

The advisory committee has recommended that these agencies “re-evaluate” their stance on tuna for pregnant women. In the report, the panel argues that albacore tuna is a “special case.” They noted that even when women ate double the recommended weekly amount of tuna, the benefits far outweighed the risks. “All evidence was in favor of net benefits for infant development and (cardiovascular disease) risk reduction,” the panel wrote.

The suggestion that pregnant women can eat more white albacore tuna — the type of tuna typically used in canned tuna — has upset advocacy groups that have called for increased warnings about mercury on tuna packaging.

“Tuna is responsible for nearly seven times more mercury exposure than the four high-mercury fish that the Federal Food and Drug Administration advises pregnant women not to eat,” said Michael Bender, director of the mercury policy project, in a statement. “So why would the proposed 2015 dietary guidelines recommend that pregnant women eat more of it?”

But Dr. Steve Abrams, a panel member involved in the seafood recommendations and medical director of the Neonatal Nutrition Program at Baylor College of Medicine, said that while women need to be aware of the types of fish they are eating, the evidence is strong that fish consumption by mothers is good for the brains of their babies.

“The goal of the dietary guidelines is to give people a healthy way to eat and not to include or exclude certain foods,” said Dr. Abrams. “The benefit of having (omega-3 fatty acids) in your diet really exceeds the likely risk of contamination. The point is that you should have a variety of types of seafood and not limit yourself to one type, and variety includes canned tuna.”

Alice Lichtenstein, senior scientist and director of the Cardiovascular Nutrition Laboratory at Tufts University said the panel hasn’t suggested that pregnant women eat more tuna. “The issue of fish contamination is a moving target and you need very current data,” said Dr. Lichtenstein. “It may be that the issue is re-evaluated and there is no change.”

Mercury levels in our oceans are on the rise due to an increase in industrial mercury emissions. Plants, plankton and tiny fish that have absorbed small amounts of mercury are eaten by larger fish. Over time, large fish sharks and swordfish accumulate high levels of mercury. As a result, health officials recommend fish like sardines, salmon, tilapia and trout that are lower on the food chain and have accumulated less mercury in their tissue.

The benefits of fish consumption on a developing fetus are clear. In a Harvard study of 135 mothers and infants, researchers tracked fish consumption during pregnancy and tested the mother’s hair to measure her mercury exposure. They found that for each weekly serving of fish the mother ate while pregnant, her baby’s score on visual recognition memory tests increased an average of four points. At the same time, a baby’s score dropped by 7.5 points for every one part per million increase in mercury found in the mother’s hair sample. The babies who scored highest on the memory tests were those whose mothers had consumed two or more servings of fish each week during their pregnancy, but were tested to have very low mercury levels.

Health officials have long worried about balancing warnings about mercury against the obvious benefits of consuming more fish. Currently fewer than one in five Americans eats the recommended two servings a week of fish. About one-third eat one serving of seafood weekly and nearly half of us eats very little seafood or none at all.

This fall Consumer Reports issued a lengthy paper on fish and mercury exposure, noting the special concerns about canned tuna due to its popularity. Six ounces of canned tuna contains 60 micrograms of mercury compared to just 4 micrograms of mercury in a six-ounce serving of salmon, according to Consumer Reports. (A six-ounce serving of swordfish contains 170 micrograms, the magazine said. )

For people who want to safely eat more seafood, the magazine recommended shrimp, scallops, sardines, salmon, oysters, squid and tilapia as the lowest-mercury seafood. Also low are haddock, pollock, flounder and sole, Atlantic croaker, crawfish, catfish, trout, Atlantic mackerel, crab and mullet. In addition to the usual warnings about high mercury fish, Consumer Reports added marlin and orange roughy to the list. They suggested limiting consumption of grouper, Chilean sea bass, bluefish, halibut, black cod, Spanish mackerel and fresh tuna.

To find out more about mercury in seafood, go to the Got Mercury? calculator created by the Sea Turtle Island Restoration Network at seaturtles.org/programs/mercury/.

 

 For more fitness, food and wellness news, “like” our Facebook page.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that health officials recommend fish that “are lower on the food chain and have accumulated less mercury in their tissue,” such as sardines and salmon. The story also states that salmon contains significantly less mercury than tuna, and lists other types of seafood that are recommended by Consumer Reports as being low in mercury. We’ll call that good enough for a satisfactory rating. The story could have mentioned other factors — for example, reading aloud to your child — that are also associated with improved childhood brain development.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
May 18, 2010 -- Flibanserin, an antidepressant-like drug, makes sex more satisfying for some premenopausal women distressed over their low sexual desire.

The findings come from phase III clinical trials that drugmaker Boehringer Ingelheim hopes will convince the FDA to approve flibanserin for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD).

While HSDD is a controversial diagnosis -- some experts see it as the medicalization of what is for many women a relationship issue -- the 1,378 premenopausal women enrolled in the clinical trials were suffering distress over their lack of sexual desire.

Compared to women who received inactive placebo pills, those who took flibanserin at bedtime were more likely to get relief from self-reported sexual distress, to experience more sexual desire, and to have more sexually satisfying experiences.

The drug didn't work for all women. Just under a third of women taking flibanserin got over their sexual distress and/or lack of sexual desire (vs. about a fifth of women taking placebo pills). But the difference was important to the women, says study researcher Michael L. Krychman, MD, medical director of sexual medicine at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif.

"The absolute number of women who had remission of sexual distress was clinically significant, but equally important to them was how it improved their lives," Krychman tells WebMD.

Nearly half of women taking flibanserin (and nearly a third of women taking placebo) reported at least minimal improvement in "bothersome decreased sexual desire."

Flibanserin is taken nightly at bedtime. However, it's not an on-demand treatment. Data suggest that the drug begins to affect sexual satisfaction after four weeks of continuous treatment.

In the 24-week "Bouquet" studies (each of the Boehringer Ingelheim-funded studies is named after a flower), there were few drug-related side effects. Those most commonly reported were daytime sleepiness, dizziness, fatigue, anxiety, dry mouth, nausea, and insomnia. Some 15% of women on flibanserin, and 7% of those on placebo, stopped treatment due to side effects.

Updated reports on data from the North American "Daisy" and "Violet" studies were made by Krychman and other researchers at this week's annual meeting of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists in San Francisco.

Kychman is an advisor to Boehringer Ingelheim and serves on their speakers' bureau, services for which he is compensated.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story indicates that an alternative drug called the Intrinsa testosterone patch is available in Europe, but not in the U.S. The story also notes a difference between these dugs; Intrinsa is a hormonal treatment compared to flibanserin which is a non-hormonal. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — A decrease in the amount of time spent eating and an increase in overnight fasting reduces glucose levels and may reduce the risk of breast cancer among women, report University of California, San Diego School of Medicine researchers in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention.

The findings were presented at the American Association of Cancer Research’s annual meeting in Philadelphia.

“Increasing the duration of overnight fasting could be a novel strategy to reduce the risk of developing breast cancer,” said Catherine Marinac, UC San Diego doctoral candidate and first author on the paper. “This is a simple dietary change that we believe most women can understand and adopt. It may have a big impact on public health without requiring complicated counting of calories or nutrients.”

Women who fasted for longer periods of time overnight had significantly better control over blood glucose concentrations. The data shows that each three hour increase in nighttime fasting was associated with a 4 percent lower postprandial glucose level, regardless of how much women ate.

“The dietary advice for cancer prevention usually focuses on limiting consumption of red meat, alcohol and refined grains while increasing plant-based foods,” said co-author Ruth Patterson, PhD, UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center associate director for population sciences and program leader of the cancer prevention program. “New evidence suggests that when and how often people eat can also play a role in cancer risk.”

Women in the study reported eating five times per day with a mean nighttime fasting of 12 hours. Those who reported longer fast durations also indicated they consumed fewer calories per day, ate fewer calories after 10 p.m. and had fewer eating episodes.

Researchers recommend large-scale clinical trials to confirm that nighttime fasting results in favorable changes to biomarkers of glycemic control and breast cancer risk.

Co-authors include Loki Natarajan, Dorothy Sears and Sheri Hartman of UC San Diego; and Linda Gallo and Elva Arredondo of San Diego State University.

Funding for this research came, in part, from the National Cancer Institute-sponsored Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award (1F31CA183125-01A1), the NCI Centers for Transdisciplinary Research on Energetics and Cancer (1U54CA155435-01) and philanthropic support from Ms. Carol Vassiliadis and family.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The researchers state that “limiting consumption of red meat, alcohol and refined grains while increasing plant-based foods” reduce breast cancer risk, which is enough to earn the release a satisfactory rating. But we’d note that obesity after menopause is another factor associated with increased risk, one that may be reduced through caloric moderation/restriction and maintenance of a healthy body weight. The release noted that participants who had longer fasting durations had a lower caloric intake, but it did not suggest that the lower calorie intake alone might be a factor in lowering breast cancer risk. That additional context would have been useful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EAST HANOVER, N.J., June 22, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- A new analysis published today in JAMA Cardiology has found that timely and broad adoption of Entresto® (sacubitril/valsartan) by all eligible heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) could prevent or postpone more than 28,000 deaths each year in the US alone.1 This analysis, based on an application of the results of PARADIGM-HF to published heart failure statistics, is the first to quantify the possible impact of Entresto's potential benefit in reducing death.1

Heart failure is a chronic condition that contributes to more than 300,000 deaths in the US every year.4 About half of people with heart failure have HFrEF.5 This new analysis estimates that as many as 28,484 deaths in HFrEF patients annually could be prevented or postponed with optimal use of Entresto (with sensitivity analyses demonstrating a range of 18,230 to 41,017).1

Further, the study suggests that delaying routine use of Entresto in clinical practice could have a substantial negative effect on patients, given the expected risk-benefit profile, as it could result in failure to prevent tens of thousands of deaths.1 These findings demonstrate the significant survival benefits Entresto could offer to those living with HFrEF, if patients in the group defined by the authors were given access to treatment.1 The study authors stated that nearly 84% of HFrEF patients – 2.2 million people – may be candidates for treatment with Entresto.1

Heart failure is a life-threatening condition and despite available medicines, about half of patients diagnosed with heart failure die within 5 years.4,6,7 According to the study authors, these findings may substantially impact the national health of the HFrEF population, offering significant clinical benefit in preventing or postponing death when applied in clinical practice.1

"This expert analysis adds to the already compelling case for the treatment of heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction with Entresto," said Fabrice Chouraqui, president of Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. "In addition to survival benefits, the study also recognizes other treatment effects of Entresto, particularly in reducing HF hospitalizations.1 Coupled with the recent Class I recommendation, the strongest endorsement, in the focused update to the US HF Guideline,2 these findings underscore the potential of Entresto as a standard therapy for chronic HFrEF patients."

In a separate analysis published in the same issue of JAMA Cardiology, researchers used data from the PARADIGM-HF trial to model the health consequences and cost-effectiveness of Entresto over a 30-year time period.3 They compared Entresto to the ACE-inhibitor enalapril and found Entresto was associated with more than a year longer average survival time, and that it was cost-effective compared to enalapril when these medications were used with other standard of care therapies.3 For every 1,000 patients treated with Entresto vs. enalapril, potentially 59.7 HF hospital admissions could be averted per each year alive in the model.3 In addition, Entresto increased life expectancy at an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio consistent with other high-value widely accepted cardiovascular interventions such as implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) and cholesterol-lowering statins before they became generic.3

About Heart Failure

Heart failure is a debilitating and life-threatening condition, which impacts nearly 6 million Americans and is the leading cause of hospitalization among Americans over the age of 65.4,8 About half of people with heart failure have heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF).5 Reduced ejection fraction means the heart does not contract with enough force, so less blood is pumped out.9 Heart failure presents a major and growing health-economic burden that currently exceeds $30 billion in the United States, which accounts for both direct and indirect costs.10

About Entresto

Entresto is a twice-a-day medicine that reduces the strain on the failing heart. It does this by enhancing the protective neurohormonal systems (Natriuretic Peptide system) while simultaneously inhibiting the harmful effects of the overactive renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).11 Other heart failure medicines only block the harmful effects of the overactive RAAS.12 Entresto contains the neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril, and the angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) valsartan.11

Entresto is indicated in the US to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and hospitalization for heart failure in patients with chronic heart failure (NYHA Class II-IV) and reduced ejection fraction.11 Entresto is usually administered in conjunction with other heart failure therapies, in place of an Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB).11 Entresto film-coated tablets are available in three dosage strengths: 24/26 mg, 49/51 mg, and 97/103 mg (sacubitril/valsartan).11 These doses are referred to as 50 mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg in the clinical trial literature including the New England Journal of Medicine publication of the results of PARADIGM-HF. The target treatment dose of Entresto is 97/103 mg twice daily.11

Novartis is committed to providing patients with affordable access and resources through Entresto Central. For more information, please call 1-888-ENTRESTO or visit www.entresto.com.

IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION 

Entresto can harm or cause death to an unborn baby. Patients should talk to their doctor about other ways to treat heart failure if they plan to become pregnant. If a patient gets pregnant while taking Entresto, she should tell her doctor right away.

Patients are not to take Entresto if they are allergic to sacubitril or valsartan or any of the ingredients in Entresto; have had an allergic reaction including swelling of the face, lips, tongue, throat or trouble breathing while taking a type of medicine called angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB); or take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients are not to take Entresto for at least 36 hours before or after they take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients should talk with their doctor or pharmacist before taking Entresto if they are not sure if they take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients are not to take Entresto if they have diabetes and take a medicine that contains aliskiren.

Before they take Entresto, patients should tell their doctor about all of their medical conditions, including if they have kidney or liver problems; are pregnant or plan to become pregnant; are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Patients should either take Entresto or breastfeed. They should not do both.

Patients should tell their doctor about all the medicines they take, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements. They should especially tell their doctor if they take potassium supplements or a salt substitute; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); lithium; or other medicines for high blood pressure or heart problems such as an ACE inhibitor, ARB, or aliskiren.

Entresto may cause serious side effects including serious allergic reactions causing swelling of the face, lips, tongue, and throat (angioedema) that may cause trouble breathing and death. Patients are to get emergency medical help right away if they have symptoms of angioedema or trouble breathing. Patients are not to take Entresto again if they have had angioedema while taking Entresto. People who are black or who have had angioedema may have a higher risk of having angioedema if they take Entresto. Entresto may cause low blood pressure (hypotension). Patients are to call their doctor if they become dizzy or lightheaded, or they develop extreme fatigue. Entresto may cause kidney problems or an increased amount of potassium in the blood.

The most common side effects were low blood pressure, high potassium, cough, dizziness, and kidney problems.

Please see full Prescribing Information, including Boxed WARNING available at http://www.pharma.us.novartis.com/product/pi/pdf/entresto.pdf.

Patients are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit www.fda.gov/medwatch, or call 1-800-FDA-1088.

Disclaimer 

The foregoing release contains forward-looking statements that can be identified by words such as "could," "potential," "call for," "accelerate," "possible," "suggests," "expected," "may," "compelling," "endorsement," "potentially," "growing," "committed," or similar terms, or by express or implied discussions regarding potential new indications or labeling for Entresto, or regarding potential future revenues from Entresto. You should not place undue reliance on these statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the current beliefs and expectations of management regarding future events, and are subject to significant known and unknown risks and uncertainties. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those set forth in the forward-looking statements. There can be no guarantee that Entresto will be submitted or approved for any additional indications or labeling in any market, or at any particular time. Nor can there be any guarantee that Entresto will be commercially successful in the future. In particular, management's expectations regarding Entresto could be affected by, among other things, the uncertainties inherent in research and development, including unexpected clinical trial results and additional analysis of existing clinical data; unexpected regulatory actions or delays or government regulation generally; the company's ability to obtain or maintain proprietary intellectual property protection; general economic and industry conditions; global trends toward health care cost containment, including ongoing pricing pressures; unexpected safety, quality or manufacturing issues, and other risks and factors referred to in Novartis AG's current Form 20-F on file with the US Securities and Exchange Commission. Novartis is providing the information in this press release as of this date and does not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statements contained in this press release as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.

About Novartis

Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation researches, develops, manufactures and markets innovative medicines aimed at improving patients' lives. We offer a broad range of medicines for cancer, cardiovascular disease, endocrine disease, inflammatory disease, infectious disease, neurological disease, organ transplantation, respiratory disease, eye and ear care and skin conditions. The company's mission is to improve people's lives by pioneering novel healthcare solutions.

Located in East Hanover, NJ Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation is an affiliate of Novartis AG, which provides innovative healthcare solutions that address the evolving needs of patients and societies. Headquartered in Basel, Switzerland, Novartis offers a diversified portfolio to best meet these needs: innovative medicines, eye care and cost-saving generic pharmaceuticals. Novartis is the only global company with leading positions in these areas. In 2015, the Group achieved net sales of USD 49.4 billion, while R&D throughout the Group amounted to approximately USD 8.9 billion (USD 8.7 billion excluding impairment and amortization charges). Novartis Group companies employ approximately 118,000 full-time-equivalent associates. Novartis products are available in more than 180 countries around the world. For more information, please visit http://www.novartis.com

Novartis is on Twitter. Sign up to follow @Novartis at http://twitter.com/novartis.
• Fonarow GC, Hernandez AF, Solomon SD, et al. Potential Mortality Reduction with Optimal Implementation of Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor Therapy in Heart Failure. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(6):1-4. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1724
• Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey Jr DE, Colvin MM, Drazner, MH, Filippatos G, Fonarow GC, Givertz MM, Hollenberg SM, Lindenfeld J, Masoudi FA, McBride, PE, Peterson PN, Stevenson LW, Westlake C, 2016 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update on New Pharmacological Therapy for Heart Failure: An Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure, Journal of the American College of Cardiology (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.05.011.
• Gaziano TA, Fonarow GC, et al. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Sacubitril/Valsartan versus Enalapril in Heart Failure Patients with Reduced Ejection Fraction in . JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(6):1-7. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1747
• Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2016 Update: A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;133;e38-e360. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000350.
• Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, et al. Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:251–259.
• Roger VL, Weston SA, Redfield MM, et al. Trends in heart failure incidence and survival community-based population. JAMA. 2004;292:344-350
• Levy D, Kenchaiah S, Larson MG, et al. Long term trends in the incidence and survival with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(18):1397-1422.
• Weir LM, Pfuntner A, Maeda J, et al. HCUP facts and figures: statistics on hospital-based care in , 2009. : Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2011.
• Heidenreich PA, Albert NM, , et al. Forecasting the impact of heart failure in : a policy statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:606-619.
• Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240-e327.

For questions about the site or required registration, please contact: journalisthelp@thenewsmarket.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Entresto was compared to enalapril and found to be associated with — on average —  a year longer of survival as well as reduced hospital admissions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Dec. 5, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Using gene therapy, German researchers report that they managed to "correct" a malfunctioning gene responsible for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, a rare but devastating childhood disorder that leads to prolonged bleeding from even minor hits or scrapes, and also leaves these children vulnerable to certain cancers and dangerous infections.

However, one of the 10 kids in the study developed acute T-cell leukemia, apparently as a result of the viral vector that was used to insert the healthy gene. The boy is currently on chemotherapy, the study authors noted.

"This is a very good first step, but it's a little scary and we need to move to safer vectors," said Dr. Mary Ellen Conley, director of the Program in Genetic Immunodeficiencies at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn.

"The study shows proof-of-principle that gene therapy with stem cells in a genetic disorder like this has strong potential," added Paul Sanberg, a stem cell specialist who is director of the University of South Florida Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair in Tampa.

Neither Conley nor Sanberg were involved in the study, which is scheduled to be presented Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Hematology in Orlando, Fla.

According to Conley, children (mostly boys) with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) are born with an inherited genetic defect on the X chromosome that affects the number and size of platelets and makes the children remarkably susceptible to easy bleeding and infections, including different types of cancer.

Bone marrow transplants are the main treatment for the disorder which, if they succeed, basically cure the patient.

"They grow up, go to college and they cause problems," said Conley. "But they're not an easy group of patients to transplant."

Even if a good match is found, transplant recipients can go on to have more problems with infections, such as graft-versus-host disease, in which the body basically rejects the foreign elements.

"One of the long-lasting complications is the kids couldn't do this, they couldn't do that, they see themselves as different," Conley said. "Transplants are getting better but we need better therapy, there's no question."

In this study, the researchers inserted a healthy gene capable of producing WAS protein into hematopoietic stem cells (the "granddaddy" cells that give rise to different blood cells), then transferred these stem cells back into the patient using a viral vector. A viral vector is a virus that has been modified to deliver foreign genetic material into a cell.

In fact, the experiment was largely successful, with cells now able to produce WAS protein, resulting in increased platelet counts and improvement of some immune-system cells.

"This is a first step that says you can correct the disease but I think most people would look at it and say the risk of leukemia is something, and that, let's see if we can avoid that," said Conley, whose team at St. Jude is working on a therapy involving a different type of vector. "It's a good start, but I think we have better things coming down the road."

In other news from the conference, another group of German researchers have determined that people who donate peripheral blood stem cells or bone marrow to help save a life don't face any heightened risk of cancer.

Previously there had been some concern that drugs needed to get the stem cells out of the bone marrow and into the bloodstream where they could be accessed might pose a risk of leukemia.

The study was based on questionnaires returned from more than 12,500 donors, which also showed the donors tended to be in good health and were willing to donate again.

Another study found that the drug rituximab (Rituxan), used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and forms of leukemia and lymphoma, could greatly reduce graft-versus-host disease in stem cell transplant recipients.

The National Marrow Donor Program has more on Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses one of the primary existing treatments for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: bone marrow transplants. The story’s muddled overview of this treatment is likely to leave readers confused, however. The story starts off its description by saying that such transplants, if they succeed, “basically cure the disease.” It then goes on to list a number of serious complications that can plague even apparently successful transplants. So the children treated via transplant sound like they probably aren’t “cured” as the story initially states. We’ll call it satisfactory, but we wish the story was a bit clearer on this point.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A few short visits and phone calls with a nurse may be enough to help insomniacs get their zzz’s, suggests a new study of sleep-deprived older adults.

Researchers found that more than half of participants overcame chronic insomnia within a month of starting a brief behavioral treatment.

The key ingredient in the therapy, according to lead researcher Dr. Daniel Buysse of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, was a simple, somewhat counter-intuitive lesson: “When you are sleeping poorly, the most important thing you can do is spend less time in bed.”

Insomnia affects about one in every five Americans, rising to one in three among the elderly, and has been linked to a range of physical problems, from accidents to hypertension. Not surprisingly, it is also detrimental to mental health.

Three decades of research has shown cognitive behavioral therapy to be equally effective to a pill for insomnia, with fewer side effects. Yet the time and resource-intense strategy — usually involving between six- and eight hour-long appointments with a clinical psychologist - is not widely available and its cost, generally hundreds of dollars, is prohibitive for many.

Buysse and his colleagues wondered if the pill-free treatment could be shortened and simplified, providing more rapid results at a lower cost.

To find out, they studied 79 adults with chronic insomnia. Participants averaged 72 years of age and were randomly assigned to receive either printed educational material about sleep or the brief behavioral treatment consisting of one 45- to 60-minute in-person session, a 30-minute follow-up session and two 20-minute phone calls.

A mental health nurse practitioner in a regular doctor’s office focused the behavioral instruction on how to restrict time in bed and set regular sleep-wake schedules, while also discussing the biological rationale behind the strategy, including the body’s daily cycles of physical, mental and behavioral changes.

“This (therapy) has the effect of compressing your sleep into a more solid block,” Buysse told Reuters Health in an e-mail. “More consolidated sleep is more refreshing.”

Based on questionnaires and sleep diaries, the researchers found that two out of every three participants receiving the behavioral intervention responded favorably by the end of 4 weeks, while just one out of every four receiving the printed material experienced substantial improvement in their sleep.

The gap was similarly wide when the researchers looked at the number of participants who no longer met the criteria for insomnia: 55 percent versus 13 percent.

On average, for every 2.4 participants treated, one responded favorably and one overcame insomnia, report the researchers in the Archives of Internal Medicine.

These improvements were sustained for at least 6 months, and were backed up by data from a sleep monitor worn on the wrist or ankle. When the researchers looked at information from a different, more in-depth sleep monitoring system, however, they failed to find significantly better outcomes with the behavioral therapy.

The new results were similar to those previously published on the more intense cognitive behavioral therapy.

“A lot of insomniacs spend a lot of time lying in bed worrying about their sleep, among other things. They expect to have insomnia,” Dr. Thomas Neylan of the University of California, San Francisco, who wrote an accompanying commentary in the journal, told Reuters Health.

“Generally, the most expedient thing to do is just prescribe a sleeping pill,” noted Neylan.

But the drugs can pose problems, ranging from dependence or abuse to cognitive impairment during the day. And the risks may be even more pronounced among older patients, added senior author Timothy Monk, also of the University of Pittsburgh. Under the influence of the drugs, seniors may be more likely to fall and fracture a bone.

While brief behavioral treatment for insomnia is not yet generally available, Monk told Reuters Health in an e-mail that his team hopes their findings will be “an important first step in that process.”

In the meantime, Neylan offers insomniacs some advice: “If you’re not ready to fall asleep, don’t lie down in bed and try to force yourself to sleep. And if you wake up in the middle of night and don’t fall back asleep easily, get out of bed.”

“You don’t want to have any linkage between the experience of lying in bed and being awake,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 


We will credit this story for discussing the alternatives of sleeping pills and cognitive behavioral therapy. Although there was no reference to other less-intense non-drug approaches that clinicians may recommend for dealing with insomnia, there was a comment at the end of the story that offered some basic advice that readers could use on their own.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Better known as an anesthetic or as an illicit hallucinogenic drug, ketamine has also long been noted for alleviating depression. But ketamine has not been tested in a large clinical trial, and all evidence of its antidepressant effects has come from anecdotes and small studies of fewer than 100 patients. Now, in the largest study of its kind, researchers at Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences at University of California San Diego mined the FDA Adverse Effect Reporting System (FAERS) database for depression symptoms in patients taking ketamine for pain. They found that depression was reported half as often among the more than 41,000 patients who took ketamine, as compared to patients who took any other drug or drug combination for pain.

The study, published May 3 in Scientific Reports, also uncovered antidepressant effects for three other drugs typically used for other purposes -- Botox, the pain reliever diclofenac and the antibiotic minocycline.

"Current FDA-approved treatments for depression fail for millions of people because they don't work or don't work fast enough," said senior author Ruben Abagyan, PhD, professor of pharmacy. "This study extends small-scale clinical evidence that ketamine can be used to alleviate depression, and provides needed solid statistical support for wider clinical applications and possibly larger scale clinical trials."

Abagyan led the study with pharmacy students Isaac Cohen and Tigran Makunts, and Rabia Atayee, PharmD, associate professor of clinical pharmacy, all at Skaggs School of Pharmacy.

The FAERS database contains more than 8 million patient records. The research team focused on patients in the database who received ketamine, narrowing their study population down to approximately 41,000. They applied a mathematical algorithm to look for statistically significant differences in reported depression symptoms for each patient.

"While most researchers and regulators monitor the FAERS database for increased incidences of symptoms in order to spot potentially harmful drug side effects, we were looking for the opposite -- lack of a symptom," Cohen said.

The team found that the incidence of depression symptoms in patients who took ketamine in addition to other pain therapeutics dropped by 50 percent (with an error margin less than 2 percent) compared to the patients who took any other drug or drug combination for pain. Patients who took ketamine also less frequently reported pain and opioid-associated side effects, such as constipation, as compared to patients who received other pain medications.

According to Abagyan, it is possible that another factor common to patients taking ketamine was driving the antidepressant effect, such as the fact that ketamine also relieves pain. That's why they compared ketamine patients with patients taking other pain medications. That control group eliminated the possibility that people who take ketamine have less depression because they have less pain. Abagyan says it's still possible, though unlikely, the effect could be due to a still unidentified confounding factor.

Three other drugs with previously under-appreciated antidepressant effects also emerged from this analysis: Botox, used cosmetically to treat wrinkles and medically to treat migraines and other disorders; diclofenac, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID); and minocycline, an antibiotic.

After the diclofenac finding, Abagyan and team went back and looked at ketamine patients who did not also take NSAIDs and compared them to patients who took any other combination of drugs for pain except NSAIDs. Depression rates in patients taking ketamine remained low.

The researchers hypothesize that the antidepressant effects of diclofenac and minocycline may be due, at least in part, to their abilities to reduce inflammation. For Botox, the potential mechanism for reducing depression is less clear. The team is now working to separate Botox's beauty effects (which could indirectly make a person feel better emotionally) and its antidepressant effects. To do this, they are first using FAERS data to determine if collagen fillers and other cosmetic treatments similarly affect depression rates.

According to the World Health Organization, more than 300 million people experience depression worldwide. If not effectively treated, depression can become a chronic disease that increases a person's risk of mortality from suicide, heart disease or other factors. Depression is currently treated with five classes of antidepressants, most commonly serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

For financial and ethical reasons, ketamine has never been tested for its safety and effectiveness in treating depression in a large-scale clinical trial, but it reportedly works much more rapidly than standard antidepressants. Ketamine is relatively inexpensive and is covered by most health insurance plans if three other antidepressants fail.

"The approach we used here could be applied to any number of other conditions, and may reveal new and important uses for thousands of already approved drugs, without large investments in additional clinical trials," Makunts said.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that depression is currently treated with “five classes of antidepressants, most commonly serotonin uptake inhibitors.”
The release could also have included psychotherapy and other common non-pharmaceutical therapies for depression.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"This is the first time that we have used this biochip technology to test for an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease," said Emma C. Harte, PhD, a research scientist at Randox Laboratories. "This type of testing is important in our quest to understand and diagnose Alzheimer's and empower patients to understand risks, consider medication, and even make early lifestyle changes."

This test detects the presence of a protein in the blood produced by a specific variation of the apolipoprotein gene (ApoE4), which is associated with increased risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. The apolipoprotein gene is inherited from each parent and when a patient inherits the ApoE4 variant from one parent they have a three times greater risk of developing Alzheimer's disease, whereas a patient who inherits ApoE4 from both parents is eight-to-12 times more likely to develop the disease.

To verify the accuracy of the biochip test, 384 samples were analyzed and results compared to those from a standard molecular diagnostic test. Researchers from Randox Laboratories collaborated with research colleagues at the Medical University of Vienna and found that results from the two tests were in 100% agreement. As biochip tests allow clinicians and researchers to quickly run multiple tests on one sample of blood, this new test is also faster and more affordable than the standard DNA test, producing results in only three hours. This enables doctors to predict the risk of an individual developing Alzheimer's disease.

"Pairing this test with medical and family history for risk of Alzheimer's disease has the real potential to advance personalized medicine," said Harte. "This fast, accurate testing will allow doctors and patients to make more informed choices earlier to potentially slow the possible progress of Alzheimer's."

In addition to this study, researchers will present the latest in Alzheimer's disease at the AACC Annual Scientific Meeting & Clinical Lab Expo, including:
• New research explores using the level of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the brain and spinal cord as a biomarker for neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease and AD. "Cerebrospinal Fluid Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Activity Levels of Patients With Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease" (A-118)
• Researchers have shown that a specific protein in blood plasma could serve as a biomarker for early detection of AD. "Plasma neuron derived exosomal protein biomarkers in the diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease" (A-135)
• A new meta-analysis of studies over 12 year suggests that a possible relationship between thyroid function and an increased risk of dementia. "Higher FT4 or TSH Below the Normal Range are Associated with an Increased Risk of Dementia: a Meta-analysis of 10 Studies" (A-180)

Session Information 

Registration for the AACC Annual Scientific Meeting is free for members of the media. Reporters can register online here: https://www.xpressreg.net/register/aacc0716/media/landing.asp

Scientific Poster B-124: Development of a New Biochip Array for ApoE4 Classification from Plasma Samples Using Immunoassay Based Methods 

Wednesday, August 3

9:30 a.m. – 5 p.m. (presenting author in attendance from 12:30–1:30 p.m.)

Scientific Posters A-118, A-119, A-135, and A-180

Tuesday, August 2

9:30 a.m. – 5 p.m. (presenting author in attendance from 12:30–1:30 p.m.)

All scientific posters will be on display in the Terrace Ballroom at the Pennsylvania Convention Center in Philadelphia.

About the 68th AACC Annual Scientific Meeting & Clinical Lab Expo

The AACC Annual Scientific Meeting offers 5 days packed with opportunities to learn about exciting science from July 31–August 4. Plenary sessions feature the latest research on the use of and testing for cannabis, combating premature death due to preventable causes such as tobacco and alcohol, the development of an "intelligent" surgical knife, programmable bio-nano-chips, and the epigenetic causes of disease.

At the AACC Clinical Lab Expo, more than 750 exhibitors will fill the show floor of Philadelphia's Pennsylvania Convention Center, with displays of the latest diagnostic technology, including but not limited to mobile health, molecular diagnostics, mass spectrometry, point-of-care, and automation.

About AACC

Dedicated to achieving better health through laboratory medicine, AACC brings together more than 50,000 clinical laboratory professionals, physicians, research scientists, and business leaders from around the world focused on clinical chemistry, molecular diagnostics, mass spectrometry, translational medicine, lab management, and other areas of progressing laboratory science. Since 1948, AACC has worked to advance the common interests of the field, providing programs that advance scientific collaboration, knowledge, expertise, and innovation. For more information, visit www.aacc.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release makes it very clear that the new test was being compared with standard DNA testing.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago — Local bans on artery-clogging trans fats in restaurant foods led to fewer heart attacks and strokes in several New York counties, a new study suggests.

The study hints at the potential for widespread health benefits from an upcoming nationwide ban, the authors and other experts say. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2015 gave the food industry until next year to eliminate artificial trans fats from American products.

New York City enacted a restaurant ban on the fats in 2007 and several counties in the state did the same. Hospital admissions for heart attacks and strokes in those areas declined 6 percent starting three years after the bans, compared with counties without bans. The results translate to 43 fewer heart attacks and strokes per 100,000 people, said lead author Dr. Eric Brandt, a Yale University cardiology fellow.

His study was published Wednesday in JAMA Cardiology.

Trans fats, also called partially hydrogenated oils, enhance food texture and structure. They were once commonly used to make restaurant fried chicken, French fries, doughnuts and other foods and found in grocery items including cookies, crackers and margarine.

These fats can boost blood levels of unhealthy cholesterol, increasing risks for heart problems. The FDA in 2006 required them to be listed on food labels and the food industry has been switching to healthier oils.

The researchers examined hospital admissions data from 2002 to 2013 in 11 New York counties that adopted bans and in 25 counties that did not. Admissions for heart attacks and strokes declined in all counties, going from more than 800 to less than 700 per 100,000 people, but the drop was steeper in counties that enacted bans.

Alice Lichtenstein, a heart and nutrition specialist at Tufts University’s Boston campus, said the results are encouraging but that other changes could have contributed, such as smoking bans and mandatory calories on menus.

Dr. Mark Creager, former American Heart Association president, said the results echo previous studies “and are consistent with the thinking of most scientists” on potential benefits of these bans.

“Policies such as these when adapted on a nationwide level will be good for our entire population,” said Creager, director of Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center’s heart center in Lebanon, New Hampshire.

Copyright 2017 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned smoking bans and mandatory calorie counts on menus, which could be considered alternative public health measures to reduce heart disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The publication notes that approximately 9,000 people aged 50 and older were enrolled and randomized in an efficacy study designed to compare Flublok Quadrivalent to a traditional quadrivalent vaccine. People who were given Flublok Quadrivalent were over 40% less likely to develop culture-confirmed influenza. This data satisfies both pre-specified criteria for non-inferiority and superiority of Flublok over the traditional egg-based quadrivalent inactivated vaccine. Flublok Quadrivalent was approved by the FDA in October 2016 and will be available nationwide in prefilled syringes for the upcoming flu season.

"This study shows that Flublok® Quadrivalent, produced with modern recombinant technology can provide better protection against confirmed influenza-like illness among older adults than standard-dose quadrivalent influenza vaccine produced with traditional technology," said Lisa Dunkle MD, Chief Medical Officer of Protein Sciences. "We demonstrated statistically significantly better protection by Flublok based on considerably fewer people contracting the flu after vaccination with Flublok Quadrivalent. Today, we announce that these peer-reviewed results have been published in the highly respected New England Journal of Medicine. Furthermore, physicians are eligible for up to 1 hour AMA PRA category 1 CME credit for reading the article. Clearly, Flublok represents a major step forward in combating influenza on a global scale."

Flublok is the only flu vaccine made without the use of eggs and therefore is not subject to the mutations that are sometimes introduced into the vaccine during the process of egg adaptation that can cause the traditional vaccines to be ineffective (see Skowronski et al. (2014) PLOS ONE 9(3), e92153). Flublok contains three times more active ingredients than traditional vaccines and produced significantly higher immune responses to the A strains of influenza (especially H3N2) in the Flublok Quadrivalent study. Furthermore, Flublok Quadrivalent is the first and only high antigen-content quadrivalent flu vaccine that with its high efficacy makes it ideal for older adults and those with a compromised immune system. Flublok is highly purified and does not contain influenza virus, antibiotics, formaldehyde, preservatives, egg protein, latex, gluten or gelatin unlike other flu vaccines. Flublok Quadrivalent is FDA approved for adults 18 and older.

For more information about Flublok, please visit www.flublok.com.

About Protein Sciences 

Protein Sciences is a world leader in vaccine development and protein production. Our mission is our inspiration: to save lives and improve health through the creation of innovative vaccines and biopharmaceuticals.

About Flublok® 

Flublok, the world's first recombinant protein-based vaccine for the prevention of seasonal influenza disease, is approved for all adults over 18 years. FDA approved the quadrivalent formulation ("Flublok Quadrivalent") in October 2016 that will be commercially available for everyone over 18 years for the 2017/18 influenza season. Flublok is the only flu vaccine made in a 100% egg-free system using modern cell culture technology, making it unnecessary to use an infectious influenza virus, antibiotics or harsh chemicals (e.g., formaldehyde) in manufacturing. Flublok is highly purified and does not contain any preservatives (e.g., thimerosal - a form of mercury), egg proteins, gelatin or latex. In addition, Flublok contains three times more antigen than traditional flu vaccines (3x45mcg hemagglutinin protein versus 3x15mcg hemagglutinin protein). In a 2014/15 post-marketing study of 9,000 adults 50 years and older, people who received Flublok were over 40% less likely to develop cell culture confirmed influenza than people who received a traditional flu vaccine. Flublok is an exact copy of the influenza virus coat protein and is not subject to the egg-adapted mutations associated with low vaccine effectiveness (see Skowronski et al. (2014) PLOS ONE 9(3), e92153).

Healthcare professionals in the U.S. wishing to order Flublok should contact one of the following distributors:

Learn more at www.proteinsciences.com and www.flublok.com.

Flublok Safety Information 

Flublok is approved for people 18 and older to prevent influenza disease. The most common side effect from Flublok is pain at the site of injection. Headache, fatigue or muscle ache may occur. Tell the doctor if you have ever experienced Guillain-Barré syndrome (severe muscle weakness) or have had a severe allergic reaction to any component of Flublok vaccine. Vaccination with Flublok may not protect all individuals. Please see the complete Package Insert available at www.flublok.com or call 203-686-0800 for more information.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release does not list other flu vaccines by name, but does clearly describe the conventional vaccine that was compared to Flublok Quadrivalent in this study. The release also articulates what distinguishes Flublok from conventional vaccines in terms of its manufacturing and components (e.g., Flublok is made without using eggs, etc.).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Spring has barely sprung, but in most of the country, spring allergy season — triggered by the first stirrings of tree pollen — is well under way.

You can tell by the sniffles and sneezes of the afflicted. But you can also tell by the ads: TV spots selling remedies for drippy, congested noses, itchy eyes and other symptoms are in heavy rotation.

New this year: ads for Flonase, a nasal steroid spray from GlaxoSmithKline that just became available over the counter. It joins Sanofi's Nasacort, a spray in the same class that went from prescription to over-the-counter status a year ago. And they both sit on store shelves next to antihistamines such as Claritin, Allegra and Zyrtec that were prescription drugs just a few years ago. Older over-the-counter antihistamines, such as Benadryl, and decongestants, such as Sudafed and Afrin, remain available as well.

Don't expect the ads to help you sort out what might work best for you. Here's what some top allergists say you need to know about these non-prescription options.

Believe (some of) the hype about the newly-accessible steroid nasal sprays.

These drugs work by fighting inflammation and they are in the "single most effective drug class" for treating nasal allergies, according to the American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Other expert groups have made similar statements. "These are first-line treatments" that can prevent allergy symptoms, not just treat them, says Jackie Eghrari-Sabet, an allergist in Gaithersburg, Md.

But that does not mean they work for everyone, says James Sublett, a Louisville allergist and president of the allergy group. People with mild to moderate symptoms have the best chance of full relief, he says.

Possible side effects include nasal irritation and nose bleeds. Labels caution that some children using the sprays may experience slower growth, so a doctor should be consulted if a child needs them for more than two months.

When prescription drugs are first available over the counter, most consumers end up paying more, because their insurers no longer cover the cost. The non-prescription steroid nasal sprays are selling for about $17 to $23 for a one-month supply (at the typical two-squirts per nostril adult starting dose). Worth knowing: so far, insurers have continued to pay for similar prescription sprays, Eghrari-Sabet says. The various sprays have never been studied head to head, so it's impossible to say whether they vary in effectiveness, she says.

There's a right way to use these sprays.

They should be used daily during your vulnerable season or seasons, ideally starting before symptoms do, Eghrari-Sabet says. The idea is "to turn an army of inflammatory cells around before they recruit more soldiers," she says.

It's also important to administer the sprays correctly, so that they end up inside your nasal passages, not just your nose, where they might cause irritation, Sublett says. Packages contain instructions, and Sublett has an added tip: bend over and look at your toes while holding the bottle up and squirting.

These drugs target histamine. That's a chemical your body releases, causing sneezing, a runny nose and itchy eyes, when you come in contact with allergy-triggering substances. Antihistamines work faster than the steroid sprays, which can take a week or so to reach full effectiveness. They also can be cheaper, because they are available in store-brand versions. For example, Walmart sells Equate loratadine tablets (the same active ingredient as Claritin) for about $7 for 60 24-hour doses

Antihistamines make perfect sense for someone who suffers a few sneezy days each season and doesn't want to use a spray for weeks or months, Eghrari-Sabet says. Look for one that does not make you sleepy, Sublett says. It's a myth, he adds, that older, sedating antihistamines, such as Benadryl, are extra effective against nasal allergies.

Decongestants such as Sudafed work by shrinking swollen blood vessels in the nose. They can raise blood pressure and cause jitters, and some people are more susceptible than others. Some decongestant sprays such as Afrin — unlike the steroid nasal sprays — can be used for just few days at a time, because they otherwise cause rebound symptoms.

So use these medications sparingly, Sublett says.

Keep your medical providers in the loop.

Over-the-counter treatments should not take the place of professional care — especially if you have never been formally diagnosed with allergies, if you have additional medical problems or if your symptoms persist or worsen, Eghrari-Sabet and Sublett say. An allergist can test you to find out what's causing your symptoms and offer additional treatments. Those include allergy shots and, for a few patients who qualify, newer immunotherapy pills that desensitize people to grass and ragweed pollens.

Also important to remember: While medications can be helpful, the first rule of allergy control is to avoid the substances that make you sniffle and sneeze. If you are allergic to mold spores or to pollen from trees, grasses or ragweed, that means knowing when levels are high (by checking pollen.com or the National Allergy Bureau) and then taking steps such as these recommended by the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and & Immunology:
• Keep windows closed at home and in your car.
• Use air conditioning if possible.
• Try to stay indoors, and avoid mowing lawns or raking leaves.
• If you need to be outside for a long period, wear a pollen mask.
• After time outside, take a shower, shampoo your hair and change clothes.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article did a great job comparing the various over-the-counter alternatives out there, from steroid nasal sprays like Flonase to antihistamines like Claritin to decongestants like Sudafed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors love the detailed pictures created by CT scans. Patients often expect a scan. But now researchers are warning that the radiation patients get each time computerized tomography is used to detect injuries and disease will cause thousands of extra cancers in coming years.

A new study from the National Cancer Institute projects 29,000 excess cancers from the 72 million CT scans that Americans got in 2007 alone. Nearly 15,000 of those cancers could be fatal.

CT-related cancers will impose a similar burden each year — unless the number of scans and the radiation dose-per-scan can be reduced.

"Physicians [and their patients] cannot be complacent about the hazards of radiation or we risk creating a public health time bomb," says Dr. Rita Redberg, editor of Archives of Internal Medicine, which is publishing the paper in this week's issue.

Children, younger adults and women are especially susceptible. Two-thirds of the excess cancers will occur in women, the NCI researchers say.

A separate study in the journal documents needlessly high radiation exposures from CT scans at four San Francisco-area hospitals.

That study looked at actual radiation doses for 11 common types of CT scans in more than 1,100 patients. For the same body part, the doses varied enormously from one hospital to another and even within the same hospital. The researchers found a 13-fold range between the highest and lowest radiation dose.

That means many unsuspecting patients are getting considerably more radiation than they need for an adequate CT image.

"For the same body part, the same patient with abdominal pain being evaluated for possible cancer, there can be a profoundly different radiation dose," says Dr. Rebecca Smith-Bindman, a radiologist at the University of California at San Francisco who led that study.

Smith-Bindman says neither doctors nor patients appreciate the amount of radiation exposure that U.S. patients are accumulating from CT scans. The number of scans has increased at a rate of 10 percent a year recently, jumping from 3 million scans in 1980 to more than 70 million a year today.

"It's often said that the radiation dose of a chest X-ray is comparable to flying across the continent," Smith-Bindman says, referring to natural radiation exposures at high altitudes. "But a CT scan can be comparable to 500 transcontinental flights."

She adds that a single CT scan can deliver about the same radiation dose that survivors of the atomic blasts at Nagasaki and Hiroshima endured.

"I think we need to pause and think about whether the extra information [from CT scans] really helps us make a diagnosis," Smith-Bindman says. "In most cases it does, and we should be using CT scanning in those cases. But in other situations it doesn't ... and the potential for harm outweighs the benefits."

She says patients should start asking doctors if they really need a particular CT scan, and if so, whether it can be done with minimal radiation exposure. It's especially important for younger adults and parents to ask the questions.

Smith-Bindman says radiation exposures can be cut substantially by eliminating unnecessary CT scans — both initial scans and repeat or follow-up scans now often done routinely. Also some fancier CT studies, involving multiple "slices" through the body in a single examination, can be replaced by simpler CT tests, conventional X-rays or tests such as ultrasound or MRI that don't involve radiation.

Another way is to reduce the amount of radiation involved in each scan.

Dr. James Thrall, chairman of the American College of Radiology, agrees. He says at his institution, the Massachusetts General Hospital, doctors who order a CT scan or other imaging study must list the reason. A computer program feeds back an "appropriateness score." A low score indicates the test is unlikely to be necessary.

"Our experience over the last five years has been rather phenomenal," Thrall says. Instead of an annual growth rate of 12 percent in CT scans, it's now about 1 percent, lower than the hospital's annual growth in patient load. "That means we're doing fewer scans per person," he says.

To cut down on unnecessarily high radiation doses, Thrall says, the College of Radiology is also developing an "alarm" system that will alert hospitals when their CT scan exceeds an acceptable dose. That will require hospitals to feed dose data to a central computer run by the radiology group.

In the long run, experts say, newer-generation CT scanners will come equipped to prevent excessive radiation doses. But it will take a while for thousands of current machines to be replaced.

Thrall doesn't agree with the National Cancer Institute's projection of 29,000 excess cancer deaths a year from CT radiation.

"I think it's almost undoubtedly less than 29,000," he says. "But in one respect, it doesn't matter whether it's 29,000 or 1,000. There are opportunities for us in radiology to do all the good things we do using less radiation."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions several other testing options, such as simpler CT tests, conventional X-rays, ultrasound or MRI that involve less or no radiation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, July 24, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- The active ingredient in pot that gets you high can calm agitation in people with advanced Alzheimer's disease, a small new study suggests.

Canadian researchers found that a form of synthetic THC significantly decreased agitation in a small group of Alzheimer's patients, working even better than the drugs now used.

"This is the first clinical trial to show that a cannabinoid can decrease agitation," said lead researcher Krista Lanctot, a senior scientist at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center in Toronto.

However, many study patients suffered from sedation due to the drug, noted Keith Fargo, director of scientific programs and outreach at the Alzheimer's Association.

"We would love to see this study done in a larger group of people, to see if it continues to be effective in a larger group, and how worried we need to be about this sedation side effect," Fargo said.

Agitation is a frequent symptom of advanced Alzheimer's, Lanctot explained. Doctors struggle to control it through off-label use of drugs like antipsychotics and anticonvulsants.

Agitated patients yell, scream, pace and wander, she said. They also can become physically aggressive, striking out at people and hurting themselves or others.

"You're going to find one in five outpatients with it. But when you get to the long-term care facilities, about 50 percent of inpatients will have agitation," Lanctot said. "It's actually a big treatment challenge. The drugs we have now do not work very well and they're associated with an increase in mortality."

The off-label drugs used to treat Alzheimer's are indeed a bit dodgy. For example, only one person out of five to 14 treated with antipsychotics actually experiences a decrease in agitation, Lanctot said. And for every nine to 25 people helped, one will die.

But Lanctot and her colleagues suspected that cannabinoids might help control agitation, given that natural cannabinoids in the brain decrease as Alzheimer's enters its advanced stages.

"We know cannabis has several effects that might be good for people with agitation," Lanctot said. "It has a calming effect. It helps with weight loss because it helps with appetite. It's also used for pain."

The synthetic THC drug, nabilone, is approved in Canada for treating nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy. It comes in capsule form.

"It's a milder form of TCH" compared to whole-leaf marijuana, Lanctot said. "We hoped it wouldn't have the side effects associated with cannabis, but would have the calming effects."

During the clinical trial, 39 patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease received nabilone for six weeks to treat their clinically significant agitation, followed by six weeks with an inactive placebo.

"We had a significant decrease in agitation. The decrease we saw was larger than is seen with the currently used medications," Lanctot said.

Patients underwent significant overall improvement in their other behavioral symptoms, and had small benefits in their brain function and nutrition during the study. Their caregivers also reported reduced levels of stress, according to Lanctot.

These benefits came with a downside, though. About 45 percent of patients experienced sedation with nabilone, compared with 16 percent for placebo, the findings showed.

Lanctot and Fargo do not recommend that relatives or friends of those with agitated Alzheimer's provide them medical marijuana to ease their suffering.

"This trial tested a synthetic analog of THC. It's not THC, and it's certainly not whole-plant marijuana," Fargo said. "There's virtually no data on whole-plant marijuana, whether or not it's effective or safe in people with Alzheimer's disease."

A form of synthetic THC is available in the United States, called dronabinol and sold under the trade name Marinol, Lanctot said. It's used as an appetite stimulant for people with AIDS and an anti-nausea remedy for chemotherapy patients.

Marinol is now being tested for its usefulness in treating Alzheimer's symptoms, Lanctot said. People interested in trying it should reach out to one of the big clinical trials; Johns Hopkins is one of the centers testing Marinol.

"We wouldn't want to change clinical practice based on one study," Lanctot added.

The study was to be presented Tuesday at the Alzheimer's Association meeting in Chicago. Research presented at medical meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Alzheimer's Society has more about cannabis and Alzheimer's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: It’s clearly explained that a major rationale for this study is that the existing pharmaceutical approaches in treating agitated Alzheimer’s patients – mainly off label use of antipsychotics and anti-seizure meds — don’t work very well and have significant side effects.
There are behavioral approaches to agitation but, given the topic of this article, not including them seems reasonable.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NIH scientists adapt new brain disease test for Parkinson’s, dementia with Lewy bodies

National Institutes of Health scientists developing a rapid, practical test for the early diagnosis of prion diseases have modified the assay to offer the possibility of improving early diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. The group, led by NIH’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), tested 60 cerebral spinal fluid samples, including 12 from people with Parkinson’s disease, 17 from people with dementia with Lewy bodies, and 31 controls, including 16 of whom had Alzheimer’s disease. The test correctly excluded all the 31 controls and diagnosed both Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies with 93 percent accuracy.

Importantly, test results were available within two days, compared to related assays that require up to 13 days. The group conducted the tests using Real-Time Quaking-Induced Conversion (RT-QuIC), an assay developed and refined over the past decade at NIAID’s Rocky Mountain Laboratories. Scientists from the University of California San Diego, University of Verona in Italy, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, and the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, collaborated on the project. The research findings were published in Acta Neuropathologica Communications.

Multiple neurological disorders, including Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, involve the abnormal clumping of a protein called alpha-synuclein into brain deposits called Lewy bodies. The pathological processes in these diseases resembles prion diseases in mammal brains. Like prion diseases, Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies result in progressive deterioration of brain functions and, ultimately, death. Parkinson’s disease is about 1,000 times more common than prion diseases, affecting up to 1 million people in the United States, with 60,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Lewy body dementia affects an estimated 1.4 million people in the United States, according to the Lewy Body Dementia Association.

Early and accurate diagnoses of these brain disorders is essential for developing treatments and identifying patients eligible for clinical trials. The diseases typically progress for years before symptoms appear, and once they do, distinguishing one disease from another can be difficult.

The NIAID group continues to adapt the RT-QuIC assay to detect additional types of neurological diseases with greater accuracy using the least invasive patient sample possible — whether that is blood, skin, nasal brushings, or other samples. The group also has trained many international colleagues to use and advance the test.

B Groveman et al. Rapid and ultra-sensitive quantitation of disease-associated α-synuclein seeds in brain and cerebrospinal fluid by αSyn RT-QuIC. Acta Neuropathologica Communications DOI: 10.1186/s40478-018-0508-2 (2018).

Byron Caughey, Ph.D., a senior investigator in NIAID’s Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, is available to comment on this study.

This research was supported in part by NIH funding awards ZIA AI001086-08, AGO5131, and PHS P30-AG010133.

NIAID conducts and supports research—at NIH, throughout the United States, and worldwide—to study the causes of infectious and immune-mediated diseases, and to develop better means of preventing, diagnosing and treating these illnesses. News releases, fact sheets and other NIAID-related materials are available on the NIAID website.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release says “test results were available within two days, compared to related assays that require up to 13 days.”
However, it doesn’t say how the faster test compares in terms of accuracy. The study says early detection is helpful in part because “the accuracy of diagnoses based on other clinical indices is poorest in the earlier phases of disease.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Douglas P. Zipes, a professor at the Indiana University School of Medicine in Indianapolis, said the new device could someday displace existing models used in many patients Every month, about 10,000 patients in this country get a defibrillator, either for the first time or as replacements for devices whose batteries have worn out.

In recent years, the safety of defibrillator wires has come in particular focus because a model made by Medtronic has been prone to fracturing. Hundreds of patients who received the model have had to undergo new operations to replace it. Also, scar tissue often builds up around intravenous wires, a process that can make removing and replacing them difficult or dangerous.

Dr. Bardy said in a telephone interview that the deaths of several patients many years ago because of wire-related injuries were a factor in his interest in developing the new device.

“You are looking at a therapy that can avert, we hope, complications and be as effective,” he said.

In the study published Wednesday, Dr. Bardy and others reported that the new device had undergone several successful initial trials, including one in which it was used for a year in about 60 patients.

The device is being developed by Cameron Health, a small company in San Clemente, Calif., that was co-founded by Dr. Bardy. Since the cardiologist began work on the project about a decade ago, the defibrillator he helped design has gone through several iterations.

The device will not be suitable for a significant number of heart patients, particularly those who require units that also include a pacemaker, which regulates a heart that is beating too fast or too slowly.

But Dr. Bardy estimated that the device could work in about 25 percent of patients who now get a defibrillator. These are largely patients at risk, because of genetic factors or certain types of heart diseases, for a type of erratic cardiac rhythm that can cause sudden death. Dr. Bardy said the cost of the new device is about the same as a standard defibrillator. However, he said it could help reduce health care costs, because implanting it is much simpler.

Before the device can be sold here, Cameron Health will have to submit more extensive human trial data to the F.D.A.. Dr. Bardy said a larger study of the device has just begun in this country and overseas and that it will most likely take a year or more to assemble data from it for the agency’s review.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 
The story makes clear that, depending on the results of further trials, the new device could be an incremental improvement on existing implantable defibrillators for certain patients. It also notes that it does not offer the heart pacemaker function of some existing implantable defibrillators.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, June 15, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Reiterating a recommendation last made in 2008, an influential U.S. panel of health experts is advocating that regular colon cancer screening begin at age 50 and continue until at least age 75.

However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force stopped short of saying any one screening method was better than another.

"There are multiple screening options for colorectal cancer that reduce the risk of dying from the disease. We encourage people to choose the best option for them, in consultation with their clinician," former Task Force member Dr. Douglas Owens said Wednesday in a USPSTF news release.

The panel's reticence to choose one option over another may be at odds with the preference of many doctors, who often advise colonoscopy as the "gold standard" test.

Dr. Arun Swaminath is one of them.

"There is only one test -- colonoscopy -- that can both diagnose a polyp/cancer and remove or sample it at the same time," said Swaminath, who directs the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"This is key, because a positive stool test plus stool DNA test (such as Cologuard), or a positive imaging test (such as CT colonoscopy) will still require a follow up colonoscopy to confirm and treat the problem," he explained.

For its part, the American Cancer Society recommends colonoscopy screening once every 10 years, beginning at age 50, or one of a number of other tests at more frequent intervals.

In drafting its updated colon cancer screening guidelines, the USPSTF reviewed data on several screening strategies. Besides colonoscopy, these included flexible sigmoidoscopy (an invasive procedure that penetrates less far than colonoscopy); CT colonography (a scan of the colon); traditional fecal occult blood tests (looking for blood in stool); and the recently approved Cologuard DNA-based stool test.

The panel said there were no comparison studies that suggested that any of the screening methods were any more effective than others. There are varying amounts of proof supporting the effectiveness of each, and each method has its advantages and limitations, the panelists said.

And what about colon cancer screening for the elderly?

In its statement, the panel said that "for some adults ages 76 to 85, the benefits of screening are smaller, and the potential for harm greater. However, some people in this age group may benefit, especially if they have never been screened before and are healthy enough to undergo treatment if cancer is found."

For this older group, the USPSTF recommends that decisions on screening be made during consultations between the patient and his or her doctor.

All of the recommendations are specific to symptom-free people 50 years of age or older with an average risk colorectal cancer, the panel stressed. People with disorders or medical histories that raise their odds for colon cancer may need more rigorous screening, the USPSTF said.

The updated recommendation was published online June 16 in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

"Evidence convincingly shows screening for colorectal cancer works, but not enough people are taking advantage of this highly effective service," said Owens, a general internist at the Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System and a professor at Stanford University.

The USPSTF notes that only one-third of eligible adults in the United States are screened for colon cancer, and more need to take advantage of this effective method of prevention.

Colorectal cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer death in the United States. This year about 134,000 people in the country will be diagnosed with the disease, and about 49,000 will die from it., the panel said

The USPSTF is an independent, volunteer panel of experts that makes recommendations about the effectiveness of specific preventive health services.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on colon cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story lists all the screening techniques the USPSTF looked at. It notes that the report intentionally did not rank the techniques and includes a dissenting opinion from a physician who was not part of the task force.
It was also worth mentioning that an average risk person who is informed about the screening may chose not to be screened as a reasonable choice, but only as part of a shared decision making process with her/his doctor.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — An international team led by researchers at the Austrian Institute of Molecular Biotechnology (IMBA) in Vienna and the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore discovered that genetically determined breast cancer can be largely prevented by blocking a bone gene. An already approved drug could be quickly available and would then be the first breast cancer prevention drug.

About one in eight women will develop invasive breast cancer over the course of her lifetime. Causes can be the use of synthetic sex hormones and other environmental factors, but also gene mutations like in the BRCA1 gene (BReast CAncer). US actress Angelina Jolie who underwent a preventive double mastectomy is the most famous carrier of a „faulty“ BRCA1 gene. On average, women with this mutation have an up to 87% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. Tumors usually develop early in life. Until now, prophylactic surgery is the only procedure which significantly reduces the breast cancer risk, but which is also often associated with postoperative complications.

In 2010, Josef Penninger, the scientific director of IMBA in Vienna and his team have shown that sex hormones can trigger breast cancer (Schramek et al., Nature) through proteins called RANKL and its receptor RANK, which are key factors in bone metabolism. RANKL and RANK also link sex hormones to breast cells by providing signals telling the breast cells to grow. This occurs normally in every woman during pregnancy and the menstruation cycle. However, if deregulated, mammary cells start to divide and multiply and fail to die when they should, ultimately resulting in breast cancer.

A multinational research effort now made the discovery that RANKL is also the main driver of BRCA1 mutation-driven breast cancer. In the current study, Verena Sigl, graduate student from Penninger's research group, showed that blocking the RANKL/RANK system in BRCA1 mutant mice led to largely normal mammary glands whereas invasive carcinomas could be found in the control group. To determine the relevance of their results for humans, scientists in Vienna and Toronto isolated breast tissue cells from women who had undergone preventive mastectomy because of their BRCA1 mutation. In the human cell culture, too, RANKL inhibition led to a significant reduction of growth and spreading of breast tissue cells. Moreover, the scientists – together with colleagues in Barcelona and from the CIMBA* consortium mapping more than 23,000 women – showed that genetic variants in the RANK gene are associated with a higher risk of developing breast cancer in women who carry BRCA1 and also BRCA2 mutations.

"Our finding is so exciting because there is already an approved drug against RANKL called „Denosumab”. It is an antibody with very few side effects, which binds tightly to RANKL, thereby inhibiting its ability to act. Based on our discovery, the already approved drug Denosumab or other future drugs that will block RANKL/RANK, could be used for breast cancer prevention in BRCA mutation carriers," explains Verena Sigl.

Scientists at the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore have already tried the preventive use of a RANKL blocking drug in mice. Animals carrying BRCA1 mutations were divided into two groups. In the control group multiple early breast cancer lesions developed. The second group received RANKL blockade treatment for prevention with the result that virtually no malignant changes in breast tissue could be observed even over a longer period of observation.

Careful phase III clinical trials are now needed to confirm the efficacy in humans. Thereafter, any woman who has been tested positive for a BRCA1 mutation could take RANKL blockade as prevention measure to reduce her dramatically increased breast cancer risk. Josef Penninger adds: “This work is a great example of an international collaboration of many scientists with one grand vision: Prevention of breast cancer. Cancer prevention is one of the key issues we face in medicine today, a world where much fewer women will get breast cancer in the first place. We have also shown that RANKL/RANK are critically involved in sex hormone-driven breast cancer. If the uncovered mechanism indeed works in the prevention of breast cancer in high risk patients, this could possibly be used to prevent breast cancer in general. One door for breast cancer prevention has now been opened and this can be tested very fast.”

The present work is the result of international collaboration. Scientists from Austria (IMBA, AKH Wien) participated as well as researchers from the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore and the University of Maryland-Baltimore County, Baltimore, USA; Toronto, Canada and Barcelona, Spain. See original publication for details.

Josef Penninger’s studies at IMBA are largely supported by the 7.4 million US $ "Innovator Award" through the "US Department of Defense”.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions prophylactic surgery as the only current method for reducing breast cancer risk. It doesn’t compare denosumab to mastectomy nor to bisphosphonates, which are other drugs that interfere with RANKL proteins and RANK receptors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Chicago) - Eating a meal of seafood or other foods containing omega-3 fatty acids at least once a week may protect against age-related memory loss and thinking problems in older people, according to a team of researchers at Rush University Medical Center and Wageningen University in the Netherlands.

Their research findings were published in the May 4 online issue of Neurology, the medical journal of the American Academy of Neurology. The study was supported by the National Institute on Aging and the Judith Zwartz Foundation.

The age-related memory loss and thinking problems of participants in the study who reported eating seafood less than once a week declined more rapidly compared to those who ate at least one seafood meal per week.

"This study helps show that while cognitive abilities naturally decline as part of the normal aging process, there is something that we can do to mitigate this process," says Martha Clare Morris, ScD, a Rush nutritional epidemiologist and senior author of the paper.

Four types of seafood, five types of brain function

The researchers followed 915 people with a mean age of 81.4 years for an average of five years. At study enrollment, none had signs of dementia. The participants were recruited from people already taking part in the Rush Memory and Aging Project, a study of residents of more than 40 retirement communities and senior public housing units across northern Illinois, plus older adults identified through church groups and social service agencies.

During the course of the study, each person received annual, standardized testing for cognitive ability in five areas -- episodic memory, working memory, semantic memory, visuospatial ability and perceptual speed. The study group also completed annual food frequency questionnaires, allowing the researchers to compare participants' reported seafood intake with changes in their cognitive abilities as measured by the tests.

The questionnaires included four types of seafood: tuna sandwiches; fish sticks, fish cakes and fish sandwiches; fresh fish as a main dish; and shrimp, lobster and crab. The participants were divided into two groups: those who ate at least one of those seafood meals per week and those who ate less than one of those seafood meals per week.

Participants in the higher seafood consumption group ate an average of two seafood meals per week. Those in the lower group ate an average of 0.5 meals per week.

Seafood is the direct nutrient source of a type of omega-3 fatty acid (docosahexaenoic acid) that is the main structural component of the brain. While epidemiologic studies have shown the importance of seafood and omega-3 fatty acids in preventing dementia, few prior studies have examined their associations with specific types of cognitive ability.

In the new Neurology article, the researchers report associations between seafood consumption and two of the areas of cognitive ability that they tested. People who ate more seafood had reduced rates of decline in the semantic memory, which is memory of verbal information. They also had slower rates of decline in a test of perceptual speed, or the ability to quickly compare letters, objects and patterns.

The study did not find a significant difference in the rate of decline in episodic memory (recollection of personal experiences), working memory (short-term memory used in mental function in the immediate present) and visuospatial ability (comprehension of relationships between objects).

The results were the same after researchers adjusted for other factors that could affect memory and thinking skills, such as education, physical activity, smoking and participating in mentally stimulating activities.

Further, the protective association of seafood was even stronger among individuals with a common genotype (APOE-ε4) that increases the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. The APOE is a gene involved in cholesterol transport to neurons. About 20 percent of the population carries the APOE-ε4 gene, although not everyone who has the gene will develop Alzheimer's disease.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story says that “researchers adjusted for other factors that could affect memory and thinking skills, such as education, physical activity, smoking and participating in mentally stimulating activities.” It doesn’t tell us which are potentially good (and which are bad), but it’s sufficient for a Satisfactory rating.
The release would have been stronger if it had addressed the question (probably on some on readers’ minds) about whether fatty acid supplements could possibly have the same effect that the researchers observed with seafood consumption. These supplements are widely used, not to mention costly, so this may have been worth including.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - U.S. researchers say they have found clear signs that blood clots in the lungs are being overdiagnosed, exposing patients to potentially dangerous side effects from unnecessary drugs.

Using national data, the researchers found the rate of so-called pulmonary embolisms, or PEs, nearly doubled with the introduction of a new powerful diagnostic test more than a decade ago.

Yet there was only a slight drop in deaths from the condition over the same period, suggesting many of the clots were too small to cause harm.

“Rather than an epidemic of disease, we think the increased incidence of PE reflects an epidemic of diagnostic testing that has created overdiagnosis,” the researchers write in the Archives of Internal Medicine.

It’s been estimated that more than 600,000 Americans have a pulmonary embolism each year. The condition usually occurs when a blood clot travels from the legs to the lungs, sometimes with fatal results.

But with increasingly sophisticated tools, doctors may be spotting clots that would never have been fatal in the first place.

One such tool is called a CT chest scan, which produces detailed images with high-dose x-rays and is being used in millions of patients every year in the U.S.

In the years before 1998, when the technique was introduced, 62 per 100,000 Americans were diagnosed with a pulmonary embolism annually. After 1998, that number rose to 112 per 100,000.

The number of deaths caused by the condition dropped only little, however: from 12.3 per 100,000 in 1998 to 11.9 per 100,000 in 2006.

“This is consistent with overdiagnosis of pulmonary embolisms that may have caused very little harm, may not have caused death,” said Dr. Renda Soylemez Wiener of Boston University, who worked on the study.

On the other hand, the blood-thinning drugs used to treat blood clots increase the risk of bleeding in the brain or gastrointestinal tract, for example.

According to the new results, such complications rose from three to five per 100,000 people hospitalized with PE per year after doctors began using chest CT scans.

The new findings add to other evidence showing that medical testing is on the rise across the U.S., although in many cases the impact on overall health remains unclear.

CT scans expose patients to radiation, for example, which can increase the likelihood of developing cancer. And the dyes used to enhance the scan also cause kidney damage in a significant portion of people.

“I think doctors should think carefully about the pretest probability of a pulmonary embolism before they order this test,” Wiener told Reuters Health.

Yet there is no easy solution at this point, because untreated blood clots can be fatal, she added.

“Right now, it is a difficult place for the patient to be in,” Wiener said.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The dilemma was framed appropriately at the end:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Detective Thomas Tobin was busting bad guys for the New York City Police, he never imagined that his toughest adversary would turn out to be … pain.

"What I usually have constantly is a dull aching crushing pain like deep in my bones, as if my shin is in a vice or somebody is standing on my foot," he told CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook.

It all started 10 years ago after an operation for a knee injury.

"It was life-changing. I went from working constantly to not working at all," he said.

For years, his only relief was a cocktail of prescribed medications.

"I take about 35 pills a day," he said. "Every day."

Now he's trying something that might seem shocking: an electrical current applied to his head - part of a clinical trial at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.

It's called TDCS, Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation. A small electrical current seems to work by affecting pain centers deep within the brain, somehow muffling the perception of pain. The main side effect so far is slight scalp irritation.

"In some way that nobody understands and still seems rather magical, pain might be reduced," said Dr. Russell Portenoy.

The idea dates back 2,000 years, when a Roman physician found he could relieve gout and headache by placing an electric fish on the scalp.

Since then, the technique has been refined.

"It's very early," Portenoy said. "And we don't know how effective it will be. We think it will be very safe."

Thirty years ago, electrodes were surgically implanted deep within the brain. Years later, on the surface. This new approach places them right on the scalp.

This kind of surface stimulation has shown promise in small studies of patients with fibromyalgia and spinal cord injury.

"The idea is when you get the treatment and it is successful and the pain gets better then you can start cutting down the on the medication, and see how low you can go" said Dr. Richard Cruciani.

Every few months, Tobin gets treatments 20 minutes a day for five days. He says his pain drops significantly after therapy and then slowly returns over time.

"I am in a lot less pain today and now it just feels as though I have a sunburn that is a few days old," he said.

This therapy is being tested at several centers around the world and more study is needed, but this new variation on an ancient concept is promising -- using electricity to try to zap the perception of pain.

Could this could work for all kinds of pain?

"That's the hope," says Lapook. "Whatever the cause, it dials down the pain on the brain center. With chronic pain you have to throw the kitchen sink at it. That means integrative medicine, acupuncture, massage, medication in as low doses as possible."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The reporter does an excellent job at the end of the piece describing the wide range of treatments used for serious chronic pain–and that multiple approaches are often required. 
He also makes clear that TDCS would be one treatment to add to the arsenal, not a breakthrough that would make other options obsolete. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Peramivir is given intravenously, making it usable by hospitalized patients who are too ill to take two approved flu drugs that work against the virus in similar ways — Tamiflu by Roche, which is typically given as a pill, or Relenza from GlaxoSmithKline, which is inhaled.

Late Thursday, the government announced orders for intravenous versions of Tamiflu and Relenza, which are much cheaper — a development that could force shares of BioCryst to give up some of their gains on Friday.

Peramivir, still being tested in clinical trials, is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for general use. But on Oct. 23, the F.D.A. granted authority for the drug to be used in emergencies for patients hospitalized with H1N1 flu who cannot take or do not benefit from Tamiflu or Relenza.

Before that, peramivir had been available only through a more cumbersome “compassionate use” procedure. Of the 32 patients who received the drug that way, 29 were still alive, BioCryst said in late October.

Although there are still questions about peramivir’s true effectiveness, some critics say the government moved too slowly to make the drug available, and that even now, access is too restricted. For each patient, doctors must call an 800 number or fill out a form on a Web site run by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The drug is then sent overnight from a central stockpile.

“If you have a critically ill patient, to delay therapy, it’s just incomprehensible to me,” said Dr. Richard Whitley, a professor at the University of Alabama and the president of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. He said the drug should be distributed so that hospitals could have it in stock.

But Dr. Nicole Lurie, assistant secretary for preparedness and response at the Department of Health and Human Services, said the limited supplies made more general distribution impossible. Some doctors said they were satisfied with the existing system.

“I think it’s fairly accessible,” said Dr. Thomas M. File Jr., chief of infectious diseases at Summa Health System in Akron, Ohio, who has treated a pregnant woman with peramivir. Some of the push to make the drug more widely available is coming from investors in BioCryst, including Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, the prominent Silicon Valley venture capital firm. John Doerr, the company’s technology guru, was in Washington this week making the case for greater availability of peramivir, according to a person who met with him there.

Other investors — both supporters of BioCryst stock and those betting the price will fall — have commented at government meetings on flu preparations, often without revealing their financial interests.

Anecdotes like Ms. Gurno’s aside, the efficacy of peramivir is still in question, according to the government. While some clinical trials showed the drug had an effect in resolving flu symptoms, others did not show statistically significant differences between peramivir and either a placebo or Tamiflu.

The question for both investors and federal authorities is how much more of the drug BioCryst can sell. So far, the order has been far less than some investors had hoped, though the price of the order announced Thursday was higher than expected.

Dr. Lurie, the federal official, said there had been 237 requests to use the drug since the emergency use authorization was granted nearly two weeks ago. Many doctors want to provide the treatment for 10 days instead of the recommended 5, she said, so the 10,000 courses the government ordered might actually treat as few as 5,000 patients.

The government has the right to buy up to 30,000 more treatment courses at the same price.

BioCryst says it will have perhaps 40,000 more treatment courses available within a few weeks, and a total of 120,000 by the end of the year. It also says it has signed up partners to try to win sales in Brazil, Mexico, Israel and China.

“We’re getting a lot of interest from countries outside the United States,” Jon P. Stonehouse, the company’s chief executive, said in an interview Thursday.

Shionogi, a Japanese drug company with licensing rights from BioCryst, ran its own clinical trials and this week applied for approval to sell the drug in Japan as a treatment for everyday flu, in competition with Tamiflu.

But in the United States, BioCryst plans to try to win approval for treatment only of hospitalized patients. It is now beginning phase 3 trials — the last stage before seeking F.D.A. approval.

Virtually all the money to develop the drug comes from $180 million in grants from the Department of Health and Human Services. Yet the company gets to keep as profit anything it makes from selling the drug to the federal government or to other governments. Mr. Stonehouse defended the price of the drug, saying it would save the health system money by getting patients out of intensive care earlier. “The cost of being in the I.C.U. and on a ventilator is extremely high,” he said.

But peramivir will soon have competition. The federal government said late Thursday that it had also ordered 10,000 treatment courses each of intravenous versions of Tamiflu and Relenza, with options to buy 30,000 more courses of each.

Those drugs could not be used, however, until they received emergency use authorizations from the F.D.A.

The government is paying an average of only $450 a course for those other drugs — only one-fifth of what it is paying for peramivir.

Right now, Dr. Lurie said, peramivir is the only drug that can be used intravenously so the government had to pay a high price. “I would say that one of the things that happens in the market when you have competition is that the price drops.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 


The story makes clear that the approved antiviral flu drugs are Tamiflu and Relenza.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For two decades, Patricia DiGiusto struggled with severe asthma. Powerful medications and frequent use of her inhaler could not prevent repeated trips to the emergency room.

On one particularly bad night, Ms. DiGiusto watched from her hospital bed as doctors and nurses prepared to insert plastic tubing down her windpipe to help her breathe. Gasping for air, she was certain she would not survive.

“I’ll never forget that feeling,” said Ms. DiGiusto, 65, a speech pathologist in Braintree, Mass. “The feeling that I’m never going to see my kids or husband again and that asthma is finally going to get me.”

Two years ago, Ms. DiGiusto’s doctor told her about a new procedure called bronchial thermoplasty, the first non-drug therapy approved by the Food and Drug Administration for patients with severe asthma.

During the procedure, a doctor guides a bronchoscope into a patient’s airways. There, it heats the lungs to 149 degrees Fahrenheit — cooler than a cup of coffee, but warm enough to shrink the smooth muscle in the airways, which swells during an asthma attack and restricts breathing. After the procedure, the airways no longer are so prone to constricting, studies show. Asthma patients suffer fewer attacks and need fewer hospital visits.

Ms. DiGiusto had the procedure in March 2011. Since then, she has ended most of her medications and has not had a single asthma attack. “I’m a language therapist,” she said, “but I can’t even think of the word to describe how much better this has made my life.”

Across the country, about 24 million people suffer from asthma. Every year, about 3,400 die because of it.

Avoiding allergens and using inhaled medications are enough to keep asthma under control in most patients. But for the minority with severe persistent asthma, medication and lifestyle changes are not enough. Frequent hospital trips are almost inevitable, and powerful steroids like prednisone — which can cause thinning bones, cataracts, depression and other debilitating side effects — become a necessity.

Nationwide, asthma treatment costs exceed $10 billion a year, and over half of that is spent on severe asthmatics, who make up only 10 percent of the asthma population.

Doctors say bronchial thermoplasty has given them a new weapon in the battle against severe asthma, and many patients call it life-changing. But the procedure is expensive, costing around $20,000, and insurers have been reluctant to cover it. As a result, many people who need it, doctors say, are forced to go without it.

“For those of us in the field who work with severe asthmatics and see how limited they are, it’s frustrating because we have this new therapy, we’ve seen it work, and the data says it works,” said Dr. Roy St. John, a pulmonary disease specialist at Columbus Pulmonary and Critical Care in Ohio. “But the big insurers have all denied it.”

Although bronchial thermoplasty was approved by the F.D.A. only two years ago, clinical studies on it began in 2000. Since then, about 650 patients across the country have had the procedure.

It takes place in three steps, each separated by about three weeks. Each time, a different section of the lungs is treated. Some patients report temporary coughing, mucus and other respiratory symptoms brought on by irritation of airways.

But several five-year studies showed no long-term safety issues. And researchers at Washington University School of Medicine found that compared with a control group, bronchial thermoplasty patients saw their asthma attacks drop by a third, their emergency room visits fall by 84 percent, and the number of days they lost from work and school drop by 66 percent.

“This isn’t a cure, but it is definitely a breakthrough,” said Dr. Pratik S. Patel, director of Interventional Pulmonary Medicine at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center in New Jersey. “It’s not going to get rid of asthma, but it is going to reduce symptoms and hospitalizations and make patients more functional in their daily life.” For now, the procedure is only for severe asthmatics, who — unlike a vast majority of asthma patients — cannot keep flare-ups at bay with standard medications, said Dr. Kyle Hogarth, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Chicago who was involved in clinical studies of the treatment.

“There are millions and millions of asthmatics,” he said. “There will not be millions of thermoplasty patients.”

Still, even patients with severe asthma often are denied insurance coverage for the procedure. Susan Pisano, a spokeswoman for America’s Health Insurance Plans, the industry trade group, said insurers are awaiting the results of an additional five-year clinical trial, required by the F.D.A. when it approved bronchial thermoplasty. That trial will not be completed until at least 2018.

Until then, Ms. Pisano said, many insurers are denying coverage on the grounds the procedure is experimental. “The issue here for health plans is the long-term safety and efficacy have yet to be established,” she said.

But three five-year studies have already been completed. Many asthma specialists believe that insurers are taking a shortsighted approach. The one-time cost of $20,000, they say, is dwarfed by the tens of thousands of dollars in hospital bills and medication costs that a severe asthmatic can easily accumulate in a single year.

One such patient, Alberto Gaulion, 68, a retired importer in Miami, estimated that for much of the last decade, his insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield, spent about $50,000 a year on his medical care.

“Every two or three weeks I had to go to the hospital,” he said, “and I was taking everything that was on the market. I was on a cocktail of drugs.”

Blue Cross would not cover the procedure for him, so Mr. Gaulion paid out of pocket when he had it in 2010. Since then, he has had no hospital visits and no asthma attacks, and takes only one medication instead of five.

“Now I can breathe,” he said, “and I’m saving my insurance company a fortune.”

Dr. Charlene McEvoy, a director of an asthma center run by Health Partners, the largest health plan in Minnesota, believed in thermoplasty enough to push the insurer to start covering it. Dr. McEvoy argued that it made economic sense, and earlier this year Health Partners agreed.

“When plans look at the cost savings, I think they’re going to cover it,” said Dr. McEvoy, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Minnesota. “You have to show that there’s a return on investment.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that avoiding allergens and using inhaled medications are enough to keep asthma under control in most patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study has shown how the body's immune system responds to the new shingles vaccine, Shingrix, making it more than 90% effective at protecting against the virus.

The trial included more than 15,000 participants across 18 countries in Europe, North America, Latin America, Asia and Australia. Participants in the trial received two doses of the vaccine, with the doses given two months apart.

Lead researcher Professor Tony Cunningham from the Westmead Institute for Medical Research said the study shows that the vaccine stimulates production of a specific immune memory cell (CD4 T cells), generating a strong and sustained protection against the virus.

"The body has two types of immunity: protein antibodies and white blood cells known as T cells. As the virus circulates around the body, antibodies block it from entering cells. But when the virus does get into cells your T cells try to kill those infected cells.

"Our research shows that the vaccine stimulates your immune system to produce more antibodies and it generates a 24-fold increase in T cells. This is 12 times higher than other less effective shingles vaccines.

The research, published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases, shows that Shingrix offers protection for up to four years, but Professor Cunningham believes it will last much longer.

"The second dose of the vaccine is important to ensure long-term protection," Professor Cunningham said.

"The efficacy is approximately 90% for all age groups--even for those over 70 years of age.

"This is quite remarkable because there are no other vaccines that perform nearly so well for people in their 70s and their 80s. We are seeing results comparable to those of childhood vaccinations.

"What's particularly exciting, though, is that 90% of recipients had an increased immune response sustained across the 3-year duration of the study.

"We anticipate that this protection will actually last much, much longer. We are now measuring the efficacy of the vaccine over the next 10 years and are very optimistic about the results," he said.

Shingrix is different from most other vaccines. Many vaccines are made from a weakened form of the virus, but Shingrix is made from just a single protein--known as glycoprotein E--that comes from the outer shell of the herpes zoster virus.

The vaccine also contains an adjuvant--a substance that helps your body fight off the virus. It is the first shingles vaccine to combine a non-live antigen with a specifically designed adjuvant.

Shingles is a viral infection, caused by the herpes zoster virus--the same virus that causes chickenpox. The incidence of shingles increases as we get older, because the body's natural immunity declines.

"When people reach their 50s and 60s, T cell immunity declines allowing shingles to strike. That's why our adult vaccine is directed specifically at T cell immunity," Professor Cunningham said.

Most Australian adults have been infected with the herpes zoster virus and are at risk of shingles, even if they do not remember having chicken pox. By age 85, approximately 50% of the population will develop shingles. Vaccination is the only way to protect against shingles.

The full paper is published online by the Journal of Infectious Diseases as Editor's choice: https:/

The Shingrix vaccine is developed by GlaxoSmithKline.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release states:
Shingrix is different from most other vaccines. Many vaccines are made from a weakened form of the virus, but Shingrix is made from just a single protein–known as glycoprotein E–that comes from the outer shell of the herpes zoster virus.
As noted above, it would have been helpful if the release had stated how the established vaccine compared in the rate of effectiveness.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Results are published in the scientific publication the Journal of Medical Cases, and is authored by USRM Chief Science Officer Dr. Kristin Comella and colleagues Dr. Scott Greenberg of the Magaziner Center for Wellness, and Dr. Laura Ross of Ross Orthopedic.

"The ability to provide this kind of therapy to Americans can be life changing," said Dr. Comella. "Use of one's own healing cells to help repair damaged tissue rather than having to cut open or manipulate the damaged area to try to reduce pain and restore function is the most elegant form of regenerative medicine we have today."

Meniscal injuries are the most common knee injury in the United States with an annual average of incidence of 66 per 100,000, according to a 2014 article in the Journal of Orthopedics. Approximately 850,000 patients each year are surgically treated -- often arthroscopically -- for meniscal injuries.

The paper outlines the case study of a 56-year-old male with a chronic meniscus injury. During the 12-month follow-up period, the patient reported a reduction in pain and an improvement in knee function. Figure 1a shows a tear at baseline on the posterior horn of the medial meniscus, while Figure 1b, taken 9 months after the first injection shows complete resolution of the tear. The healed tear could not be penetrated by the probe.

The arthroscopic images showing resolution were also consistent with quality of life improvements for the patient, including a reduction in pain and resumption of normal activities. The patient experienced very little downtime and was able to resume normal activities in less than 1 week.

Dr. Comella, who has more than 20+ years' experience, is recognized worldwide by her peers as an innovator and world leader in the development and clinical practice of stem cell products and therapies. USRM has been a part of more than 10,000 stem cell procedures in the past 19 years for a variety of indications including orthopedic, autoimmune, degenerative and neurological diseases.

U.S. Stem Cell, Inc. is an emerging leader in the regenerative medicine / cellular therapy industry specializing in physician training and certification and stem cell products including its lead product Adipocell™, as well as veterinary stem cell training and stem cell banking and creation and management of stem cell clinics. To management's knowledge, USRM has completed more clinical treatments than any other stem cell company in the world.

Forward-Looking Statements: Except for historical matters contained herein, statements made in this press release are forward-looking statements. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, words such as "may", "will", "to", "plan", "expect", "believe", "anticipate", "intend", "could", "would", "estimate", or "continue", or the negative other variations thereof or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements and represent our management's beliefs and assumptions only as of the date hereof. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements, even if new information becomes available in the future. The Company's business and the risks and uncertainties of the business are described in its filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission which can be found at sec.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release adequately covers this category by offering the following statement:  “Approximately 850,000 patients each year are surgically treated — often arthroscopically — for meniscal injuries.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - - People were less likely to go to the hospital with heart attacks or strokes after several counties in New York State restricted the use of trans fats, according to a new study.

Trans fats raise bad cholesterol, lower good cholesterol and ultimately increase the risk of heart attacks and strokes. They’re found naturally in some foods but are often manufactured and added to processed foods to improve taste and texture.

“New York City was progressive and they enacted restrictions on trans fats, but no one looked to see if this made measurable changes to outcomes,” said study lead author Dr. Eric Brandt, of Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut.

New York City limited the use of trans fats starting in July 2007. The restrictions applied to food purchased outside of stores, such as at restaurants, street vendors and bakeries, in the city’s five counties. Other New York counties took similar actions after New York City’s measure was enacted.

Previous research found that death from cardiovascular disease declined 4.5 percent within a year after counties enacted trans fat restrictions, the researchers write in JAMA Cardiology. No study looked at non-fatal cardiovascular issues like hospitalizations due to heart attacks and strokes, however.

For the new study, the researchers compared data on people hospitalized between 2002 and 2013 for heart attacks or strokes in counties that did or didn’t restrict trans fats.

Altogether they had data on 3.3 million people in 25 counties without trans fat restrictions and 8.4 million people in 11 counties with restrictions.

In 2006, there were 753 hospital admissions for heart attack or stroke per 100,000 people in counties that never enacted restrictions compared to 726 per 100,000 people in counties that put restrictions in place.

While admissions for heart attacks and strokes fell after 2002 in all the counties, the drop was more substantial in those that enacted trans fat restrictions, the authors found.

After three years or more, the combined rate of hospitalizations for heart attacks or strokes was about 6 percent lower in the counties with trans fat regulations.

Admissions for heart attacks were nearly 8 percent lower in counties with restrictions. Similarly, admissions for strokes were about 4 percent lower in counties with restrictions, but that finding could be due to chance.

Brandt told Reuters Health that New York City was also pushing other public health initiatives around the same time. Those included clean air initiatives and showing calorie counts on restaurant menus.

When they removed New York City data to make sure those other factors weren’t driving the findings, the pattern didn’t change.

“We still found the same thing,” Brandt said.

Still, the study can’t say the trans fat restrictions caused fewer admissions in those counties.

Brandt and colleagues write that in 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) removed manufactured trans fats from its list of safe food additives. By 2018, those fats will be nearly eliminated from American diets, they add.

“There has been a lot of looking into whether trans fats are harmful,” said Brandt. “Here we find on a population level when we restrict them, it benefits society by reducing heart attacks and strokes.”

The findings suggest the FDA’s action will lead to health benefits across the country, he added.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story included a discussion about how the findings could also be linked to smoking bans and mandatory calorie counts on menus, which could be considered alternative public health measures to reduce heart disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OAK BROOK, Ill. - MRI screening improves early diagnosis of breast cancer in all women-not only those at high risk-according to a new study from Germany published online in the journal Radiology.

MRI has long been known as an effective breast cancer screening modality that offers better sensitivity than mammography and ultrasound. Currently, guidelines reserve breast MRI screening for women who have a strong family history or other specific breast cancer risk factors. MRI screening has not been considered necessary for women at average risk, and there has been resistance to expansion of MRI into this population due, in part, to concern over higher costs.

However, with breast cancer remaining a major cause of cancer death in women, there is good reason to pursue the search for improved screening methods, according to the study's lead author, Christiane Kuhl, M.D., chair of the Department of Radiology at RWTH Aachen University in Aachen, Germany.

Between 2005 and 2013, Dr. Kuhl and colleagues studied breast MRI's impact on 2,120 women, ages 40 to 70, with less than a 15 percent lifetime risk of breast cancer. The women had normal screening mammograms and, in the case of those with dense breast tissue, normal screening ultrasound. Breast MRI detected 60 additional breast cancers, including 40 invasive cancers, for an overall supplemental cancer detection rate of 15.5 per 1,000 women. Of the 60 cancers detected in the study group over the observation period (7,007 screening rounds), 59 were found only using MRI, one was found also by mammography, and none by mammography or ultrasound alone.

According to Dr. Kuhl, the results suggest that MRI can serve as a useful supplemental screening tool for women at average risk, especially those with dense mammographic tissue, and that MRI is superior to supplemental ultrasound for this purpose.

The results also highlight the ability of MRI in the detection of more aggressive types of cancer.

"The faster a cancer grows and the better it is in seeding metastases, the better will it be picked up early by MRI," Dr. Kuhl said. "In our cohort, cancers found by MRI alone exhibited features of rapid growth at pathology."

This ability is especially important in women with dense breast tissue in which aggressive cancers may be missed on mammography. Left undetected, these cancers will grow to become clinically palpable cancers, also known as interval cancers. The new study showed that, consistent with previous research, breast MRI can depict these rapidly growing cancers with high reliability.

According to Dr. Kuhl, interval cancers exhibit an adverse biologic profile and are the main driver of breast cancer mortality. Additional cancers detected by MRI screening in the study had a skewed distribution towards a higher-than-normal prevalence or incidence of rapidly growing (grade 3) cancers.

"The interval cancer rate in our study was zero percent. Not a single cancer was undetected that became palpable," she said. "This suggests that MRI finds breast cancers that also mammography would find, but MRI detects them earlier, and it finds the cancers which, if MRI had not been done, would have progressed to interval cancers."

"Supplemental Breast MR Imaging Screening of Women with Average Risk of Breast Cancer." Collaborating with Dr. Kuhl were Kevin Strobel, M.D., Heribert Bieling, M.Sc., Claudia Leutner, M.D., Hans H. Schild, M.D., Ph.D., and Simone Schrading, M.D., Ph.D.

Radiology is edited by Herbert Y. Kressel, M.D., Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass., and owned and published by the Radiological Society of North America, Inc. (http://radiology. )

RSNA is an association of 54,000 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release includes a comparison with breast ultrasound. It found that supplemental MRI screening is useful for women with average risk of cancer who exhibit a range of breast densities and that it is superior to the alternative of breast ultrasound for this purpose.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A popular class of blood-pressure medications thought to be safe in the first trimester of pregnancy appear to have caused serious birth defects in about 7 percent of babies whose mothers took them, a new study has found.

ACE inhibitors carry a warning that pregnant women should not use them in the last two trimesters because they can cause kidney damage to the fetus. The number of women taking them early in pregnancy is unknown but probably is small, the study suggests.

ACE inhibitors are the second-most commonly prescribed class of pharmaceuticals in the United States, with 149 million prescriptions dispensed last year. They came on the market 25 years ago.

"It would be important for a pregnant woman and her health-care provider to be aware of this, so they can identify an alternative medicine to treat her hypertension," said William O. Cooper, a pediatrician at Vanderbilt Children's Hospital who headed the study, published in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

Exposure to ACE inhibitors early in pregnancy nearly tripled the risk of birth defects, the study showed. "We all believe that we want to see more data. But this is important enough and impressive enough to tell people about," said Robert Temple of the Food and Drug Administration, who spoke to reporters about the findings.

The agency will consider broadening the "black box" warning against taking ACE inhibitors late in pregnancy, he said. The message is that women trying to get pregnant should switch to a different blood-pressure drug, Temple said.

One-third of the defects involved the heart, one-quarter the limbs or face, and one-tenth the brain or spinal cord, the study found. Many defects, especially the heart problems, are curable with surgery or other treatment. Others, however, cause permanent disability or retardation.

Cooper and his colleagues looked at 29,507 births to women covered by Medicaid in Tennessee between 1985 and 2000.

Of that group, 209 babies were born to women who took an ACE inhibitor, and 18 had birth defects. Among 202 babies born to mothers taking some other blood-pressure medication, four had defects. The fraction of babies with defects was 7.1 percent in the ACE-inhibitor group; 1.7 percent in the other anti-hypertensive group; and 2.6 percent in the group taking no blood-pressure medication.

That such an effect was first noticed a quarter-century after ACE inhibitors arrived on the market points up the lack of data about the effect of drugs in pregnancy.

All new drugs are tested on pregnant animals to see whether they cause malformations, but those tests can be misleading. It's considered unethical to include pregnant women in studies of new drugs unless the medication is intended to treat pregnancy-related conditions.

As a consequence, the labels on nearly all medications carry a statement saying their safety to fetuses has not been established.

"I think it is safe to say that not a lot is known about the options for women in pregnancy," said Sandra L. Kweder of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

Studies of large databases such as Medicare records or registries that enroll pregnant women already taking particular drugs are the chief ways to discover and measure possible risks to the fetus from prescription drugs.

Increasingly, the FDA is seeking such data. It paid for the ACE-inhibitor study with help from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The alternatives that clinicians might want to consider are diuretics, alpha-methyldopa, some beta-blockers, and the calcium-channel blocker nifedipine, according to the FDA officials and an editorial accompanying the study.

Blood pressure often falls slightly in pregnancy, and women with mild hypertension may be able to go without medicines, experts say. Some pregnant women develop hypertension that can be life-threatening to them and their babies.

ACE inhibitors -- the acronym stands for angiotensin-converting enzyme -- have become more popular. A government survey of visits to doctors' offices found that their use doubled from 1995 to 2002.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The article included a list of other medications that may be used to to lower blood pressure. However these suffer from the same lack of clinical testing of their safety for use in pregnant women. The story discussed the impact of pregnancy on blood pressure – lowering it for some women and raising it in others.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- Acupuncture gets a thumbs-up for helping relieve pain from chronic headaches, backaches and arthritis in a review of more than two dozen studies -- the latest analysis of an often-studied therapy that has as many fans as critics.

Some believe its only powers are a psychological, placebo effect. But some doctors believe even if that's the explanation for acupuncture's effectiveness, there's no reason not to offer it if it makes people feel better.

The new analysis examined 29 studies involving almost 18,000 adults. The researchers concluded that the needle remedy worked better than usual pain treatment and slightly better than fake acupuncture. That kind of analysis is not the strongest type of research, but the authors took extra steps including examining raw data from the original studies.

The results "provide the most robust evidence to date that acupuncture is a reasonable referral option," wrote the authors, who include researchers with Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and several universities in England and Germany.

Their study isn't proof, but it adds to evidence that acupuncture may benefit a range of conditions.

The new analysis was published online Monday in Archives of Internal Medicine. The federal government's National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine paid for most of the study, along with a small grant from the Samueli Institute, a non-profit group that supports research on alternative healing.

Acupuncture's use has become more mainstream. The military has used it to help treat pain from war wounds, and California recently passed legislation that would include acupuncture among treatments recommended for coverage under provisions of the nation's new health care law. That law requires insurance plans to cover certain categories of benefits starting in 2014. Deciding specifics is being left up to the states.

Some private insurance plans already cover acupuncture; Medicare does not.

In traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture involves inserting long, very thin needles just beneath the skin's surface at specific points on the body to control pain or stress. Several weekly sessions are usually involved, typically costing about $60 to $100 per session. Fake acupuncture studied in research sometimes also uses needles, but on different areas of the body.

Scientists aren't sure what biological mechanism could explain how acupuncture might relieve pain, but the authors of the new study say the results suggest there's more involved than just a placebo effect.

Acupuncture skeptic Dr. Stephen Barrett said the study results are dubious. The retired psychiatrist runs Quackwatch, a Web site on medical scams, and says studies of acupuncture often involve strict research conditions that don't mirror how the procedure is used in the real world.

The new analysis combined results from studies of patients with common types of chronic pain -- recurring headaches, arthritis or back, neck and shoulder. The studies had randomly assigned patients to acupuncture and either fake acupuncture or standard pain treatment including medication or physical therapy.

The authors explained their statistical findings by using a pain scale of 0 to 100: The patients' average baseline pain measured 60; it dropped to 30 on average in those who got acupuncture, 35 in those who got fake acupuncture, and 43 in the usual treatment group.

While the difference in results for real versus fake acupuncture was small, it suggests acupuncture could have more than a psychological effect, said lead author Andrew Vickers, a cancer researcher at Memorial Sloan-Kettering. The center offers acupuncture and other alternative therapies for cancer patients with hard-to-treat pain.

The analysis was more rigorous than most research based on pooling previous studies' results, because the authors obtained original data from each study. That makes the conclusion more robust, said Dr. Andrew Avins, author of an Archives commentary and a physician and researcher with the University of California at San Francisco and Kaiser-Permanente.

Acupuncture is relatively safe and uncertainty over how it works shouldn't stop doctors from offering it as an option for patients struggling with pain, Avins said.

"Perhaps a more productive strategy at this point would be to provide whatever benefits we can for our patients, while we continue to explore more carefully all mechanisms of healing," he wrote.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story briefly mentions that standard treatments for chronic pain include medications and physical therapy. Close call, but good enough. We would have appreciated a comment about the relative value of these “mainstream” treatments.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Sept. 11, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- New research suggests that Opdivo -- a drug that works with the immune system to fight melanoma -- is more effective than the current standard of care for patients who've had surgery to remove advanced tumors.

The international study was funded by Opdivo's maker, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and included more than 900 patients with stage III and stage IV melanoma.

Patients were treated at 130 medical centers across 25 countries. All underwent surgery for their cancer before they began treatment with either Opdivo (nivolumab) or Yervoy (ipilimumab), the drug that's the current standard of care.

Both drugs are "immunotherapies," which work by boosting the immune system's ability to spot and destroy tumor cells.

After a year of treatment, 71 percent of patients in the Opdivo group were alive without any recurrence of the disease, compared with 61 percent of those treated with Yervoy. And at 18 months, the rate was 66 percent for Opdivo and 53 percent for Yervoy, the findings showed.

According to the Skin Cancer Foundation, metastatic melanoma accounts for only about 1 percent of skin cancer cases but causes the majority of skin cancer deaths.

"Our results demonstrate that [Opdivo] is more effective in treating patients with stage III and IV melanoma, cutting the risk of relapse by a third," lead researcher Dr. Jeffrey Weber, professor of medicine at NYU School of Medicine, said in a university news release.

"Results like this will change how we practice medicine. Hopefully, physicians will embrace the use of [Opdivo] in these high-risk patients as adjuvant therapy," added Weber, who also helps direct NYU's Perlmutter Cancer Center in New York City.

One cancer surgeon who reviewed the findings was impressed.

"Based on this study, it appears that patients with advanced melanoma who have their disease completely removed by surgery should go on to receive additional therapy with Opdivo," said Dr. Gary Deutsch. He is a surgical oncologist at Northwell Health's Imbert Cancer Center in Bay Shore, N.Y.

"Not only did these patients have a better survival outcome at one year, but they had only one-third the side effects compared to Yervoy," Deutsch said.

The study found that patients taking Opdivo had fewer severe side effects than those taking Yervoy, at 14 percent versus 45 percent. Five percent of patients on Opdivo had to stop treatment due to side effects, compared with 31 percent of those on Yervoy. The most common side effects for both drugs were fatigue and diarrhea.

Weber added that "the safety of [Opdivo] is very promising."

The study is scheduled for presentation Monday in Madrid, Spain, at the annual meeting of the European Society for Medical Oncology. It was also published online Sept. 10 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Both Opdivo and Yervoy are already approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat advanced (metastatic) melanoma. In some patients, the drugs are used in combination.

Dr. Michele Green is a dermatologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. She said any advance in the care of aggressive melanomas is welcome news for patients.

"It is amazing that there is now an alternative that is superior to conventional chemotherapy for advanced metastatic disease," Green said after reviewing the new study findings. "With these advanced melanomas -- that have high risks of recurrences and have poor outcomes -- it is vital to look at alternative treatments. The future in cancer treatments lies in immunotherapy and other targeted options."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on melanoma.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly compares the use of Opdivo to the use of Yervoy, and cites an independent source as noting that Opdivo “is superior to conventional chemotherapy for advanced metastatic disease.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- DNA testing for the human papillomavirus should replace the Pap smear as the main way to screen women for cervical cancer, according to Italian researchers.

Their recommendation is based on a study that found that the human papillomavirus (HPV) test prevented more cases of cervical cancer than the conventional Pap smear. Results of the study were published online Jan. 19 in The Lancet Oncology.

The HPV test should become the screening tool of choice for women 35 and older, the researchers said. It could be done less frequently than the Pap test, which could be used only in women who have tested positive for HPV, they said.

The Pap smear, first introduced in the 1950s, looks for changes in the cervix that could lead to cervical cancer. The HPV test works a step further back in the process, looking to see if women are infected with HPV.

HPV causes cervical cancer, which remains a significant health problem, particularly in less resource-rich areas of the world.

DNA testing for HPV, though, does have drawbacks -- namely that it is less specific, meaning it is likely to pick up more false-positives, than a Pap smear. This results in many more callbacks for women to undergo further testing.

Using HPV as a primary screening tool results in a callback rate of about 25 to 30 percent, said Dr. Mark Einstein, a gynecologic oncologist and director of clinical research at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City. By contrast, Pap smears have a callback rate of about 5 to 7 percent, he said.

For their study, the Italian researchers compared HPV testing alone with HPV testing plus a Pap smear in 94,370 women aged 25 to 60 years old.

During the first phase of the study, women 35 to 60 who tested positive for HPV were given a cervical examination, called a colposcopy. Younger women got a colposcopy if their Pap smear was abnormal or if HPV results were positive several times, indicating that their body had not been able to clear the infection.

Screening for HPV DNA appeared more effective in older women, but the testing in younger women led to over-diagnosis of a particular type of cervical lesion, the study found.

Not all experts agree, though, that current practice would change based on the study's findings alone.

"I don't think this is going to change any strategies we do now, but I do think it's more evidence that HPV testing can predict who's going to develop cervical cancer," said Dr. Jay Brooks, chairman of hematology/oncology at Ochsner Health System in Baton Rouge, La. "HPV testing, in certain populations, can really predict who would benefit from treatment."

Einstein had a somewhat different take on the findings. "This shows that the strategy does work," he said. "It does make sense, it's cost-effective and effective. This is happening in single-payer health systems which have national screening. We're behind in the U.S."

The strategy makes particular sense in less-developed countries, where women could do an HPV test themselves with a "self swab" and then send the swab in for analysis, Einstein said.

In the United States, cervical cancer screening guidelines were changed in November. Women now are being told that they should get their first screening for cervical cancer -- including a Pap test -- at age 21. The previous recommendation was to start Pap tests three years after becoming sexually active or at age 21, whichever came first.

And, rather than have an annual Pap test, most women need to be screened every other year or less, depending on their age, according to the new guidelines.

Cervical cancer rates have dropped more than 50 percent in the last 30 years in the United States, according to the guidelines. That decline has been largely attributed to widespread use of the Pap test.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on cervical cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the pros and cons of HPV DNA testing to pap smears, even indicating how HPV could be particularly useful in resource-poor countries.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every year, many U.S. women get the grim news that they have breast cancer. In 2013 alone, according to the American Cancer Society, more than 230,000 were given that diagnosis. Each one very likely came as a devastating blow, both to the patient and to her family.

But what if some of these cases are preventable? What if there was a medication that could at least reduce a woman’s risk of developing breast cancer?

The Breast Cancer Prevention Trial published results in 1998 indicating that women who took one of those drugs, tamoxifen, were half as likely to develop breast cancer as similar women who did not take the drug.

Other medications, including raloxifene and a class of drugs called aromatese inhibitors, do much the same thing, though the Food and Drug Administration has not yet approved aromatese inhibitors for this use. Studies estimate that more than 2 million American women at high risk for breast cancer could benefit from taking a preventive drug.

But few women are opting for this protection, which goes by the name chemoprevention. A 2010 study found “exceptionally low” rates of usage.

In part this may be because many doctors are not even discussing this option with their patients. A small 2014 study in the Journal of Women’s Health found that only 13 percent of internal medicine, family medicine and gynecology physicians reported having recommended or prescribed these medications to women who might benefit from them.

The “low uptake of these medications is a missed opportunity,” says Heidi Nelson, a professor of medical informatics and clinical epidemiology at the Oregon Health & Science University in Portland. “Many high-risk women . . . could reduce their risks for invasive cancer by approximately 30 to 50 percent.” On the other hand, these drugs don’t suit everyone, and they are not without risks of their own. Because some of the side effects are serious — such as blood clots in the legs and in the lungs, and, in the case of tamoxifen, uterine cancer — only women who are deemed to be at high risk for the disease should consider them. But there are conflicting views on who meets that “high risk” definition

Chemoprevention should not be confused with chemotherapy. Although both involve taking drugs, chemoprevention medications are taken with the goal of avoiding breast cancer altogether and the subsequent need for chemotherapy later.

And they work on the body differently. Chemotherapy kills off cells, healthy ones as well as cancercous ones. The chemoprevention drugs, by contrast, work by blocking estrogen, a hormone known to promote the growth of cancer cells in breast tissue. Chemoprevention drugs are called SERMs, or selective estrogen receptor modulators, and two have been approved specifically for breast cancer prevention: tamoxifen, which was developed to treat breast cancer after its onset and only later was found to have a preventive benefit, and raloxifene, which was designed to treat osteoporosis.

A 2013 study in the Lancet analyzed data for more than 80,000 women taking tamoxifen or other SERM drugs. The researchers found an overall 38 percent reduction in new cases of breast cancer 10 years after women took these drugs compared with women who took a placebo. The effect was even larger during the first five years of the study.

Investigators working for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent group of scientists and clinicians funded by the government, echoed these results. After looking at multiple trials of tamoxifen and raloxifene, the task force noted that these drugs reduced new cases of breast cancer significantly: from 23 cases per 1,000 women in the control groups to 16 cases per 1,000 women in the treatment groups.

Nelson, one of the lead authors of the analysis, is “confident” that these results show a true benefit. Others are more cautious.

Kenneth Lin, a family physician at Georgetown University who worked on developing the task force’s SERM guidelines, notes that while SERMs may have reduced new cases, they “have not been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality in any study or meta-analysis.” One possible explanation, he says, is that “these drugs are effective at preventing nonlethal cancers rather than the more serious ones.”

Not used enough?

Given that these drugs seem to offer some protection, why are they not in widespread use? Serious side effects is one reason. Beyond blood clots and uterine cancer, other known reactions to the drugs include strokes, cataracts, bone pain, hot flashes, nausea and vaginal dryness.

For some women, the risk of such side effects may be worth taking, depending on their particular odds of developing breast cancer. Those odds can be figured by using a commonly used calculator, often called the Gail model, that estimates a woman’s chances of having breast cancer in a five-year period and over a lifetime.

But this is where it gets more complicated. While many experts agree that women at high risk should consider the medications, they do not agree on what Gail score should trigger that consideration.

The studies that served as the basis for the FDA approval of the drugs, along with recently released guidelines from the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), set the threshold at a five-year Gail score of 1.67 percent.

The Preventive Services Task Force, however, recommended a threshold of 3 percent. At that point, the panel said, women “are likely to have more benefit than harm from using tamoxifen or raloxifene.”

ASCO’s lower cutoff worries some experts. “At the 1.67 percent high-risk threshold,” Georgetown’s Lin says, “every woman age 62 and older would be [considered] high-risk.” That might lead to a situation in which millions of women would be encouraged, unnecessarily,to consider this therapy, along with its potential harmful effects.

Kala Visvanathan, the lead author of the ASCO recommendations and a faculty member at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, said the cutoffs provide only a rough estimate of risk.

It is important to realize, she adds, that “as the risk increases, the benefits tend to be greater. This is an evolving field, and our goal is to better discern who is at high and low risk of breast cancer and develop a greater range of prevention strategies.”

An individual risk analysis should prompt conversation between doctor and patient about the potential benefits and the risk of the therapy.

Both the ASCO and the task force guidelines recommend such a conversation. “The discussion should include the specific risks and benefits associated with each chemopreventive agent,” according to ASCO.

The task force similarly recommends that “clinicians engage in a shared, informed decision making” with women and said that clinicians “should offer to prescribe” these drugs. Many risk factors increase a woman’s chances of having side effects. These factors include older age, obesity, having a history of a blood clot, history of any cancer, immobility, history of certain autoimmune conditions, history of using estrogen or oral contraceptives and history of some form of heart disease.

Insured women with a high risk for breast cancer and a low risk for side effects who try this therapy will not incur out-of-pocket costs, because this treatment was included in the Affordable Care Act as mandated, no-charge preventive care.

So what should a woman do?

Most important, become familiar with your family history, know your risk factors and discuss them with your primary-care physician. Age and family history cannot be controlled, but lifestyle changes — including eating a healthful diet, exercising, not smoking and not overconsuming alcohol — are eminently doable and can reduce your risk. These basic tenets of leading a healthy lifestyle have been shown to be important factors in breast cancer prevention.

Visvanathan and her colleagues are hopeful that more women will be aware of this option.

“A discussion on the use of preventive agents needs to become part of routine care in women at high risk,” she says. “We should begin to implement preventive strategies based on what we already know.”

Mishori is an associate professor of family medicine at the Georgetown University School of Medicine and director of the Health & Media fellowship. Seliby is a family physician and the Health & Media fellow at Georgetown University School of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story spends most of its time on drugs for prevention, but wisely does point out lifestyle alternative behaviors known to lower risk.
“Most important, become familiar with your family history, know your risk factors and discuss them with your primary-care physician. Age and family history cannot be controlled, but lifestyle changes — including eating a healthful diet, exercising, not smoking and not over consuming alcohol — are eminently doable and can reduce your risk. These basic tenets of leading a healthy lifestyle have been shown to be important factors in breast cancer prevention.”
It would have been interesting to hear about the comparative effectiveness of instituting lifestyle changes vs. drugs for reducing cancer risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A couple of extra minutes attached to the umbilical cord at birth may translate into a small boost in neurodevelopment several years later, a study suggests.

Children whose cords were cut more than three minutes after birth had slightly higher social skills and fine motor skills than those whose cords were cut within 10 seconds. The results showed no differences in IQ.

"There is growing evidence from a number of studies that all infants, those born at term and those born early, benefit from receiving extra blood from the placenta at birth," said Dr. Heike Rabe, a neonatologist at Brighton & Sussex Medical School in the United Kingdom. Rabe's editorial accompanied the study published Tuesday in the journal JAMA Pediatrics.

Delaying the clamping of the cord allows more blood to transfer from the placenta to the infant, sometimes increasing the infant's blood volume by up to a third. The iron in the blood increases infants' iron storage, and iron is essential for healthy brain development.

"The extra blood at birth helps the baby to cope better with the transition from life in the womb, where everything is provided for them by the placenta and the mother, to the outside world," Rabe said. "Their lungs get more blood so that the exchange of oxygen into the blood can take place smoothly."

Past studies have shown higher levels of iron and other positive effects later in infancy among babies whose cords were clamped after several minutes, but few studies have looked at results past infancy.

In this study, researchers randomly assigned half of 263 healthy Swedish full-term newborns to have their cords clamped more than three minutes after birth. The other half were clamped less than 10 seconds after birth.

Four years later, the children underwent a series of assessments for IQ, motor skills, social skills, problem-solving, communication skills and behavior. Those with delayed cord clamping showed modestly higher scores in social skills and fine motor skills. When separated by sex, only the boys showed statistically significant improvement.

"We don't know exactly why, but speculate that girls receive extra protection through higher estrogen levels whilst being in the womb," Rabe said. "The results in term infants are consistent with those of follow-up in preterm infants."

Delayed cord clamping has garnered more attention in the past few years for its potential benefits to the newborn. Until recently, clinicians believed early clamping reduced the risk of hemorrhaging in the mother, but research hasn't borne that out.

Much of the research has focused on preterm infants, who appear to benefit most from delayed cord clamping, Rabe said. Preemies who have delayed cord clamping tend to have better blood pressure in the days immediately after birth, need fewer drugs to support blood pressure, need fewer blood transfusions, have less bleeding into the brain and have a lower risk of necrotizing enterocolitis, a life-threatening bowel injury, she said.

This study is among the few looking at healthy, full-term infants in a country high in resources, as opposed to developing countries where iron deficiency may be more likely.

The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has not yet endorsed the practice, citing insufficient evidence for full-term infants. The World Health Organization recommends delayed cord clamping of not less than one minute.

It is unclear whether the practice could harm infants' health. Some studies have found a higher risk of jaundice, a buildup of bilirubin in the blood from the breakdown of red blood cells. Jaundice is treated with blue light therapy and rarely has serious complications.

Another potential risk is a condition called polycythemia, a very high red blood cell count, said Dr. Scott Lorch, an associate professor of pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine and director of the Center for Perinatal and Pediatric Health Disparities Research at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

"Polycythemia can have medical consequences for the infant, including blood clots, respiratory distress and even strokes in the worst-case scenario," Lorch said. Some studies have found higher levels of red blood cells in babies with delayed cord clamping, but there were no complications.

Lorch also pointed out that this study involved a mostly homogenous population in a country outside the U.S.

"We should see whether similar effects are seen in higher-risk populations, such as the low socioeconomic population, racial and ethnic minorities and those at higher risk for neurodevelopmental delay," Lorch said.

So far, studies on delayed cord clamping have excluded infants born in distress, such as those with breathing difficulties or other problems. But Rabe said these infants may actually benefit most from the practice.

These babies often need more blood volume to help with blood pressure, breathing and circulation problems, Rabe said. "Also, the placental blood is rich with stem cells, which could help to repair any brain damage the baby might have suffered during a difficult birth," she added. "Milking of the cord would be the easiest way to get the extra blood into the baby quickly in an emergency situation."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: There’s either early or late clamping, and the article describes both methods.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug, apixaban (Eliquis), appears better than the old standby warfarin in preventing strokes in people with the abnormal heart rhythm called atrial fibrillation, a new study finds.

Over 2.6 million Americans are affected by atrial fibrillation, and many take warfarin (also known as Coumadin) to prevent dangerous clots that can cause a stroke. Warfarin is notoriously tricky to modulate, however, and needs to be closely monitored -- usually through monthly doctors' visits. If the drug's activity isn't checked regularly it can trigger severe bleeding episodes, the most serious of which can happen in the brain.

"Warfarin is labor-intensive to manage," said study researcher Dr. Jack Ansell, chairman of the department of medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Sometimes it impairs the patient's quality of life and the outcomes are very dependent on how well the drug dosing is managed," he added. "This [new] drug has a lot of advantages over warfarin."

With apixaban, patients can use a standard dose that doesn't need monitoring and adjusting, Ansell said. Also, unlike warfarin, apixaban has few interactions with other drugs or foods, he added.

The study was funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer, the makers of apixaban.

Apixaban is a so-called Xa inhibitor, a class of anticoagulants (anti-clotting drugs) that work by blocking factor X, a protein involved in blood clotting. Ansell expects drugs in this class will have a major effect on how atrial fibrillation is managed in the future.

Another similar drug, Pradaxa (dabigatran), has been on the market for about a year and many patients with atrial fibrillation have been switched or started on it, he said.

"Once [apixaban] is available it is going to be very difficult to avoid offering this drug to patients," he said.

The issue of cost remains a factor, however. While generic warfarin is just pennies a dose, any new brand-name drug is likely to be much more expensive. According to Laura Hortas, a spokeswoman for Bristol-Myers Squibb, because apixaban is still an experimental drug its price tag remains uncertain.

The new report was published online Aug. 28 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with its presentation at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Paris.

For the trial, more than 18,000 patients with atrial fibrillation and a heightened risk for stroke were randomly assigned to receive either apixaban or warfarin.

Over an average of 1.8 years of follow-up there were fewer strokes or clots among patients taking apixaban (1.27 percent a year), compared with patients taking warfarin (1.6 percent per year), the researchers found.

This means that apixaban prevented six patients from having a stroke, 15 patients from having a major bleeding event and eight patients from dying, the researchers said in a Duke University news release.

The major effect on stroke was preventing hemorrhagic stroke, which is caused by bleeding in the brain and is the most serious type of stroke. According to the researchers, apixaban reduced this risk by 50 percent, preventing four patients from having this type of stroke and two patients from having an ischemic stroke (cause by a vessel blockage) or stroke of uncertain origin.

As to apixaban's expected higher price tag, Ansell said that since the drug does not require monitoring and the incidence of stroke and major bleeding are less, savings in doctors' visits and stroke treatment should more than compensate.

The new trial comes on the heels of another study on apixaban that was stopped early due to safety concerns. In that trial, published in July in the New England Journal of Medicine, apixaban's use was associated with raised odds for bleeding -- without providing patients with any reduction in heart attack risk.

However, "in that case, apixaban was given to patients with coronary artery disease who were also taking two other blood thinners," Ansell noted. "The three of them together showed that the risk of bleeding was just too high and there was no real benefit in that population. But, that's an entirely different problem, compared with atrial fibrillation," he said.

Commenting on the latest study, Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles agreed that "atrial fibrillation substantially increases the risk of stroke and death."

Warfarin reduces the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, but it also boosts the odds of bleeding and is often difficult to manage, he said.

"Apixaban is now the first oral anticoagulant [blood thinner] to show a statistically significant improvement in survival over warfarin in atrial fibrillation patients," Fonarow said. "This represents a very important therapeutic advance in the care of patients with atrial fibrillation."

For more information on atrial fibrillation, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story compared the outcome measure of apixabane to warafarin; in addition, it indicated that there is another medication in the same category that has been recently approved by the FDA.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Aug. 10, 2011 -- Two of three patients dying of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) appear cured and a third is in partial remission after infusions of genetically engineered T cells.

The treatment success came in a pilot study that was only meant to find out whether the treatment was safe, and to determine the right dose to use in later studies. But the therapy worked vastly better than University of Pennsylvania researchers David L. Porter, MD, Carl H. June, MD, and colleagues had dared to hope.

"Our results were absolutely dramatic. It is tremendously exciting," Porter tells WebMD. "These kinds of outcomes don't come around very often. We are really hopeful that we can now translate this into treatment for much larger numbers of patients and apply this technique to other diseases and to many more patients."

Excitement is spreading as oncologists learn about the findings. "I think it is a big deal," says Jacque Galipeau, MD, professor of hematology and medical oncology at Emory University Winship Cancer Center. Galipeau was not involved in the Porter study.

"Here's this guy, the handwriting is on the wall, any hematologist will tell you he is a goner -- this guy was essentially cured," Galipeau tells WebMD. "These genetically engineered cells did what everyone in the field has tried to do for 20 years. The man probably had kilograms of disease in his body, and the cells mopped it up completely."

The treatment uses a form of white blood cells called T cells harvested from each patient. A manmade virus-like vector is used to transfer special molecules to the T cells. One of the molecules, CD19, makes the T cells attack B lymphocytes -- the cells that become cancerous in CLL.

All this has been done before. These genetically engineered cells are called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. They kill cancer in the test tube. But in humans, they die away before they do much damage to tumors.

What's new about the current treatment is the addition of a special signaling molecule called 4-1BB. This signal does several things: it gives CAR T cells more potent anti-tumor activity, and it somehow allows the cells to persist and multiply in patients' bodies. Moreover, the signal does not call down the deadly all-out immune attack -- the feared "cytokine storm" -- that can do more harm than good.

This may be why relatively small infusions of the CAR T cells had such a profound effect. Each of the cells killed thousands of cancer cells and destroyed more than 2 pounds of tumor in each patient.

"Within three weeks, the tumors had been blown away, in a way that was much more violent than we ever expected,"June says in a news release. 'It worked much better than we thought it would."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story talked about bone marrow transplants, while the Reuters story made no mention of them. This was an important comparison for readers. “Cure is possible, but it requires a risky bone marrow transplant. About 20% of patients don’t survive this treatment — and even when they do, there’s only a 50-50 chance of a cure.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, April 26, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- After a stroke, many patients are given the clot-busting intravenous drug alteplase, but another drug may be more effective, Australian researchers report.

Among more than 200 stroke victims, TNKase (tenecteplase) was about twice as effective as alteplase in restoring blood flow to the brain, and it also resulted in less disability, the scientists found.

"Tenecteplase is likely to become the preferred medication for clot-dissolving in stroke patients," said lead researcher Dr. Bruce Campbell, head of the stroke department at the Royal Melbourne Hospital in Parkville. "It is likely to change stroke treatment guidelines and clinical practice."

Campbell said tenecteplase is more effective than alteplase because of differences in the enzymes in each drug.

Although both drugs work in the same way, tenecteplase is better at attacking and dissolving clots, and more resistant to factors that inhibit the breakdown of clots, he said.

For either drug to be most effective, it needs to be given as soon as possible after a stroke occurs. In this study, patients were given the drugs within 4.5 hours after the onset of a stroke, Campbell said.

Although tenecteplase appears to be more effective for stroke patients, it's not approved for that use in the United States, according to Dr. Rohan Arora, director of stroke at Long Island Jewish Hospital in Forest Hills, N.Y.

In 2000, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved tenecteplase for use after a heart attack, Arora said.

"Tenecteplase is being widely used in developing countries, such as India," he said. "One reason is it's cheaper than alteplase."

In the United States, tenecteplase costs about $5,800, versus alteplase, which costs $8,000, Arora said.

In addition, tenecteplase is easier to give, requiring only a single injection, while alteplase requires an injection and an IV drip, he added.

Arora explained that tenecteplase is not widely used in the United States for heart attack patients because these patients are typically treated with angioplasty or heart bypass surgery.

For the new study, which did not receive drug company funding, Campbell and his colleagues randomly assigned 202 stroke patients to either alteplase or tenecteplase before surgery to remove clots.

The researchers specifically looked to see which drug was better at restoring blood flow to clot-blocked blood vessels in the brain, and which drug resulted in patients having better outcomes.

The investigators found that 22 percent of the patients treated with tenecteplase had more than 50 percent of blood flow return to the brain, compared with 10 percent of those treated with alteplase.

Patients treated with tenecteplase also had better functional outcomes after 90 days than those given alteplase, the findings showed.

Bleeding into the brain, the most serious side effect of either drug, occurred in 1 percent of patients, regardless of which drug they received, Campbell said.

The report was published April 26 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

For more on stroke, visit the National Stroke Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story said tenecteplase is “easier to give, requiring only a single injection, while alteplase requires an injection and an IV drip.”
That’s sufficient but the story would have been stronger had it mentioned the option of simply proceeding with surgical removal of a clot, called a thrombectomy, without first giving either medication. All patients in this trial went on to receive mechanical thrombectomy regardless of which medication they received.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking fish oil may help prevent full-blown psychotic illness in at-risk adolescents and young adults, a study released today hints.

These at-risk individuals may have weak or transient psychotic symptoms, and already show schizophrenia-like brain changes, Dr. G. Paul Amminger of The University of Melbourne in Australia, a researcher on the study, told Reuters Health. But while psychiatrists now know how to identify these individuals, he added, they don’t know what to do with them. “At the moment there’s no state-of-the-art guideline (on) how to treat those people.”

Prescribing antipsychotic medications may be helpful, Amminger added, but these medications have serious side effects, and can also be stigmatizing. “For young people they don’t want to commit themselves to a treatment which they might need to take for the next five to ten years,” he said. Furthermore, only about a third of people at high risk for psychotic disorders will go on to develop full-fledged mental illness in a given year.

There’s considerable evidence that abnormal fatty acid metabolism may contribute to the development of schizophrenia, Amminger and his team note in the Archives of General Psychiatry. To investigate whether omega-3 fatty acids might help prevent psychotic illness, they randomly assigned 81 at-risk individuals, 13 to 25 years old, to take 1.2 grams a day of omega-3s in fish oil capsule form or a placebo for 12 weeks and then followed them for another 40 weeks.

The researchers included people who met at least one of the following three criteria: having low-level psychotic symptoms; having transient psychotic symptoms; or having a schizophrenia-like personality disorder or a close relative with schizophrenia, along with a sharp decline in mental function within the past year.

Seventy-six of the 81 study participants, or 94 percent, completed the trial, Amminger noted, which underscores the safety and tolerability of fish oil.

At one year, 5 percent of the study participants taking omega-3s had developed a psychotic disorder (2 of 41 people), compared to 28 percent of those on placebo (11 of 40). People taking fish oil also showed significant reductions in their psychotic symptoms and improvements in function, while they were at no greater risk of adverse effects than people taking placebo capsules.

The effect of fish oil capsules, Amminger noted, was similar to that seen in two trials of antipsychotic drugs in at-risk individuals.

There are a number of mechanisms through which omega-3s could protect the brain, Amminger said; they are a major component of brain cells. They are also key to the proper function of two brain chemical signaling systems, dopamine and serotonin, which have been implicated in schizophrenia. Fish oil also boosts levels of glutathione, an antioxidant that protects the brain against oxidative stress.

Trials of medications for treating mental illness typically don’t include people younger than 18, Amminger noted, while starting minors on these medications is “always very difficult, and always quite controversial.”

But if future research bears out the current findings, he added, fish oil promises to offer a safe way to help prevent psychosis in at-risk people, and could also potentially be used to prevent or delay the onset of chronic depression, bipolar illness, and substance abuse disorder — all of which are far more common than psychotic illness.

He and his colleagues are now planning a multicenter trial of fish oil for the prevention of psychotic illness in 320 at-risk people.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: This story does compare treatment with fish oil/omega-3 PUFA supplements to an alternative treatment with antipsychotic medications.   In addition, the story reports on potential harms of treatment with antipsychotic medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A daily vitamin D supplement may help young men enjoy more sick-free days during cold and flu season, a small study suggests.

Vitamin D has been the subject of much research of late, with studies linking low vitamin D levels in the blood to higher risks of type 1 diabetes and severe asthma attacks in children and, in adults, heart disease, certain cancers and depression.

But whether vitamin D is the reason for the excess risks — and whether taking supplements can curb those risks — has yet to be shown.

The body naturally synthesizes vitamin D when the skin is exposed to sunlight. Because rates of vitamin D insufficiency rise during the winter in many parts of the world, researchers have been interested in whether the vitamin might play a role in people’s susceptibility to colds, flu and other respiratory infections.

Some past research has indeed found that people with relatively lower vitamin D levels in their blood tend to have higher rates of respiratory infections than those with higher levels of the vitamin, said Dr. Ilkka Laaksi of the University of Tampere in Finland, the lead researcher on the new study.

Along with that evidence, recent lab research has shown that vitamin D may play an “important role” in the body’s immune defenses against respiratory pathogens, Laaksi wrote in an email to Reuters Health.

“However,” the researcher said, “there is a lack of clinical studies of the effect of vitamin D supplementation for preventing respiratory infections.”

For the current study, Laaksi’s team randomly assigned 164 male military recruits to take either 400 international units (IU) of vitamin D or inactive placebo pills every day for six months — from October to March, covering the months when people’s vitamin D stores typically decline and when respiratory infections typically peak.

At the end of the study, the researchers found no clear difference between the two groups in the average number of days missed from duty due to a respiratory infection — which included bronchitis, sinus infections, pneumonia, ear infections and sore throat.

On average, men who took vitamin D missed about two days from duty because of a respiratory infection, compared with three days in the placebo group. That difference was not significant in statistical terms.

However, men in the vitamin D group were more likely to have no days missed from work due to a respiratory illness.

Overall, 51 percent remained “healthy” throughout the six-month study, versus 36 percent of the placebo group, the researchers report.

The findings, Laaksi said, offer “some evidence” of a benefit from vitamin D against respiratory infections.

Still, the extent of the benefit was not clear. While recruits in the vitamin group were more likely to have no days missed from duty, they were no less likely to report having cold-like symptoms at some point during the study period.

Moreover, recent studies on the usefulness of vitamin D for warding off respiratory ills have come to conflicting conclusions.

A study of Japanese schoolchildren published earlier this year found that those given 1,200 IU of vitamin D each day during cold and flu season were less likely to contract influenza A. Of 167 children given the supplement, 18 developed the flu, compared with 31 of 167 children given placebo pills.

On the other hand, a recent study of 162 adults found that those who took 2,000 IU of vitamin D everyday for 12 weeks were no less likely to develop respiratory infections than those given placebo pills.

Laaksi said that larger clinical trials looking at different doses of vitamin D are still needed before the vitamin can be recommended for curbing the risk of respiratory infections.

In the U.S., health officials recommend that adults up to the age of 50 get 200 IU of vitamin D each day, while older adults should get 400 to 600 IU. The upper limit is currently set at 2,000 IU per day; higher intakes may raise the risks of side effects.

Symptoms of vitamin D toxicity are often vague and include nausea, vomiting, constipation, poor appetite and weight loss. Excessive vitamin D in the blood can also raise blood pressure or trigger heart rhythm abnormalities.

Some researchers believe that people need more vitamin D than is currently recommended, and that intakes above 2,000 IU per day are safe. However, exactly what the optimal vitamin D intake might be remains under debate.

Food sources of vitamin D include milk, breakfast cereals and orange juice fortified with vitamin D, as well as some fatty fish, like salmon and mackerel. Experts generally recommend vitamin pills for people who do not get enough of the vitamin from food.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story points out that experts generally recommend supplements only when people aren’t getting enough vitamin D from their diet or sunlight. And as noted above, the story points out that supplements expose people to some risks of vitamin D toxicity.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
After three years, teens with severe obesity who underwent stomach reduction surgery to lose weight also significantly improved their heart health.

A study published Monday in Pediatrics shows that blood pressure, cholesterol, inflammation and insulin levels all improved, particularly among those who lost the most weight.

"The potential impact of such risk reduction translates into a reduced likelihood of developing significant heart disease later in life, including atherosclerosis, heart failure and stroke," says study author Marc Michalsky, surgical director of the Center for Healthy Weight and Nutrition at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, in an email. "This study serves to reinforce the benefits of bariatric surgery as a safe and effective treatment strategy that should be considered sooner rather than later."

Younger adolescents in the study showed bigger improvements in their cholesterol and inflammation levels than the older teens. Even participants who had normal-range blood pressure, triglycerides or cholesterol levels before surgery saw improved measures.

Nearly a third of all children and teens are overweight or obese in the U.S., and an estimated 4 to 7 percent have severe obesity. The greater a person's obesity, the greater their risk of high blood pressure, heart disease, Type 2 diabetes and organ damage.

The findings are important because many of the participants in this study likely already had some level of cardiac damage, such as thickened arteries or heart walls, says Geetha Raghuveer, a pediatric cardiologist at Children's Mercy Kansas City in Missouri who was not involved in the study.

"If you have very high blood pressure or lipids [cholesterol] or diabetes, you do see cardiovascular changes even at a very young age," Raghuveer says. "They may not be having a heart attack or stroke in their teens and 20s, but they're closer to having those in their 30s and 40s."

Among 242 teens in the study, 161 of them underwent a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedure, 67 underwent a vertical sleeve gastrectomy and 14 received an adjustable gastric banding. The study authors had no part in which procedures the teens received. They collected data from the five participating medical centers for their observational study, and decisions about procedures depended on each center's clinical practices.

The teens, ages 15 to 18 when the study began, had a body mass index (BMI) between 34 and 88, with half over 51. Medical providers use BMI, the ratio of a person's weight to height, to estimate body fat. A BMI over 25 is considered overweight; over 30 is obese. The obesity classification with the highest risks of health problems is a BMI of 40 or higher.

The risk factors measured in the study included elevated blood pressure (above 120/80 mg/Hg), high cholesterol, high insulin levels in the blood and abnormally high levels of C-reactive protein, an indicator of inflammation in the body. The higher a person's insulin levels are, the more likely they are to have or develop insulin resistance, which can increase blood sugar levels and diabetes risk. High insulin levels may also contribute to increased blood pressure and increase the risk of atherosclerosis, when fat clogs the arteries.

Three years after surgery, teens who underwent a gastric bypass had a 27 percent drop in their BMI, similar to the 26 percent drop in those who had the sleeve gastrectomy. Those with the gastric band had an 8 percent drop in BMI.

Before surgery, only 3 percent of the teens had no cardiac risk factors at all, but three years later, just over half of them (52 percent) had no risk factors. Just 5 percent had all four cardiac risk factors before their surgeries, but none had all of them three years later. In fact, the majority of the participants — 83 percent — had only one or no risk factors three years after their surgeries. The proportion of participants with two or three risk factors also dropped substantially.

"One of the surprises was that almost all patients benefited as a result of the surgery," says M. James Lenhard, the medical director of Christiana Care Health System's Diabetes & Metabolic Diseases Center in Wilmington, Del., who was not involved in the study. The average BMI three years after surgery was 39, still considered very obese, he says. "And yet they still had significant improvements in cardiovascular risk factors," Lenhard says. "The results were impressive."

The study's biggest limitation is its very selective population. Most of the participants were female, most were white, and most received the gastric bypass. Children of color have the greatest risk of obesity, heart disease and Type 2 diabetes, but it's not clear whether they would see the same improvement with these procedures. Lenhard expects the "odds are very good" that they would, and Raghuveer "would be cautiously optimistic" that the findings would be similar regardless of sex or ethnicity.

The population also included only teens with the greatest obesity who were also unsuccessful trying other weight loss methods.

"Severe obesity is notoriously difficult to treat with anything other than surgery," Lenhard says. "The results of this study suggest that performing surgery at a BMI even lower than 52 would provide even better outcomes."

An estimated 1,600 adolescents undergo metabolic or bariatric surgeries each year, the study notes, but families should only consider such procedures after exhausting other treatment options.

"This is not a procedure you would consider for any obese patient who walks through the door," Raghuveer says. "It would be considered for the highly obese and those not responding to any behavioral modifications, physical activity or calorie restriction."

Before undergoing bariatric surgery, teens and their families receive extensive counseling, Michalsky says.

"Teens considering bariatric surgery should have a frank discussion with their family and primary care provider and seek detailed information from well-established bariatric surgery centers that are specifically dedicated to treating adolescents," he adds.

All three procedures carry the same risks as any surgical procedure, such as infections, blood clots and bleeding, Lenhard said, and a common risk of sleeve gastrectomy is bleeding where the stomach is reconnected. People who have a gastric bypass often have nutritional and vitamin deficiencies, Lenhard said. And gastric banding has low effectiveness and a risk of the band slipping down the stomach.

Getting longer term data is important, too. Three years is a good follow-up time for this type of study, and it has many more participants than similar studies.

"However, three years is not a long time overall in the life of a child," Raghuveer says. "I'd be curious what happens to these kids at 10 years, 15 years later."

Michalsky says the study is ongoing, and they expect to continuing gathering information for years to come.

Ideally, public health efforts should aim for better obesity prevention, including parent education and interventions when children are toddlers and preschoolers, according to Raghuveer. "A generational divide" has left fewer families knowing how to fix meals, she says, and more families need to learn to cook and avoid packaged foods and microwave dinners.

"The big question is, how do we prevent obese kids from getting to this point where they would need an invasive surgical procedure?" Raghuveer says. "The bigger message should be that we should get to a point in society where we are not managing obesity, but we are preventing obesity."

Tara Haelle is the co-author of The Informed Parent: A Science-Based Resource for Your Child's First Four Years. She's on Twitter: @tarahaelle
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job here, quoting Geetha Raghuveer, a pediatric cardiologist at Children’s Mercy Kansas City in Missouri who, it reports, was not involved in the study. Raghuveer is quoted saying surgery “would be considered for the highly obese and those not responding to any behavioral modifications, physical activity or calorie restriction.” Further, the story says, Raghuveer endorses public health efforts that “aim for better obesity prevention, including parent education and interventions when children are toddlers and preschoolers.”
“The big question is, how do we prevent obese kids from getting to this point where they would need an invasive surgical procedure?” Raghuveer says in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Montreal, March 22, 2016 — The proportion of older adults with age-related vision loss is estimated to be as high as one in three over the age of 50. In Canada, that’s roughly 3.6 million people. Many of these individuals turn to adaptive devices designed to magnify objects and text, but these devices can be prohibitively expensive, uni-functional and bulky.

Enter the iPad: a technological device that’s relatively cheap, serves many purposes, is smaller than most books, and — according to new research from Concordia University in Montreal — is just as effective a visual aid as traditional devices.

A study recently described in Good Times Magazine provides the first experimental evidence that the Apple iPad is as good as technology traditionally used in reading rehabilitation for individuals with visual impairment.

And that could help with stigmatization of the elderly and disabled.

For the study, the Concordia-based research team recruited 100 participants who ranged in age from 24 to 97. A little over half the participants had age-related macular degeneration, a disease characterized by the deterioration of the small central portion of the retina that is normally responsible for fine detailed vision tasks such as reading.

The researchers used questionnaires and tests to gauge participants’ visual ability, and then compared the Apple iPad versus two traditionally used magnification devices, to see if reading rates varied across devices.

“Unsurprisingly, we found that most participants found it hard to read small and medium text, while nearly a quarter of them reported that reading large text was much easier,” says Elliott Morrice, an MA student in Concordia’s Department of Psychology and the study’s first author.

“What was interesting to note was that it didn’t matter what technology was used to do the magnification: an iPad worked just as well as a traditional device like a closed circuit television system (CCTV),” he says. “When we took previous experience into account, we found that participants who had used iPads before read on average 30 words per minute faster than those who were using the iPad for the first time. But there were no significant differences in the reading rates of participants who had previous experience using the CCTV, compared to the reading rates of first-time CCTV users.”

Another benefit is that many older adults feel stigmatized by using the traditional devices, because they identify them as having an impairment or disability.

“Tablet computers offer many of the same benefits while being socially acceptable,” says Aaron Johnson, the study’s senior author, and an associate professor in the psychology department, and a member of the Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Rehabilitation of Greater Montreal (CRIR).

“What’s more, compared to the devices currently used by those with low vision, iPads are multi-functional, allowing the user to go online, check email, make video calls — and they cost less than the traditional devices,” he says. “This cost saving can be both to the individual, and if appropriate, to the insurance companies that may provide individuals with assistive devices.”

Partners in research: This work was supported in part by the Vision Health Research Network, the Fonds de recherche du Québéc - Santé, the Antoine Turmel Foundation, CRIR, and the MAB-Mackay Foundation. The study's third co-author is Julie-Andrée Marinier, from the Centre de recherche interdisciplinaire en réadaptation du Montréal métropolitain and École d'optométrie at the Université de Montréal.

Walter Wittich is a member of CRIR, an assistant professor in l’École d'optométrie at Université de Montréal and an affiliated faculty member of the Department of Psychology at Concordia University.

Related links:Department of PsychologyCentre de recherche interdisciplinaire en réadaptation du Montréal métropolitainÉcole d'optométrie at the Université de MontréalMAB-Mackay Rehabilitation Centre
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release compares using a widely available consumer device to using more traditional and more expensive devices. We’ll give them a Satisfactory for naming the CCTV device but we’re never told what the other alternative magnification device was, although the release often refers to two traditional alternatives. We also would have liked some comparative prices and inclusion of other brands besides the Apple brand.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 26, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Electroencephalogram (EEG), a test that shows the electrical activity of the brain, might be used to spot autism in children, a new study suggests.

The study, conducted by researchers at Harvard University Medical School, looked at the synchronization of brain activity across different brain regions, as measured by EEG.

"These scientists used sensors to record electrical brain activity across many different regions on the scalp," explained Geraldine Dawson, chief science officer at the advocacy group Autism Speaks. "They then looked at the extent to which brain activity from one region was synchronized with brain activity from another region," a phenomenon known as "EEG coherence," said Dawson, who was not involved in the research.

"Synchronization between different brain regions indicates that those regions are functioning in a coordinated, rather than independent, fashion -- in other words, they are functionally connected and communicating with each other," she said.

In the new study, Dr. Frank Duffy and Dr. Heidelise Als compared EEG measurements of nearly 1,000 children with and without autism. They found that the two groups had widespread differences in terms of brain connectivity.

EEG revealed that the children with autism had a reduced short range connectivity, indicating poor function of local brain networks. This was especially true in the left hemisphere regions of the brain responsible for language.

The children with autism also had increased connectivity between brain regions that were farther apart, which might be a mechanism developed to compensate for reduced short range connectivity, the researchers said.

The research was conducted at Boston Children's Hospital and was published online June 25 in the journal BMC Medicine.

The use of EEG-based testing may help diagnose autism in children and may improve early detection in infants, leading to more effective treatments and coping strategies, the researchers said.

"What was unique about this study is the very large number of children studied," Dawson noted. "Consistent with many previous studies using EEG and functional MRI with both children and adults with autism, these investigators found that, overall, children with autism show reduced coordination (coherence) across brain regions."

She said the findings are important because, "they help us understand why individuals with autism have difficulty with complex behaviors, such as social interaction and language. As children's brains develop, the different brain regions become increasingly connected, allowing for the acquisition of complex behaviors that require coordination across different brain regions."

Language, for example, requires coordination across the auditory, visual, and motor brain regions, as well as the participation of the prefrontal cortex, she said.

"This reduced functional connectivity in the brain helps us understand impairments associated with autism," she added. "The hope is that early behavioral intervention can help mitigate these functional impairments, helping to form the connections that natural develop in typical children."

"Although autism is still principally a clinical diagnosis, this study ... may allow for a new approach to classifying children with autism and may even assist in the early identification of affected children at a younger age," said Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at the Steven & Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York in New Hyde Park, NY.

The number of children diagnosed with autism in the United States has recently increased to one in 88.

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more about autism.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention that autism is a clinical diagnosis (and though this research study was not about diagnosis, it deals with better understanding the brain activity behind the behaviors which lead to the diagnosis). It would be hard for the writer to do much more than that.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Women undergoing surgery for endometrial cancer can confidently opt for a minimally invasive hysterectomy performed by a skilled surgeon — with or without a robot’s help — suggests a new review of surgical outcomes.

The researchers found that the two advanced minimally invasive techniques led to similar results, and both appeared to be generally superior to the traditional open procedure.

“With minimally invasive surgery by an experienced surgeon’s hands, the incisions are smaller, pain and suffering is less, visualization is better, and recovery is faster than with open surgery,” Dr. Ceana Nezhat of the Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta who was not involved in the review, told Reuters Health.

“Robotics makes it easier for surgeons to transition from open to minimally invasive procedures,” he added.

More than 40,000 women are diagnosed with endometrial cancer in the U.S. every year. Treatment usually involves surgical removal of the uterus, known as hysterectomy. At the same time, lymph nodes are often removed to determine the stage of the cancer and whether further treatment is necessary.

The research team from the Florida Hospital Cancer Institute, in Orlando, reviewed eight prior studies, including nearly 1,600 patients who underwent either an open, closed or robot-assisted hysterectomy and lymph node removal.

In the open surgery, a relatively large incision is made in the abdominal wall. The closed procedure, known as laparoscopy, requires a much smaller cut, through which small instruments and a video camera are inserted. However, this minimally invasive approach also calls for significant training on the part of the surgeon to overcome challenges such as the counterintuitive movements involved in working from images on a TV monitor.

Robotic-assisted surgery is similar to laparoscopy, only the instruments and cameras are integrated into robotic arms, which the surgeon operates through a control console. The robotic equipment provides better three-dimensional vision, increased range of motion and intuitive, downscaled movements, while adding a few thousand more dollars to the procedure’s price tag, the authors note.

“Also with the computer-enhanced robotic technology, no matter how much coffee you drink in the morning, your movements don’t have tremors,” said Nezhat.

Based on their review, the researchers found that minimally invasive surgeries done with a human hand and instruments or with robotic assistance equipment took around the same time and resulted in similarly long stays in the hospital. However, about half as much blood was lost when robots were enlisted than with standard laparoscopy.

Both minimally invasive techniques resulted in longer-duration operations than open surgery. But both also led to shorter hospital stays and, in the case of robotic surgery, less blood-loss.

Further, the average number of lymph nodes removed was about the same in the robotic and open procedures, suggesting that both approaches result in about equal surgeon accuracy in staging endometrial cancer.

No differences between the three methods were seen in the numbers of complications, report the researchers in the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology.

“The robot will not really decrease human errors but it will make the surgery easier,” Dr. Tommaso Falcone of the Cleveland Clinic, in Ohio, who was also not involved in the study, told Reuters Health in an e-mail.

“Robotics increases the chance that a hysterectomy can be done by laparoscopy,” he added. “However, if the surgeon is skilled enough to do the hysterectomy without the robot by laparoscopy then the outcomes will be similar.”

Nezhat further noted that while robotic assistance can be a good “enabler” for a minimally invasive approach, surgeons should have at least the basic knowledge of regular laparoscopy too, as there may be times when the robotic equipment doesn’t work.

The reviewers point out that some of the differences found, such as the longer operation times for robotic-assisted surgery, may be due to surgeons’ inexperience with the new tool and could improve over time.

On the other hand, the newness of the technology could have deterred surgeons from using it for difficult cases, potentially biasing the results in a positive way for the robotic technique.

Robotic surgery equipment only received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval in 2005. More research is needed to be able to compare long-term outcomes, wrote the researchers.

Nezhat advises women to look for a surgeon experienced in doing minimally invasive surgery. If a robot is to be enlisted, he recommends asking how the procedure would be performed if the robot is not available or if it doesn’t work.

“Robotic-assisted surgery is in its infancy, and it definitely has a future,” said Nezhat. “Its benefits should offset its higher costs.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The entire story was based on a systematic review of studies of three surgical approaches to endometrial cancer. The story did a nice job briefly explaining the differences in the surgical techniques and the differences seen in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 20, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Stem cell transplants may halt the progression of aggressive multiple sclerosis (MS) in nearly half of those with the debilitating disease, but picking the right patients for the treatment is key, a new study suggests.

Specifically, younger patients with a relapsing form of MS who were not severely disabled and who hadn't found relief with other treatments fared better than others over five years, the international team of researchers found.

However, in some cases the treatment proved fatal, the researchers reported.

"Stem cell transplantation cannot be considered a cure for MS. However, it can be considered a concrete option for patients showing aggressive MS who have not responded to approved treatments," said study co-author Dr. Riccardo Saccardi. He's from the cell therapy and transfusion medicine unit at Careggi University Hospital in Florence, Italy.

Using patients' own stem cells to reboot the immune system is a way to halt the advance of the disease. But the treatment can be risky because the patient's immune system has to be wiped out before the stem cells are transplanted, the researchers said.

In fact, nearly 3 percent of the patients died shortly after receiving the transplant, and those deaths were directly related to the transplant, the researchers reported.

Those deaths are a major concern, one neurologist said, because MS is not in itself life-threatening.

In effect, those patients gambled with a treatment that could be fatal for a disease that isn't, said Dr. Michael Racke, a professor in the department of neurology at Ohio State University.

Racke pointed out that stem cell transplants were first used to treat deadly diseases, such as leukemia, lymphoma and other cancers.

"There may be a population of MS patients that could be identified that might do well with transplant," he said. "It's important to select patients in such a way that they actually get well with the transplant."

A trial that compares stem cell transplants with other therapies to see whether stem cell transplants can become a treatment for patients who have progressive MS is about to start, added Racke, who co-authored an editorial that accompanied the study.

More than 2 million people in the world suffer from MS, in which the body attacks the central nervous system, according to the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.

MS can cause many symptoms, including blurred vision, loss of balance, poor coordination, slurred speech, tremors, numbness, extreme fatigue, problems with memory and concentration, paralysis and blindness.

These symptoms can come and go, or persist and worsen over time. Most people are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 50, although individuals as young as 2 and as old as 75 have developed the disease, the society says.

Medications can slow the progression of MS and help patients manage symptoms, but there's no cure.

To see how patients did over the long term after stem cell transplants, Saccardi and colleagues followed 281 patients from 13 countries who received stem cell transplants between 1995 and 2006.

The researchers found that 46 percent of the patients experienced progression-free survival at five years after transplant.

Within 100 days of transplant, however, eight patients died (nearly 3 percent). Those deaths were related to the transplants, Saccardi said.

The researchers think these deaths were most likely due to the transplant technology used before 2006, which has since improved.

The report was published online Feb. 20 in the journal JAMA Neurology.

Dr. Paul Wright is chair of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., and Long Island Jewish Medical Center, in New Hyde Park, N.Y. He said, "As neurologists battle with current therapies that are limited for progressive MS in younger patients, this study provides a possible new avenue for treatment."

Visit the National Multiple Sclerosis Society for more on MS.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that “A trial that compares stem cell transplants with other therapies to see whether stem cell transplants can become a treatment for patients who have progressive MS is about to start.” The story also notes that “Medications can slow the progression of MS and help patients manage symptoms, but there’s no cure.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jan. 13, 2010 - A new anticlotting drug works better than Plavix, one of the most prescribed and most profitable drugs in the world, a huge clinical trial finds.

The new kid on the block is AstraZeneca's ticagrelor, to be named Brilinta if the experimental drug gets FDA approval.

That approval seems likely, given the results of a new clinical trial that compared Plavix to Brilinta in patients with acute coronary syndromes who had stents placed in their arteries to improve blood flow. Such patients need anticlotting drugs because blood clots can be a deadly complication of getting a stent.

Plavix is the drug most often used to prevent this complication. But there's a problem with Plavix, and with a newer, stronger drug in the same class called Effient.

Both drugs increase the risk of dangerous bleeding. And since the drugs irreversibly bind to blood-clotting platelets, a patient has to stop taking these drugs for five to seven days before the body can make enough new platelets.

Brilinta lets go of platelets more quickly than Plavix -- in about two or three days. And in the new study, patients had less bleeding after stent installation.

That's probably why the 6,732 study patients who got Brilinta were 16% less likely to die, or have a heart attack or stroke, than were the 6,676 patients who got Plavix. Brilinta reduced overall death rates by 1.1% .

"We estimate that use of [Brilinta] instead of [Plavix] for one year in 1,000 patients with acute coronary syndromes and who are planning to undergo an invasive strategy at the start of drug treatment would lead to 11 fewer deaths, 13 fewer myocardial infarctions, and six fewer cases of stent [clotting] without an increase in the rates of major bleeding or transfusion," conclude study researcher Christopher P. Cannon, MD, and colleagues.

The findings impress Columbia University researcher Gregg W. Stone, MD. Stone has in the past received honoraria from the makers of both Plavix and Brilinta and serves on the advisory boards of Boston Scientific and Abbott Vascular.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION:  The story indicated that the drug reported on was more effective than the currently available treatments at reducing death, heart attack, and stent clotting.  The story would have been greatly improved had it provided absolute data on the occurrence of these events.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Up to half of women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer might be cured, compared to the current 20 per cent survival rate, argues Dr. Steven Narod, senior scientist at Women's College Research Institute, who calls for a new standard of treatment for women with late-stage ovarian cancer.

Based on an analysis of existing evidence, published in an opinion article in the Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology journal on January 20, Dr. Narod argues that to achieve a cure, rather than simply delay progression or reoccurrence of the disease, women should be first treated with aggressive surgery to remove all clinically-detectable cancer cells, followed by targeted chemotherapy to the abdomen (intraperitoneal chemotherapy).

The possibility of a 50 per cent cure rate would be a significant improvement over the current 20 per cent survival rate resulting from more conventional treatment options offered to patients, which consist of a combination of different methods including: chemotherapy before surgery; post-operative chemotherapy delivered intravenously to the whole body (as opposed to localized into the abdomen); and surgery that leaves minimal residual disease in the abdomen, rather than removing all visible cancer cells.

Dr. Narod, who is also a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Breast Cancer, recommends that doctors should consider adopting a standard model of care for all women diagnosed with advanced-stage ovarian cancer:
• Chemotherapy should be offered after the surgery, rather than before. Chemotherapy before surgery might provide a false assurance that there's no more residual cancer, whereas microscopic tumour may remain after the surgery, leading to cancer recurrence and possibly, death.
• The surgery should be aggressive in an attempt to remove all visible signs of the tumour, and to avoid leaving any residual disease. The goal is to have no cancer visible to the naked eye of the surgeon after the surgery.
• Surgery should be followed by intraperitoneal, or localized, chemotherapy delivered to the abdomen. Localized chemotherapy works best if there's no residual cancer after the initial surgery. It is the combined effect of surgery and chemotherapy that works best.

"For decades, women have been treated with a combination of treatment options, resulting in poor prognosis for most women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer, but there are many survivors as well," said Dr. Narod, senior scientist at Women's College Research Institute.

"Women need support to endure surgery and the rigours of intraperitoneal chemotherapy, but should be encouraged to do so whenever possible, considering the potential survival benefits," said Narod. "We should offer all women the possibility of a cure."
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release discusses several other conventional treatment options for advanced-stage ovarian cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Maximilian Muenke has a superpower: He can diagnose disease just by looking at a person’s face.

Specifically, he can spot certain genetic disorders that make telltale impressions on facial features.

“Once you’ve done it for a certain amount of years, you walk into a room and it’s like, oh, that child has Williams syndrome,” he said, referring to a genetic disorder that can affect a person’s cognitive abilities and heart.

And that’s an incredibly useful skill, even as genetic sequencing becomes more widespread. For one thing, it can be the factor that sends someone to get a genetic test in the first place. For another, people in many parts of the world don’t have access to genetic tests at all.

That’s inspired years of effort to train a computer to do the same thing. Software that analyzes a patient’s face for signs of disease could help clinicians better diagnose and treat people with genetic syndromes.

Some older attempts at facial analysis relied on large, clunky scanners — a tool better suited to a lab, not the field. Now, in the era of smartphones, such efforts have a whole new promise. Face2Gene, a program developed by Boston-based startup FDNA, has a mobile app that clinicians can use to snap photos of their patients and get a list of syndromes they might have.

Meanwhile, Muenke and his colleagues at the NIH last month published an important advance: the ability to diagnose disease in a non-Caucasian face.

It’s a promising preliminary sign. But if facial recognition software is to be widely useful for diagnoses, software developers and geneticists will need to work together to overcome genetics’ systemic blind spots.

The algorithms in general work on the same principles: measuring the size of facial features and their placement to detect patterns. They’re both trained on databases of photographs doctors take of their patients. The NIH works with partners around the world to collect their photos; FDNA accepts photos uploaded to Face2Gene.

But they differ in a key way: Whereas the algorithm the NIH uses can predict if someone has a given genetic disorder, the Face2Gene algorithm spits out not diagnoses, but probabilities. The app describes photos as being a certain percent similar to photos of people with one of the 2,000 disorders for which Face2Gene has image data, based on the overall “look” of the face as well as the presence of certain features. However, the app won’t give clinicians a yes or no answer to the question of, “Does my patient have a genetic disorder?”

That’s intentional. Face2Gene is meant to be more like a search engine for diseases — a means to an end.

“We are not a diagnostic tool, and we will never be a diagnostic tool,” said FDNA CEO Dekel Gelbman.

Drawing that bright line between Face2Gene and “a diagnostic tool” allows FDNA to stay compliant with FDA regulations governing mobile medical apps while avoiding some of the regulatory burden associated with smartphone-based diagnostic tools.

The algorithm the NIH uses — developed by scientists at Children’s National Health System in Washington, D.C., — seems to work pretty well so far: In 129 cases of Down syndrome, it accurately detected the disorder 94 percent of the time. For DiGeorge syndrome, the numbers were even higher: It had a 95 percent accuracy rate across all 156 cases.

Face2Gene declined to provide similar numbers for their technology. “Since Face2Gene is a search and reference informational tool, the terms sensitivity and specificity are difficult to apply to our output,” Gelbman cautioned.

But there’s one big stumbling block for both of them, a problem that has dogged medical genetics for decades: Data for non-white populations is sorely lacking.

“In every single textbook, the ones we had [when I trained] in Germany and the major textbooks here in the US, there are photos of individuals of northern European descent,” Muenke said. “When I told this to my boss, he said there have to be atlases for children from diverse backgrounds. And there aren’t. There just aren’t.” (Today there is that resource, based on Muenke and the NIH’s work.)

So diagnosing diseases from a face alone presents an additional challenge in countries where the majority of the population isn’t of northern European descent, because some facial areas that vary with ethnic background can often overlap with areas that signify a genetic disorder. Eventually, the software will also have to be able to tackle people with mixed ethnic backgrounds, too. “We have thought about it but haven’t gone there yet,” Muenke said.

For example, children with Down syndrome often have flat nasal bridges — as do typically developing African or African-American children. Across different races and ethnicities of children there were only two reliable identifiers that could be used to diagnose Down syndrome — the angles between landmark points on the child’s nose and eye, according to a paper Muenke and Marius Linguraru at Children’s National published with their colleagues earlier this year. All of the other “typical” features weren’t significantly more likely to show up when children were compared to ethnically matched controls.

In fact, using a Caucasian face as a reference can sometimes be the least representative choice. “One of the findings that I’m very interested in [in] our recent study was that the population that we found to be most different from the others, in terms of facial patterns characteristic of DiGeorge syndrome, was the Caucasian population,” Linguraru said.

To continue to fix this problem, both the NIH and Face2Gene need help from more researchers who can upload more patients’ faces — but that’s easier said than done. Confirming a suspected disorder with genetic tests is standard practice today, and there are no genetic labs based in Africa registered in the NIH’s Genetic Testing Registry. Asia and South America are also relatively underserved.

Those numbers also reflect the general patterns of distribution for medical geneticists. “Most practitioners are located in North America and Europe,” Gelbman said. Nigeria, for example, doesn’t have a single medical geneticist in the entire country.

It’s possible that might change, with time and effort. In addition to his work as a researcher, Muenke directs a program that brings health care professionals from developing countries to the US for a month-long crash course in medical genetics. (The program is funded by the NIH’s Fogarty International Center; President Trump eliminated funding for the center in his 2018 “skinny” budget proposal announced in March.)

For now, both algorithms have shown that they can handle a diverse patient set. FDNA scientists published a paper in January showing that their algorithm could better identify Down syndrome after being trained with a more diverse set of faces, and Muenke and Linguraru have also published papers this year demonstrating their algorithm’s ability to identify genetic disorders correctly in children across a variety of ethnic backgrounds.

As both groups work on recruiting more researchers, they are also working to push their tech forward. FDNA is working on establishing partnerships with pharmaceutical companies to start their commercial outreach. In theory, these partnerships could contribute to precision medicine efforts or help companies develop new therapies for rare diseases.

Meanwhile, Linguraru has his eyes on eventual FDA approval for the algorithm the NIH has used. The ultimate goal would be a simple tool that any doctor could use anywhere to get fast results and better diagnose their patients.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story makes clear that there is physician experience, as well as genetic tests, as alternatives. Because the software-makers insist this new tool is not to be used for diagnoses, we’re still not sure what the benefit of this new technology would be, and why it’s needed, though.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Do this and similar exercises hundreds of times over multiple sessions weekly; continue for months; and, gradually, presbyopia lessens, a number of studies show.

One study also examined functions of the eye itself and found none of these improvements were because of changes in the eye. They’re all in the brain.

Various smartphone apps say they offer this kind of vision-improving training; I used one called GlassesOff, the only one I found that was backed by scientific studies.

Perceptual learning can improve the vision of people who already see quite well and those with other conditions. For example, a study tested the approach in 23 young adults, around age 24. Compared with a control group of 20 young adults, the treatment group increased letter recognition speed. Similar training is an effective component in treating amblyopia, also called “lazy eye,” which is the most frequent cause of vision loss in infants and children, affecting 3 percent of the population. It may also improve vision in those with mild myopia (nearsightedness).

It should be acknowledged that some researchers involved in many of these studies have financial ties to GlassesOff. However, other studies with no commercial links obtained similar results, and several scientists I spoke to, including those without ties to GlassesOff, thought the science behind the app was credible. One study published in Psychological Science trained 16 college-aged adults and 16 older adults (around age 71) with Gabor patch exercises for 1.5 hours per day for seven days. After training, the older adults’ ability to see low-contrast images improved to the level that the college-age ones had before training.

Scientists don’t know exactly how perceptual learning relieves presbyopia, but they have some clues based on how our brain processes visual information.

After first taking in “raw data” of an image through the eye, different sets of neurons in the brain process it as separate features like edges and colors. Then the brain must coordinate activity across sets of neurons to assemble these features into recognizable objects like chairs, faces, letters or words. Reading at our normal pace, the brain has only about 250 milliseconds to do this work until the eyes automatically move onto the next letter or word. Once they do so, we’re taking in more information from whatever the eyes focus on next. If we haven’t yet processed the prior set of information, we can’t understand it.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story raises the alternatives of bifocals and transitional lenses. It would have been stronger if it had mentioned other alternatives to the app-based brain training, such as simple magnifiers, brighter light, and multifocal lenses now available for those who need cataract surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — For three years, Andrew Harder wondered if he had prostate cancer. In 2009, he had routine blood work that revealed an elevated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level. When PSA is above 4 nanograms per milliliter of blood, it can be one of the first signs of a prostate tumor. Harder’s PSA was 9.

By the time Harder saw a urologist, it had skyrocketed to 20. His doctor recommended the traditional next step: a transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) biopsy, which involves taking random tissue samples from 12 cross sections of the prostate.

Over the course of two years, Harder, 60, an MRI technologist, would have three TRUS biopsies. They were all inconclusive.

“It is frustrating to have a bunch of biopsies with a rising PSA and no proof of cancer,” Harder said.

After Harder’s third biopsy, his urologist was ready to throw in the towel, and that’s when Harder was referred to Jinxing Yu, M.D., at VCU Health. By then, Harder’s PSA was around 30.

Yu is the director of oncologic and prostate imaging in the Department of Radiology at VCU. Over the past five years, he has developed diagnostic techniques using MRI technology to investigate difficult cases like Harder’s.

After one MRI, Yu found Harder’s tumor. After that, Yu performed a targeted biopsy guided by the MRI scanner, allowing him to take tissue samples directly from the tumor.

In 2012, he started on a treatment plan: hormone therapy for six months to shrink the tumor and prostate, and then external beam radiation to finish the job. Today, his PSA is normal.

Other patients who continue to hit a brick wall with negative results from TRUS biopsies yet persistently high PSA levels may not be as fortunate.

“A patient had 10 TRUS biopsies and his doctors still couldn’t find a tumor,” Yu said. “If you do not have this kind of advanced imaging, sometimes a patient runs into a situation when a tumor can’t be found and treated because it’s too late — it has already metastasized. He ends up diagnosed with cancer only after the tumor has spread to his bone or lymph nodes years later.”

Magnetic resonance imaging and targeted biopsy for the prostate have provided relief for patients like Harder who have not been able to get an accurate diagnosis. When caught early, prostate cancer is highly treatable.

Much like someone would have an MRI to investigate the cause of back pain, the technology gives doctors eyes on what is happening in prostate tissue. VCU Medical Center is one of the major teaching hospitals in the country doing advanced multiparametric MRI, which involves taking three different types of imaging sequences of the prostate.

Each of the sequences — T2 weighted imaging, diffusion-weighted imaging and dynamic contrast enhanced imaging — tells a story, and together they can be used to make a diagnosis with more than 90 percent accuracy.

Interpreting a prostate MRI to be able to correctly diagnose cancer is a skill that can take years to develop. Yu and his team look for certain patterns that are typical of cancer on each of the different sequences.

“If we put those characteristic features together from each sequence then we can say with a high degree of confidence that this area is concerning for cancer and potentially target it for biopsy,” said Sarah Winks, M.D., an attending physician in the Department of Radiology.

An MRI can also help determine how aggressive a tumor is, Yu said, and indicates if the tumor extends outside of the prostate and involves other areas — all information that helps urologists and radiation oncologists determine the best course of treatment.

In addition to enhancing detection of prostate cancer, magnetic resonance technology also enhances the biopsy process with a procedure called magnetic resonance/ultrasound fusion biopsy. MRI scans are overlaid with real-time ultrasound images to guide the biopsy needle to the tumor.

In 2014, VCU Health’s Department of Radiology, supported by the Division of Urology in the Department of Surgery, purchased ultrasound/MRI fusion biopsy equipment. Prior to this, Yu’s team had performed targeted MRI biopsies with the patient being moved in and out of the MRI scanner as the needle was guided to the target area — a sort of stop-motion procedure that could take up to an hour. The new equipment has simplified and shortened the process to about 20 minutes.

A study published in 2015 by the Center for Cancer Research found that fusion biopsy is 30 percent more accurate in diagnosing high-risk, aggressive cancers than a TRUS biopsy. It is also much better at finding tumors in the anterior part of the prostate, near where Harder’s tumor was located.

Yu credits the technology and also having a dedicated team that can perform multiparametric-MRI, read the MRI scans and conduct biopsies with a very high success rate.

“At most places, there will be a radiologist reading the MR image and a clinician performing the biopsy. The person reading the image and person putting in the needle is different,” Yu said. “Sometimes you don’t get the same result. We do both. That’s one of our strengths.”

Yu has seen how MRI technology has changed prostate patients’ care. “Five years ago, 95 percent of patients with prostate cancer or a high PSA would never get any imaging,” Yu said. “Right now, I think probably 50 or 60 percent get imaging.” Sometimes, these are patients pushing their doctors for a referral as one of Yu’s patients did last year.

Last August, Jim Grandon of Colville, Washington, discovered he had a PSA of 5.3. It was elevated from the 4.1 measurement that he had registered for a few years. The rising PSA was cause for concern. Instead of going through with an immediate TRUS biopsy recommended by his urologist, he decided to research next steps.

“With just going in and doing a blind biopsy like most urologists will do, you have anywhere from 35 to 45 percent success rate,” Grandon said. “I found three or four places around the country with a biopsy success rate of over 85 percent. When I went back to my urologist, he said, ‘Why spend money flying around the country when we can take care of you here?’ I said, ‘Because 85 percent is better than 40 percent.’”

VCU Medical Center was one of the places Grandon had researched to get his diagnostic testing done, and a few phone calls later, he was on a plane flying across the country to see Yu.

On his second day in Richmond, Grandon had an MRI that showed a lesion. The next day, Yu biopsied it. On the fourth day, Grandon flew home and began researching treatment options. He opted for brachytherapy followed by external radiation at a clinic closer to home, and recently completed his treatment.

More and more, physicians are hearing about and understanding the benefits of MRI technology for prostate care, which has also been helpful in preventing overdiagnosis and overtreatment. According to the Center for Cancer Research study, MRI targeted biopsies detect 17 percent fewer low-risk tumors. These are tumors that would have never developed into a life-threatening cancer, but might lead a doctor and patient to treat it unnecessarily.

When Yu started prostate MRI screening in 2011, his team performed about 50 scans per year. Now, with the support of Massey Cancer Center, Urology and Radiation Oncology, they are doing about 1,200 multiparametric-MRI and 200 imaging guided biopsies per year. He estimates the volume will continue to increase because VCU will attract patients not only from the Greater Richmond area but also patients such as Grandon from other parts of the country.

Yu hopes the advanced technology means positive changes in the standard of care. He speculates that in the same way women have a baseline mammogram, men would have a baseline prostate MRI and periodic magnetic resonance scans if warranted by bloodwork and family history.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The news release offers comparisons between MRIs and the current standard of ultrasound-guided biopsies.
One option not mentioned is foregoing a PSA test. Indeed, that is the recommendation of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
It’s also worth noting that researchers are investigating ways to improve PSA tests to better distinguish between potentially lethal cancerous tumors and benign conditions, according to the NCI. Better PSA tests could result in fewer invasive and costly biopsies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
U.S. prisons are experimenting with a high-priced monthly injection that could help addicted inmates stay off opioids after they are released, but skeptics question its effectiveness and say the manufacturer has aggressively marketed an unproven drug to corrections officials.

A single shot of Vivitrol, given in the buttocks, lasts for four weeks and eliminates the need for the daily doses common with alternatives such as methadone. But each shot costs as much as $1,000, and because the drug has a limited track record, experts do not agree on how well it works.

Proponents say Vivitrol could save money compared with the cost of locking up a drug offender — about $25,000 a year for each inmate at the Sheridan Correctional Center, 70 miles southwest of Chicago.

Dr. Joshua Lee, of New York University’s medical school, said more evidence is needed to determine whether the medication can help substantial numbers of people and whether it’s worth paying for, but the early results are encouraging.

“It sounds good, and for some of us, it feels like the right thing to do,” said Lee, a leading researcher on the treatment.

Vivitrol is emerging as the nation searches for ways to ease an opioid epidemic that affects more than 2 million Americans and an estimated 15 percent of the U.S. prison population. Many experts view prisons — where addiction’s human toll can be seen most clearly — as a natural place to discover what works.

Christopher Wolf had already served prison time for nonviolent crimes when he was ordered into treatment for a heroin addiction by a judge who suggested Vivitrol. Three months later, the 36-year-old from Centerville, Ohio, is clean and working full time as a cook.

He now suggests the medication to other addicts.

“I don’t have cravings,” Wolf said. “I see how much better life is. It gets better really fast.”

Vivitrol targets receptors in the brain’s reward system, blocking the high and extinguishing urges. In some programs, prisoners get an injection before release, then follow-up shots from any clinic.

For decades, researchers have recognized addiction as a relapsing brain disease with medication an important part of therapy. But most jails and prisons reject methadone and buprenorphine, the other government-approved medications for opioid addiction, because they are habit-forming and can be abused.

Just ask Joshua Meador, 28, an inmate at Sheridan who hopes to get into the Vivitrol program before his release in January. Before incarceration, he abused both older treatment drugs. When given take-home doses of methadone for the weekend, he would sell them for heroin.

“When I’m on Vivitrol, I can’t get high,” he said. The drug has no street value or abuse potential.

“You couldn’t design something better for the criminal justice system,” said David Farabee of the University of California at Los Angeles, who leads a Vivitrol study in a New Mexico jail. “There’s been pushback with other medications, people saying, ‘We’re just changing one drug for another.’ That argument goes out the window when you’re talking about a blocker” like Vivitrol.

Prison systems in Illinois, Vermont, Wyoming and Wisconsin are trying the drug on a small scale. Michigan is offering Vivitrol to parolees who commit small crimes, if addiction is the reason for their new offense. The federal Bureau of Prisons ran a field trial in Texas and plans to expand the program to the Northeast next year. The drug’s manufacturer hopes prisons will be the gateway to a larger market.

Also known as extended-release naltrexone, the medication won Food and Drug Administration approval for alcohol dependence in 2006 and in 2010 to prevent relapse in post-detox opioid users.

The evidence for giving Vivitrol to inmates is thin but promising.

In the biggest study, sponsored by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, about 300 offenders — most of them heroin users on probation or parole — were randomly assigned to receive either Vivitrol or brief counseling and referral to a treatment program.

After six months, the Vivitrol group had a lower rate of relapse, 43 percent compared with 64 percent. A year after treatment stopped, there had been no overdoses in the Vivitrol group and seven overdoses, including three deaths, in the other group. The results, published in March in the New England Journal of Medicine, have been promoted by the drugmaker, Ireland-based Alkermes, as it markets Vivitrol to U.S. correctional systems.

Yet addiction is stubborn. When the injections stopped, many in the study relapsed. A year later, relapse rates looked the same in the two groups.

“It does suggest six months wasn’t enough,” said Lee, the lead author.

T.J. Voller was a Vivitrol success story — until he wasn’t. After Vivitrol was approved by the FDA, Voller talked about getting the shot with The Associated Press and Dr. Sanjay Gupta in a CNN segment. The 30-year-old was back at work and seemed proud of his recovery. But after 10 months on Vivitrol, he died of a heroin overdose.

“He was alone for the weekend and picked up that needle one last time,” said his mother, Kathi Voller of Raynham, Massachusetts.

Advocates argue that inmates have a constitutional right to all FDA-approved addiction medications throughout their incarceration.

“Treatment should be offered from the moment they are brought into the system,” said Sally Friedman, legal director of the New York-based Legal Action Center, which is looking for a test case to bring to court.

Physicians have learned to be cautious about pharmaceutical company marketing, said Andrew Kolodny, senior scientist at the Heller School for Social Policy and Management at Brandeis University.

Not so for criminal justice officials, who may be too trusting, Kolodny said.

“When the drug company sends someone in to give them a talk and buy them pizza, they think they’re getting a scientific lecture,” he said.

Alkermes spokeswoman Jennifer Snyder said the company’s sales team helps educate corrections staff and community care providers only after they have shown interest in Vivitrol.

There’s widespread agreement that counseling, support groups and treatment for underlying problems such as depression are crucial for Vivitrol patients, said Dr. Joseph Garbely of Pennsylvania-based Caron Treatment Centers, which supports medication-assisted treatment and prefers Vivitrol.

“The disease of addiction is a cunning, baffling and powerful one,” Garbely said. “And you need all hands on deck.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Existing alternatives, such as methodone and buprenorphine, are mentioned and their debits highlighted, but more could have been said about their track record.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is the first time we have been able to regenerate a cornea in humans,” researcher May Griffith, PhD, of the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute and the University of Ottawa tells WebMD. “We are still in the prototype stage, but this shows that regenerating a human cornea is possible.”

Two years after having the corneas implanted, six of the 10 patients had improved vision . Nine of the 10 experienced cell and nerve regeneration, meaning that corneal cells and nerves grew into the implant.

In a newly released study, investigators from Canada and Sweden reported results from the first 10 people in the world treated with the biosynthetic corneas.

Aug. 25, 2010 -- Corneas made in the lab using genetically engineered human collagen could restore sight to millions of visually impaired people waiting for transplants from human donors, researchers say.

Too Few Corneas Available

Acting as the window to the eye, the cornea is made up largely of water and the fibrous protein collagen.

Worldwide, more than 10 million people have impaired vision or blindness as a result of corneal damage, but only a small fraction ever receive transplants from cadaver donors.

A shortage of human donor tissue coupled with the threat of graft rejection from donor corneal transplants has driven the search for other ways of treating corneal damage. Although synthetic corneal replacements made from plastic are available, they have many drawbacks and are considered an option for only a small percentage of people.

It has been 10 years since Griffith and colleagues first reported the development of a material with the potential to grow healthy new tissue in people with damaged corneas.

To make the material, the researchers placed a human gene that regulates the natural production of collagen into specially programmed yeast cells. They then molded the resulting material into the shape of a cornea.

After several years of testing in her lab, Griffith began collaborating with Swedish eye surgeon Per Fagerholm of Linkoping University, who implanted the engineered collagen corneas into the 10 patients in Sweden.

None of the patients experienced graft rejection or required long-term immune suppression -- two potential side effects with human donor corneal transplants. The corneas were sensitive to touch and produced normal tears.

The results were published in the journal Science Translational Medicine. The research was primarily funded by grants from the Canadian Stem Cell Network, the Swedish Research Council, and the Marie Curie International Fellowship. The human collagen used to develop the corneas was provided by biotechnology company FibroGen Inc.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story compares the biosynthetic corneas both to human corneas and to plastic corneas. It is the only story of the three to even mention plastic corneas. Other alternatives could have been explored.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among the less convinced is Dr. John H. Glick, director of the Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Glick tells his patients about the new data but does not suggest they skip chemotherapy. After all, he notes, the national guidelines were based on results from large randomized clinical trials. And the recent data indicating that some women can skip chemotherapy are based on an after-the-fact analysis of selected clinical trials.

"We're in an era where evidence-based medicine should govern practice," Dr. Glick said.

For women with breast cancer, of course, the uncertainty is excruciating. Faced with a disease that already causes indecision and anxiety, they are now confronted with incomplete data, differing opinions from different doctors and a choice that can seem almost impossible: Should they give up a taxing treatment when all the answers are not in and they have what may be a fatal disease?

"If the medical profession is not even close to being of one mind, how is the woman to know?" said Donald A. Berry, a statistician at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, the lead author of a recent paper questioning chemotherapy's benefits in many women.

Barbara Brenner, who has had breast cancer and is executive director of the advocacy group Breast Cancer Action, said, "There's a real problem," and added, "We finally tell people at the end of the day: 'You're going to get a lot of information. Trust your gut. Nobody has the answers.' "

"I'm really glad I was diagnosed 13 years ago," Ms. Brenner said, "when there were fewer choices."

Doctors worry, too. It took two years before the National Cancer Institute and its researchers could even agree on a design for the large new American study that will test the idea that many women might safely forgo chemotherapy.

The study, which starts enrolling patients at the end of this month, will involve women whose cancers are fueled by estrogen and have not spread beyond the breast. They will be randomly assigned to have the standard treatment — chemotherapy followed by a drug like tamoxifen that starves tumors of estrogen — or to skip chemotherapy and have treatment only with a drug like tamoxifen.

Unlike the American study, the one now planned in Europe will also include women whose cancer has spread beyond their breasts into nearby lymph nodes. The American study may eventually add such women, said Sheila E. Taube, who directs the cancer diagnosis program at the National Cancer Institute.

Dr. Taube said the debate reminded her of one a few decades ago, when the question was whether all women with cancer needed mastectomies or whether many could have a lumpectomy instead. "To me, the situations are analogous," she said.

The chemotherapy question starts with American and European guidelines that say almost every woman with breast cancer that has gone beyond its earliest stages, when it is confined to the milk duct, should have the treatment. And for good reason, many cancer researchers say: a series of large studies has shown that chemotherapy saves lives and that newer and more aggressive regimens are improvements over older ones.

That has led doctors to feel most at ease giving very aggressive treatments to almost everyone.

"Part of it is that this area of medicine we're practicing in is kind of a high wire act," said Dr. Michael Lee, an oncologist in private practice in Norfolk, Va. "It is more comfortable to adopt things that are aggressive."

But most of those studies were done at a time when doctors did not distinguish between the 70 percent of women with breast cancers fueled by estrogen and the 30 percent whose cancers were not.

Now Dr. Berry, the M. D. Anderson statistician, and a group of leading cancer researchers have found that the chemotherapy benefits in those clinical trials were concentrated almost exclusively in women whose cancers were impervious to estrogen. For the others, with estrogen-sensitive tumors, the lifesaving benefit came from hormonal therapy. The results of the analysis, published recently in The Journal of the American Medical Association, were the same even if the cancer had spread to the lymph nodes.

The drawback of that study, Dr. Glick notes, is that it was not a large prospective randomized clinical trial, the gold standard in medicine.

There is also another issue. What if some women with estrogen-fed tumors do benefit from chemotherapy? How can they be identified?

One possibility is new genetic tests, which are part of the two studies that are about to begin. The cancer institute is using the Oncotype DX test, which includes genes associated with response to chemotherapy, among them genes involved with a cell's response to estrogen.

The study is ethical, said Dr. Larry Norton of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, because the only women whose treatment will be decided at random are those in a kind of gray area, not women for whom chemotherapy would be a clear benefit or clearly unnecessary.

"I think the clinical trial is really a superb one," Dr. Norton said. "I would like to see it go so we have definitive data."

In the meantime, some physicians, like Dr. Winer, are taking their own best shot at figuring out who really benefits from chemotherapy. He asks how sensitive the tumor is to estrogen, how aggressive a pathologist believes it is, how big it is, how much has spread to the lymph nodes and whether its surface has a type of protein, HER2, that is associated with a better response to chemotherapy. After talking through the decision with his patients, he says, he is comfortable omitting chemotherapy in some who would have had it not long ago.

Others, like Dr. Francisco J. Esteva of M. D. Anderson, use a computer program to calculate a woman's risks of recurrence and give the option of no chemotherapy only to women with low-risk cancers confined to their breasts.

Still others, like Dr. Glick, are starting to tell women with estrogen-fed cancers that although they still need chemotherapy, they may not need the most intense treatment.

And while some, including Dr. Winer, predict that the use of chemotherapy will almost certainly decline in the years ahead, for now most doctors are sticking with the current guidelines, waiting for expert advice from national panels on what to do.

"I don't know that many doctors who are comfortable giving women an option about chemotherapy," said Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, an advocacy group. "A lot of physicians talk about the data, but then they say, 'But, to be on the safe side. ...' "

Still, doctors say it is not simply that they are urging more and more chemotherapy on patients. In many cases, it is patients who want the most aggressive treatment.

"A cancer diagnosis is earth-shattering," said Dr. Lee, who has had cancer himself. "You stay up at night. You wonder. Even when you're doing well, you don't know whether to trust it."

And so, he said, "a lot of people will take a treatment even if there is a very low statistical chance that they will benefit."

That was what happened a few months ago, when Dr. Esteva told Janice Baty of Sulphur, La., a 40-year-old mother of two, that she might not need chemotherapy. After a long discussion with Ms. Baty and her husband, Dr. Esteva left them so they could decide what to do.

"My husband said, 'Look, we have two little kids,' " Ms. Baty recalled. "I called the doctor back in and said, 'We're doing the chemo.' "

Women who say they want the most aggressive treatment may not fully realize what they are asking for, said Mary Peelen, 45, of San Francisco. Ms. Peelen learned in January 2005 that she had cancer. It was small, was fed by estrogen and had spread to just two of her lymph nodes. Her oncologist was adamant: chemotherapy was her only option.

"I felt frightened and very coerced," she said. She had an aggressive regimen, suffered terribly and was left with painful nerve damage in her arms and hands that prevents movements like opening jars or using scissors and frequently makes her drop things.

Ms. Peelen feels that in a way, she just missed the revolution, perhaps one of the last women with her type of cancer who will have to suffer so much.

For now, the answers as to who should have chemotherapy are far from clear.

"I think practice should change, but it's very dicey," said Dr. Berry, of M. D. Anderson.

His colleague Dr. Esteva says it is one thing for a statistician like Dr. Berry to look at retrospective data, and another for a physician, like himself, to sit down with a patient who has to make what may be a life-or-death decision.

"It's not a perfect science," Dr. Esteva said. "A statistically small reduction in risk may be very important to some women, while for others chemotherapy is not worth it."

And so, Dr. Esteva said, he is left asking many women with early-stage breast cancer to decide what can seem like the undecidable: whether they want "to take something potentially toxic when you have a 90 percent chance of being cured without it."

"My experience ," he said, "is that more want to get chemo than not."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Excellent discussion of chemotherapy treatment decision process, including discussion that no treatment is also an option. Certain chemotherapy treatments may carry serious risks and only small benefit for some women. For other women the benefit is greater, though this must still be weighed against the risks of treatment. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new pilot study led by McLean Hospital's Ipsit Vahia, MD, medical director of Geriatric Psychiatry Outpatient Services at McLean Hospital, suggests that the use of tablet computers is both a safe and a potentially effective approach to managing agitation among patients with dementia.

"Tablet use as a nonpharmacologic intervention for agitation in older adults, including those with severe dementia, appears to be feasible, safe, and of potential utility," said Vahia. "Our preliminary results are a first step in developing much-needed empirical data for clinicians and caregivers on how to use technology such as tablets as tools to enhance care and also for app developers working to serve the technologic needs of this population."

"Use of Tablet Devices in the Management of Agitation Among Inpatients with Dementia: An Open Label Study" was recently published in the online version of The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. This research builds upon previous studies demonstrating that art, music, and other similar therapies can effectively reduce symptoms of dementia without medication. By using tablet devices to employ these therapies, however, patients and providers also benefit from a computer's inherent flexibility.

"The biggest advantage is versatility," said Vahia. "We know that art therapy can work, music therapy can work. The tablet, however, gives you the option of switching from one app to another easily, modifying the therapy seamlessly to suit the individual. You don't need to invest in new equipment or infrastructure."

Researchers loaded a menu of 70 apps onto the tablets for the study. The apps were freely available on iTunes and varied greatly in their cognitive complexity--from an app that displayed puppy photos to one that featured Sudoku puzzles.

The researchers found that tablet use was safe for every patient, regardless of the severity of their dementia, and that with proper supervision and training, the engagement rate with the devices was nearly 100 percent. The study also found that the tablets demonstrated significant effectiveness in reducing symptoms of agitation, particularly--but not exclusively--among patients with milder forms of dementia.

Vahia cited several examples of the tablet's potential to improve a patient's condition. One particular patient, who only spoke Romanian, was very withdrawn and irritable, and medications were ineffective in controlling his symptoms.

"We started showing him Romanian video clips on YouTube, and his behavior changed dramatically and instantaneously," said Vahia. "His mood improved. He became more interactive. He and his medical support team also started using a translation app so that staff could ask him simple questions in Romanian, facilitating increased interaction. These significant improvements are a clear testament of the tablet's potential as a clinical tool."

Based on such promising outcomes, the Geriatric Psychiatry Outpatient Services clinical team is expanding the use of tablet devices as a means to control agitation in dementia patients at McLean. This will allow researchers to develop more robust data and expand the scope of the study, including a focus on specific clinical factors that may impact how patients with dementia engage with and respond to apps.

McLean Hospital is the largest psychiatric affiliate of Harvard Medical School and a member of Partners HealthCare. In addition to providing a full continuum of psychiatric clinical care, McLean maintains the largest neuroscience and psychiatry research program of any private psychiatric hospital in the United States. McLean's robust research program is backed by more than $40 million in funding from a variety of sources, including foundations, private contributors, National Institutes of Health, United States Department of Defense, and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. For more information about McLean, visit mcleanhospital.org or follow the hospital on Facebook or Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that art and music therapy, for example, are alternatives but that tablets may require fewer staff members and provide more variety for each individual patient.
It also mentions that tablets were used as a “nonpharmalogic intervention,” which might suggest to many readers that it’s a good idea to try non-drug interventions before drugs with all their side effects and limited effectiveness for this problem.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A government committee of health experts yesterday opened the door to selling Orlistat, a prescription weight-loss drug in a reduced dosage directly to consumers.

While the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) still must approve the switch, the agency often follows the advice of its experts. If it does, Orlistat (xenical) -- currently sold only by prescription -- could be available over-the-counter (OTC) later this year. But it's important to know that the weight loss that's typical for users of the drug -- 5 to 10 percent of total weight -- will be less than many dieters expect. And many consumers may be put off by the drug's significant gastrointestinal side effects, including flatulence, diarrhea and anal leakage.

Nor is Orlistat a quick fix for unwanted pounds. To achieve any weight loss, users must also eat fewer calories and exercise more.

"It's not a miracle drug," notes Lawrence Cheskin, director of the Weight Management Center at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore, who conducted a study of Orlistat in adolescents. "None of these [weight loss] medications are."

Orlistat was approved as a weight loss and weight maintenance drug by the FDA in 1999 to treat obese and overweight people -- those with a body mass index of 30 or higher -- and overweight people (with BMI of 27 or higher) who already have weight-related health problems including diabetes, heart disease or high blood pressure.

More than 100 studies involving some 30,000 patients have been conducted with Orlistat, according to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) Consumer Healthcare, the maker of Orlistat, which has petitioned the FDA to permit OTC sales of the drug. The company says that 22 million people in 145 countries have taken the drug. "Orlistat is a very safe and effective drug with a long history of use around the world," says George Quesnelle, president of GSK Consumer Healthcare, North America.

In the longest study of Orlistat, participants who took the drug in addition to eating fewer calories and increasing exercise shed up to 12 percent of their body weight the first year. But by the fourth year of the study, they had regained some pounds. Overall, they lost about 7 percent of their body weight, compared to 4 percent for a control group that dieted and increased physical activity but didn't take the drug. The 7 percent figure works out to about 18 pounds for someone who weighs 250.

"That's little difference in weight, but significant in terms of medical benefits," notes Samuel Klein, director of the Center for Human Nutrition at the Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine. Those lost pounds translate to lower blood pressure, improved blood cholesterol levels and reduced risk of diabetes.

While Americans spend an estimated $1 billion on nonprescription weight loss products, few if any of those products have undergone the rigorous testing that is required by the FDA for prescription medications. Some weight loss experts say making Orlistat available directly to consumers broadens the proven options available to people trying to reach a healthier weight. "It's very exciting," Klein says.

But "the problem with Orlistat are the side effects," notes Johns Hopkins endocrinologist Aniket Sidhaye, co-author with Cheskin of a recent scientific review of Orlistat and other prescription weight loss drugs.

At the current recommended prescription dose -- 120 milligrams taken up to three times per day, for example up to 360 milligrams daily -- about 70 percent of users experience gastrointestinal complications, Klein says. They range from flatulence and increased bowel movements to diarrhea and anal leakage.

That's because Orlistat works by blocking fat absorption in the intestine. When fat that's eaten isn't absorbed, it must be eliminated. Thus, the gastrointestinal problems.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: Article presents 
information on weight loss results from xenical, diet, and exercise (7% of body weight) compared with diet and exercise (4% 
of body weight) over a 4 year period. The story did not mention sibutramine, another prescription weight loss drug. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - New data from centers that aggressively treat short-term “mini-strokes” offer new evidence that quick action can cut the odds of a serious stroke in half.

The findings, reported in the New England Journal of Medicine, are more evidence of the benefits of sending someone to a hospital even if muscle weakness or slurred speech has only lasted for a few seconds, lead author Dr. Pierre Amarenco of Bichat Hospital in Paris told Reuters Health by phone.

That’s because mini-strokes, also known as transient ischemic attacks or TIAs, are often the harbinger of a potentially-deadly stroke that can come within a matter of hours or days.

“You should worry about symptoms even if they last for just a few seconds or a few minutes,” Amarenco said.

“The study showed that the widespread, systematic implementation of specialized TIA units across multiple sites, countries, and continents can make a difference in the care of these patients,” write Drs. Ralph Sacco and Tatjana Rundek of the University of Miami in an accompanying editorial.

The ongoing study, which used previous stroke estimates for comparison, was based on data from 4,789 patients from TIAregistry.org, an international registry designed to follow cases for as long as five years.

It didn’t include a comparison group, which would offer the best evidence, but it “helps build the evidence base for the importance of getting in for early treatment,” said Dr. Donna Arnett, dean of public health at the University of Kentucky and past president of the American Heart Association.

Any kind of mini-stroke “should lead you to be evaluated,” said Arnett, who was not involved in the study.

Research reported prior to 2004 had suggested that the stroke risk is 10 percent two days after mini-stroke symptoms appear and between 8 percent and 20 percent for the 30- to 90-day period after symptom onset.

But in the new study, Amarenco and his colleagues found stroke risks of 1.5 percent at two days, 2.1 percent at seven days and 3.7 percent at 90 days when mini-strokes were treated aggressively.

One year after symptoms, the stroke rate was 5.1 percent.

“Although this was not a randomized trial and there was no comparison group to assess whether specialized units performed better than nonspecialized (stroke) units, these (newly-reported) risks are substantially lower than expected. Outcomes in this study were at least 50 percent lower than those reported in previous studies,” Sacco and Rundek write.

“The rate was remarkably lower,” Arnett told Reuters Health. The study was also noteworthy because, over the long haul, patients did a particularly good job of taking the medications they were given.

The researchers also found that the one-year stroke risk doubled when multiple blood vessel clogs were seen with brain imaging, a large artery was narrowed by heart disease and the patient scored a 6 or 7 on a seven-point scale that assesses stroke risk factors.

More than two thirds of the patients in the study had a score of 4 or higher but the researchers caution that “limiting urgent assessment to patients with a score of 4 or more would miss approximately 20 percent of those with early recurrent strokes.”
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The intervention in this story is sending patients to hospitals with specialized TIA units. The alternative–presumably being treated at a hospital without a TIA unit–wasn’t directly studied here, and this is made clear in the story.
However, we do wish the story had discussed if receiving care at one of these specialized units is really necessary, i.e., if similar care can be received at a regular hospital. As the study noted, it appears so: The researchers stated that these results “may be achievable in a large range of settings as long as patients are evaluated and treated for acute TIA and minor stroke on an urgent basis.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But it's not clear that women concerned strictly about breast cancer will line up for this drug, either. A closer look at the recent study suggests that raloxifene's advantages may not be as great as the government announcement implied. Some cancer experts were less than enthusiastic, and patient advocates were downright skeptical.

"The outcome of the study is not as clear cut as we might have hoped for," said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society. "It will take some time for experts to review the data to determine which of the two treatments is preferable."

Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, said the new study had been hyped adding, "We have many concerns about it on many levels."

Another group, Breast Cancer Action, said, "We are very concerned that treating risk as a medical condition will result in substituting one disease for another."

The study included nearly 20,000 women 35 and older who were past menopause and had an increased risk of developing breast cancer. To qualify, their risk had to be at least that of an average 60- to 64-year-old woman — a 1.66 percent chance of getting the disease within 5 years. On average, the participants actually had more than twice that risk, around 4 percent, meaning that 40 of 1,000 would be affected. (Women can quickly figure out their own risk at the Web site cancer.gov/bcrisktool).

Half the participants took one drug, and half the other for about five years. Their rates of invasive breast cancer were the same, 163 cases for tamoxifen and 167 for raloxifene — about half as many as would have been expected without treatment.

So raloxifene looked just as good as tamoxifen. Even better news, the cancer institute said, was that those taking raloxifene "had 36 percent fewer uterine cancers and 29 percent fewer blood clots." Based on those findings, it is easy to see why raloxifene was declared the winner.

But numbers can be tricky. Expressed as percentages, the differences between the drugs for uterine cancer and blood clots sound large.

"But the actual numbers are small," Dr. Lichtenfeld said.

Among women taking tamoxifen in the study, 36 of 4,732 got uterine cancer, while for raloxifene the number was 23 of 4,712. (Women who had had hysterectomies were not counted.) As for blood clots, there were 141 in the 9,726 women on tamoxifen and 100 in the 9,745 on raloxifene

"Women who took raloxifene did get uterine cancer, and they did have blood clots," Dr. Lichtenfeld said. "Any suggestion that tamoxifen is the only drug saddled with getting these diseases is not accurate."

More important, the difference between the numbers of side effects was not statistically significant, meaning that it could have occurred by chance and that the drugs could be similar or even the same. That fact was not stated in the news release, and the researchers mentioned it only briefly during the news conference, calling the results "borderline" significant.

Many researchers say that results don't count unless they pass the statistical tests. But Dr. Leslie Ford, an associate director for clinical research at the cancer institute, said that the differences could not be ignored because they came so near to being significant. Had the study gone on a little longer, they might have crossed the line, she said.

Another issue is that the message from the cancer institute seemed to play down a shortcoming of raloxifene that cancer doctors consider important. The institute emphasized that raloxifene lowered the risk of "invasive" breast cancer, tumors that have penetrated surrounding tissue and that have the potential to spread and turn deadly.

But raloxifene did not prevent two other serious breast conditions, whereas tamoxifen did reduce their risk by 50 percent. Those conditions, sometimes called noninvasive breast cancers, are L.C.I.S. and D.C.I.S., for lobular and ductal carcinomas in situ. Lobular growths increase the likelihood of invasive cancer, and ductal ones can become invasive. D.C.I.S. is often treated like breast cancer, with surgery and radiation.

"D.C.I.S. is not inconsequential," said Dr. Lichtenfeld, adding that it leads some women to have both breasts removed. Since tamoxifen lowers the risks of both invasive and noninvasive tumors, he said, it "has a broader spectrum of activity against breast cancer."

Dr. Larry Norton, a breast cancer expert at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, said he also found it worrisome that raloxifene did not share tamoxifen's ability to prevent the noninvasive growths.

When it came to L.C.I.S. and D.C.I.S., the difference between the two drugs was statistically significant, meaning it was likely to be real and not due to chance. Yet that distinction was not pointed out in the news release, and, Dr. Lichtenfeld noted, it was "de-emphasized" during the news conference.

But Dr. Ford of the cancer institute said raloxifene's ability to prevent invasive cancers was more important.

"Invasive cancer is what kills you," she said, adding that only about 10 percent of D.C.I.S. turn invasive, and that those that do can be treated. She called it "twisted logic" to dwell on tamoxifen's superior ability to prevent the noninvasive cancers because, she said, "We're not preventing noninvasive cancers because nobody's taking tamoxifen anyway."

Given that there are shades of gray and room for debate about these findings, some critics questioned the way they were made public.

The results were announced by the cancer institute in a news release and a telephone conference for news reporters. Contrary to usual practice, the complete data had not yet been revealed to scientists or published in a medical journal, though the institute said it intended to do so. Officials said they announced the findings before publishing them because they had implications for public health.

Ms. Visco said, "How is it ethical to do that, to make this much hype around something that is not a health emergency, and you can't check their data?"

She said she also worried that the announcement might have left the impression that the drugs could prevent breast cancer entirely.

"It's not prevention," Ms. Visco said. "It's risk reduction, short term, for a subset of women we cannot identify."

The concern is that many women would have to take tamoxifen or raloxifene for a few to benefit. In 1,000 high-risk women like those in the study, for instance, without treatment 40 would be expected to develop invasive breast cancer over the next five years. If all 1,000 were treated, only 20 cases would occur.

But since there is no way to predict who will actually get cancer, everyone has to be treated, meaning that 980 will be exposed to the drug's risks but will get no cancer benefit.

"The hope is that at some point we'll be able to pinpoint who really is at high risk of breast cancer and then we'll know what to do," Ms. Visco said. "But we're not anywhere near there."

In the meantime, Dr. Ford said, at least tamoxifen and raloxifene give women at risk the chance to do something. She compared the drugs to statins and blood pressure drugs, which people take even though they feel well, to lower their risks of heart attacks and strokes. But others argue that heart attacks are far more common than breast cancer, and the drugs to prevent them much safer.

To Dr. Norton, the most important conclusion to be drawn from the study is that more research on breast cancer prevention is needed. He said the next step should be to test another class of drugs called aromatase inhibitors, already in use to treat breast cancer, to see if they can do better at risk reduction than tamoxifen or raloxifene.

"Until we have zero cancer," he said, "I'm not going to make any claims about a great advance."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions tamoxifen as the alternative to raloxifene.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a landmark medical clash pitting the diagnostic merits of fancy tech versus vintage exercise machines, the new toys and old ways finished in a dead heat, cardiologists reported Saturday.

The first showdown pitting 3-D, heart-imaging exams against older stress tests atop treadmills or stationary bikes found that among 10,003 heart patients, their rates of eventually having serious heart events were the same — no matter which method doctors used to check their tickers, researchers said.

Even more surprising, the rate of bad outcomes among the heart patients studied were extremely low. In both test groups, only about 3 percent of the people had heart attacks, suffered "major" complications, needed hospitalization for chest pain or died during two years of tracking, researchers found.

Which prompts a big question: Could the use of stress tests or expensive scans become less frequent for heart patients, replaced by more watchful waiting?

"We were very pleasantly surprised," said Dr. Pamela Douglas, Ursula Geller professor of research in cardiovascular diseases at Duke University, and the study’s lead author.

Results of the federally funded trial — Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain (PROMISE) — were presented at the American College of Cardiology’s 64th Annual Scientific Session in San Diego. Findings also were published the New England Journal of Medicine.

"Knowing how well the patients did in spite having a very high cardiovascular-risk burden opens up the door to thinking differently about how we might manage those patients. And, certainly, one option is watchful waiting," Douglas said in an interview. "We now have the data to support that as a reasonable way to go for a lot of patients. We didn’t before."

The 10,000-plus patients, who visited 193 health centers in the U.S. and Canada, had no prior diagnosis of coronary artery disease. But they had new symptoms that caused physicians to suspect heart disease — and nearly all had at least one risk factor like high blood pressure, diabetes or a history of smoking.

Half were randomly selected to get a computed tomographic angiography (CTA), which creates a 3-D image of the heart's arteries, allowing physicians to spot narrowing. The rest took stress tests — either an exercise electrocardiogram, a stress echocardiography or a nuclear stress test, which uses radioactive dye. Stress tests measure the heart's response to exertion, letting doctors see or hear any disease.

"The remarkable thing about the study is ... these were quite high-risk patients, but the actual [bad] event rate was very low ... It is a real testament to how far we’ve come in the treatment of patients with suspected coronary disease," said Dr. Steven Nissen, department chair of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic. He was not part of the study.

Prevention tactics do seem to be working: Lowering cholesterol through diet and medicine, keeping blood pressure in check, and helping people to stop smoking.

"Traditionally, when you come in with chest pain, some sort of stress test or CT angiogram will be performed," Nissen said. "And I wonder if it's worth doing those tests when rates of cardiac events are so low."

Until this study, doctors have been "guessing" which form of those two diagnostic tests is best, Douglas said.

And while there's often no wrong choice between CTAs and stress tests, the new findings underscore a vital nuance, she added.

CTAs, the study found, result in fewer instances of patients with suspected heart issues undergoing unneeded catheterization procedures — only to later learn they had no artery problems.

"If you have chest pains and you needed a test," Douglas said, "and if I said to you: 'Either one of these two tests will be equally effective in preventing heart attack or death, but this one will have less chance of going to the cath lab if you don’t have blockages,' which one would you pick?"

Each year, about 4 million Americans report heart symptoms such as chest pain or shortness of breath.

But one Cleveland Clinic patient epitomizes a difference between CTAs and stress tests — and he does so just by being alive.

At age 48, David, an electrical engineer, was in great condition, biking 50 miles on a weekend. Be he'd been feeling vague sensations for a year, including chest tightness and heart palpitations. (He did not want his last name published). He easily passed several stress tests on treadmills.

But — partly because his mother had died of coronary artery disease at age 49 — David remained unconvinced by those results. He underwent a CTA at Cleveland Clinic, and it showed severely blocked arteries. He soon underwent a bypass surgery. He is healthy today, now 50.

As a result, however, David's two brothers, both close to his age, were convinced to undergo CTAs. Both were found to have blocked arteries, also requiring immediate surgeries.

"None of us had any indications," David said. "Just because I had a CTA, that had a domino effect to my brothers getting it, and it very well saved all three of our lives."
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The whole point of the study was to compare a newer and an older approach to diagnosing heart problems.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 29, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A device that grabs and drags a blood clot out through the blood vessels should be used to treat certain stroke victims, according to new guidelines issued by the American Heart Association.

Nearly nine out of 10 strokes are caused by a blood clot that blocks one of the arteries supplying blood to the brain, the American Heart Association (AHA) said. Standard stroke treatment relies on powerful blood-thinning medications that break up the clot and restore blood flow to the brain.

But when those drugs don't work, doctors now can turn to a new catheter-based device that will physically remove the blood clot, said Dr. William Powers, lead author of the updated AHA guidelines and chair of neurology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

The tool, called an endovascular stent retrieval device, is made up of wire mesh that resembles a tiny ring of chicken wire, Powers said.

Skilled surgeons run the device up through a person's arteries via a catheter, and then open it smack in the middle of a stroke-causing blood clot.

"If you actually deploy or open one in the middle of a clot, it smooshes out and the clot gets caught in the chicken wire, and then you pull the whole thing out back through the artery," Powers said.

The new guidelines were published June 29 in the journal Stroke.

The AHA issued its updated guidelines based primarily on the results of six new clinical trials released within the past eight months, Powers said. All of these studies showed that the device can safely and effectively stop a stroke by removing blood clots, he added.

A number of other medical societies have endorsed the AHA's new guidelines, including the American Association of Neurological Surgeons and the Society of Vascular and Interventional Neurology.

As with other stroke treatments, time is of the essence. The procedure must start within six hours of the onset of a stroke, which means that emergency teams and hospitals will have to move fast, Powers said.

The guidelines provide added incentive to quickly transfer stroke victims from a local hospital to a major stroke center capable of advanced treatment, said Powers and Dr. David Kandzari, director of interventional cardiology and chief scientific officer for the Piedmont Heart Institute in Atlanta.

Local hospitals currently are urged to "drip and ship" people experiencing a major stroke -- essentially, start an IV drip of the powerful clot-busting drug called tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), and then ship them by ambulance or helicopter to the nearest comprehensive stroke center for further treatment, Kandzari said.

Stent retrieval devices make that quick hospital transfer even more important, since the gadgets provide a crucial backup for tPA but are more tricky to use.

"These are procedures performed by very specialized individuals," Kandzari said. "They are not regularly performed by cardiologists or radiologists or neurologists. Hospitals must make plans to get people to other centers that are capable of this catheter-based therapy," he explained.

Powers said, "I think what's going to happen is that we will develop systems of rapid triage and rapid transport. A lot of this at this point depends on logistics and manpower. The people who do this are specially trained. You need a lot of special training to get those catheters up into the brain and pull things out."

The guidelines specifically recommend using a stent retrieval device for people who:
• Didn't have any significant disability prior to their current stroke.
• Received tPA within 4.5 hours of their stroke onset, and can start the procedure within six hours after stroke symptoms started.
• Are at least 18 years old, as clinical trials have not been conducted with children.
• Have imaging scans that show more than half of the brain on the side of the stroke is not permanently damaged.
• Have a clot blocking a large artery supplying blood to the brain.

That last point is especially important, because the stent retrieval device will not fit into the smaller blood vessels that branch out further into the brain, Powers said.

The major risk of using the device is that it could tear an artery and cause bleeding in the brain, particularly since it will be used on people who have already received very potent blood thinners, Kandzari said.

But clinical trials have shown that the risk of brain bleeding for people who received tPA and then went through mechanical clot removal is no greater than for people who just receive the blood thinner, Powers said.

"The outcomes were uniformly positive in all of the trials," he said. "It's really, really good evidence."

For more about stroke, visit the National Stroke Association.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: The alternative to endovascular clot retrieval is no procedure, and is made clear in the article.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Why Doctors Are Trying A Skin Cancer Drug To Treat A Brain Tumor

MaryAnn Anselmo feared for the worst when she was diagnosed with a brain tumor called a glioblastoma in late 2013.

"You start doing research on that type of tumor, and you're saying, 'Oh my God, you're history.' It's like a death sentence," says, Anselmo, now 59.

Only for her it wasn't.

Anselmo's successful treatment shows how precision medicine — tailoring therapy to each patient's genetic needs — is beginning to transform cancer care.

At first, the outlook seemed grim. Although Anselmo's surgeon was able to surgically remove most of her tumor, she couldn't tolerate traditional chemotherapy that was the planned second step, and had to discontinue it.

The chemo failure was the latest in a string of personal setbacks.

The year before she was diagnosed with brain cancer, she'd lost her son to suicide. Weeks after that she was almost killed in a car crash outside a local mall. Her cancer was discovered after she had a dizzy spell, and her husband, Joseph, insisted she return to the hospital to have it checked out.

After all that, Anselmo and her husband weren't ready to give up on her cancer fight. He'd read about advances in targeted therapies — drugs that go after cancer cells at the molecular level.

The family sent samples of her tumor samples for genetic testing to several leading cancer hospitals. Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, where she was being treated, also did its own sequencing. They all found the same thing. Anselmo's tumor had a BRAF mutation common in skin cancer, but very unusual for a brain tumor.

Her oncologist, David Hyman at Memorial Sloan Kettering, enrolled Anselmo into a new kind of drug trial. Called a basket trial, the study is designed to include people whose tumors have the same kind of genetic fingerprint regardless of where in the body the tumors are found.

Knowing more about the genetic mutations of a tumor enables doctors to find a potentially effective drug much more quickly and accurately. "It's like you're in a parking lot," Hyman says. "And you have a key to one of the cars in the parking lot. And so one option is just to go to each car and try to open the lock. The other is to know that it's the third car on the right. What we're doing now is we're saying, OK, this key fits that lock. And we're only going straight to that car."

Today, Anselmo is doing well. She's been in the clinical trial for a year now, and continues to take Zelboraf (or vemurafenib generically) daily. The pills have kept her cancer from growing.

There are side effects, of course. She's lost some peripheral vision, though she's been able to compensate. And Zelboraf is expensive, though it's free to Anselmo because she's taking it as part of a study.

Now she can focus again on the things she loves, like singing. Anselmo, a jazz singer who performed under the stage name Mariel Larsen before her illness, is planning a comeback. She's back in training with her longtime vocal coach.

As this kind of genetic sequencing of tumors has become faster and cheaper, more patients have access to this technology. More doctors are taking advantage of the information to treat patients with a targeted approach.

"We took a disease where nothing really works for any length of time and we've given her a year of life, and hopefully much more, where she's been much better," Hyman, her oncologist, says.

Still, he cautions that the targeted treatments can't be considered cures. At some point the drug that is keeping Anselmo's cancer at bay could stop working. "Every patient is different in how long it works," he says. "We all have patients that have been on these drugs for years. But I don't know, I mean, I think if I was being honest eventually our expectation would be that it would stop working."

There's no way to predict when. But in the meantime, patients like Anselmo are grateful to have time they wouldn't have had otherwise.

After all the misfortunes she's been through, it would be easy to think Anselmo has been incredibly unlucky. But she doesn't see it that way. No, she says after rehearsing for her comeback show, "I'm the luckiest."

Our series is produced with member station WNYC, and with Ken Burns Presents: Cancer: The Emperor of All Maladies, which will air on PBS starting March 30. Check your local listings for broadcast times.
QUESTION: Does the story compare the new approach with existing alternatives?
EXPLANATION: At least on one alternative is mentioned, e.g. “traditional chemotherapy” (Temodar/temozolomide), so we’ll rate the story satisfactory. However, it’s important to note that radiation therapy is not discussed at all, and it is part of the standard of care alongside chemotherapy and surgery. There are other potential alternatives, too, including drugs that limit blood flow to cancerous tissue and immunotherapy techniques (aka “cancer vaccines”).
<|endoftext|>
